                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       QUALITY DISCLOSURE AND CERTIFICATION:
                               THEORY AND PRACTICE

                                           David Dranove
                                           Ginger Zhe Jin

                                        Working Paper 15644
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15644


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




Accepted at the Journal of Economic Literature. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David Dranove and Ginger Zhe Jin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Quality Disclosure and Certification: Theory and Practice
David Dranove and Ginger Zhe Jin
NBER Working Paper No. 15644
January 2010
JEL No. D18,D8,L15,L51

                                             ABSTRACT

This essay reviews the theoretical and empirical literature on quality disclosure and certification. After
comparing quality disclosure with other quality assurance mechanisms and describing a brief history
of quality disclosure, we address three key theoretical issues: (i) Why don't sellers voluntarily disclose
through a process of "unraveling?" (ii) When should government mandate disclosure? and (iii) Do
certifiers necessarily report unbiased and accurate information? We further review empirical evidence
on these issues, with a particular focus on healthcare, education, and finance. The empirical review
covers quality measurement, the effect of third party disclosure on consumer choice and seller behavior,
as well as the economics of certifiers.


David Dranove
Management & Strategy Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu
                     Quality Disclosure and Certification: Theory and Practice

I. Introduction

       A young couple expecting their first child might consult healthgrades.com hospital

rankings to help choose where to deliver their baby. A year later, the couple decides they need

an SUV and consults performance specifications provided by manufacturers and reads Consumer

Reports to learn about reliability. Soon thereafter, the couple obtains test score results from

several school districts to help choose where to raise their family. When their child is in high

school they peruse US News and World Reports rankings of universities. Once their child is off

to college, they plan for retirement by investing in AAA-rated corporate bonds and browse

through Medicare's Nursing Home Compare to help plan for their parents' final years.

       Literally from cradle to grave, consumers rely on quality disclosure to make important

purchases. Although disclosure has a long history that we describe below, it has attracted

considerable attention in the past few years, especially in the areas of healthcare, education, and

finance. President Obama has made quality reporting a key component of his healthcare reform

effort. President Bush's No Children Left Behind initiative relies on testing and disclosure to

evaluate and, potentially, punish, underperforming public schools. Many states have similar

programs. And much of the finger pointing for the recent crisis on Wall Street has been directed

at corporate bond rating agencies that seemed to ignore systematic risk while giving firms clean

bills of health. Many policy analysts in these and other industries believe that we need more and

better disclosure.

       In this essay, we review the theoretical and empirical literature on disclosure. Section I

compares quality disclosure with other quality assurance mechanisms and offers a brief history

of disclosure. In section II, we address three key theoretical issues: (i) Why don't sellers

voluntarily disclose through a process of "unraveling?" (ii) How would government-mandated


                                                  2
disclosure differ from voluntary disclosure in costs and benefits? and (iii) Do certifiers

necessarily report unbiased and accurate information? Section III discusses empirical evidence

on disclosure with a particular focus on healthcare, education, and finance. We begin with a

practical question: How is quality measured and reported? We then present evidence that

unraveling often does not occur in practice, thereby creating a need for third party disclosure.

We review whether third party disclosure helps consumers make better choices and whether it

encourages sellers to improve quality. We also identify situations where sellers exploit private

information so as to boost their ratings at the expense of consumers. We conclude the review of

empirical evidence by examining the behavior of certifiers. Section IV concludes with

suggestions for further research.



I.1 Disclosure versus other quality assurance mechanisms

       We define quality disclosure as an effort by a certification agency to systematically

measure and report product quality for a nontrivial percentage of products in a market. While we

are mainly interested in third-party disclosure, we also include direct quality disclosure by

sellers, provided that the disclosed information can be independently verified. This definition

distinguishes disclosure from broader marketing efforts by sellers that do not contain verifiable

product information. It also distinguishes disclosure from forums such as town squares, barber

shops, or, more recently, Internet sites such as Angie’s List where individuals share word-of-

mouth reviews of local service providers without systematic editing and scoring. The latter

distinction is admittedly blurry; ratings such as Amazon.com’s customer reviews have elements

of both a “town square” forum and a systematic report card.

       Quality disclosure can take many forms. Sellers may voluntarily report product attributes.

For example, a hospital may disclose that the majority of its medical staff is board certified. Or


                                                 3
an auto manufacturer may report performance specifications. An industry concerned about the

lemons problem may establish a certification agency to collect and disseminate product

information. Examples include the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare

Organizations (JCAHO), which reports the frequency of “sentinel events” (instances of poor

quality) at member hospitals; and the Motion Picture Association of America, which is

responsible for the familiar G/PG/R/M movie rating system. In these cases, sellers have the

choice of disclosing or not disclosing quality information via the certification agency. Those that

choose to disclose often pay a fee to cover the cost of certification.

       Many industries face mandatory disclosure, whereby a regulatory body requires sellers to

disclose certain product attributes in a standard format. In some cases, sellers must provide

verifiable information to a designated agency (e.g. automobile manufacturers measure fuel

economy and report the results to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). In other cases,

government officials inspect the product on site (e.g. a local health board inspects restaurant

hygiene). Mandatory disclosure often focuses on health and safety issues and ignores other

product attributes that might influence demand. For example, the U.S. Food and Drug

Administration requires food manufacturers to report nutritional information but does not

evaluate taste. In recent years, U.S. government agencies have expanded disclosure to include

many other factors that can influence demand, including mortality rates for hospitals, on-time

arrival rates for airlines, graduation rates for high schools, and consumer satisfaction with

Medicare Advantage health insurance plans. There are similar disclosure requirements in many

other nations. The targeted audience has also shifted from government officials who might fine

or even shut down a business that failed inspection to the consumers whose demands will

determine the fate of low scoring firms. By posting results online and publicizing them through




                                                  4
the media, government certifiers hope to ensure that consumers can access the disclosed

information with little cost and in a timely manner.

        In addition to industry-sponsored voluntary disclosure and government-enforced

mandatory disclosure, many private third-party certifiers adopt disclosure regimes to satisfy

market demand for quality information. 1 Examples include the Leapfrog Group’s hospital

quality ratings, Moody's bond ratings, Consumer Reports' evaluation of consumer products, and

U.S. News & World Report’s ranking of colleges. Some of these third-parties (e.g. Leapfrog)

must obtain data directly from sellers and therefore require seller participation. Others may use

public information (e.g., U.S News) to evaluate the products and do not require seller

participation. In some cases, certifiers may be financially affiliated with sellers, introducing a

conflict of interest. Stock analysts working for a brokerage firm that underwrites initial public

offerings are often cited as an example of such conflict.

        Aside from disclosure, there are many other well-known mechanisms for informing

consumers about product attributes. We will call these “quality assurance” mechanisms, though

in some cases they provide information about horizontal product attributes rather than vertical

quality dimensions. Table 1 gives examples of the mechanisms used to help assure quality in a

wide array of markets. All of these markets can be considered credence goods and many are

experience goods, in that consumers may find it difficult to evaluate quality of all of these goods

prior to purchase but may be able to assess quality of some of them after purchase.

                                             Table 1 about here

        As suggested by Table 1, brand and experience are perhaps the most common quality

assurance mechanisms, but they are rarely sufficient. One limitation is that even with

experience, consumers may find it difficult to link ex-post product failure with a product defect;

1
 Demand for quality information is usually stronger for credence goods because consumers have difficulty
assessing their quality via search or experience.

                                                        5
think of a automobile owner establishing the reason for premature brake wear or whether a

hospital patient determining whether the medical staff is responsible for an adverse outcome.

Experience and word-of-mouth are also of limited value when products are infrequently

purchased, such as open heart surgery and executive education. Disclosure has the potential to

overcome these limitations because certifiers may have better expertise evaluating the product

and they can aggregate experiences from many idiosyncratic consumers.

            Branding, another common quality assurance mechanism, is usually initiated and

maintained through the seller's marketing efforts. It is unclear whether branding acts as a

“bond” in which the seller sinks an investment in branding to signal its high quality or whether

branding makes it easier for consumers to recall their positive experiences when making repeat

purchases. 2 In any event, consumers may find third-party disclosure more trustworthy than

brands.

            In some cases, sellers may offer warranties, especially if the value of the product is large

relative to the cost to consumers of exercising the warranty. Thus, we see warranties for

automobiles and televisions, but not for diapers or light bulbs. Warranties are also uncommon

for professional services because consumers have difficulty gauging service quality even after

consumption. 3 Warranties for hospital care are almost unheard of, for example. Compared with

disclosure, warranties often focus on narrow aspects of product performance, such as complete

failure, and may not assure gradations of quality.

            While most quality assurance mechanisms directly assure product quality, licensing

focuses on inputs (e.g. training or staffing) rather than outputs. Licensing is usually done by a

government agency, but some industries do their own credentialing. A good example is JCAHO

hospital credentialing. Many insurers refuse to reimburse for services performed at non-

2
    See Bagwell (2007) for a summary of advertising literature.
3
    As an exception, plaintiffs’ attorneys in some litigation cases work on a strict contingency basis.

                                                              6
credentialed hospitals. Sometimes government agencies may also establish a minimum quality

standard that measures quality directly but does not differentiate quality above the minimum

standard. Economists have long debated whether licensing or minimum quality standards serve

to control entry, assure quality, or both. 4 In comparison, disclosure does not have a direct impact

on entry, though the disclosed information may motivate consumers to shy away from low

quality products and eventually drive out low-quality sellers.

          Another way to look at Table 1 is to identify the credibility and source of the quality

assurance mechanism. Warranties and brands are offered and established by individual firms as

a way to assure consumers of their own quality. Assuming they are enforceable, the

effectiveness of warranties is self-explanatory. Brands have credibility because they are

developed over time on the basis of experience and often require considerable expense to

maintain. Industries often assure quality of member firms, through disclosure, credentialing, or

lobbying for licensing laws. Although these may serve as entry barriers, they may also limit the

ability of member firms to free ride off of the industry’s overall positive reputation. 5

          Aside from disclosure by an industry group, certifying firms are usually independent of

the individual firms they assess. The JCAHO may certify hospitals, but individual members do

not otherwise provide industry-wide quality reports. An obvious explanation is the potential

conflict of interest. One interesting exception occurs when financial analysts evaluate stock

offerings in their own names, even though they are employed by investment banks involved in

the offerings. This practice could endure if the analyst's own name is separable from the

employer and the analyst develops a reputation of unbiasedness and accuracy.

          To summarize, disclosure has three distinguishing features: First, disclosure

systematically measures and disseminates information about product quality, which makes it

4
    Stigler (1971).
5
    Dranove (1988).

                                                   7
attractive when other mechanisms for quality assurance are inadequate and the value of quality

information when aggregated across all consumers is large relative to the costs of information

collection. 6 Second, disclosure is usually conducted via third-party certifier(s) that identify

themselves separately from manufacturers. This may give consumers an impression that the

disclosed information is more trustworthy than seller advertising. 7 Third, disclosure standardizes

quality assessment so that results are readily comparable across sellers. Instead of granting the

power of licensing to government officials, disclosure empowers consumer with information

with the expectation that consumer choice will provide sufficient incentives to assure quality.

         Disclosure both complements and substitutes for other quality assurance mechanisms. In

lemons markets, disclosure provides more precise and comparable information than word of

mouth, warranties and brand names. Positive reviews may be especially helpful to companies

that lack a strong brand. The conventional wisdom is that strong reviews in Consumer Reports

were critical to the successful 1970s invasion by Japanese automakers into the American car

market. By the same token, negative reviews can bring down established brands, as occurred

after Ralph Nader’s Unsafe at Any Speed chronicled problems with the Chevrolet Corvair. Firms

in lemons markets may even band together and voluntarily disclose quality as a way to prevent

an Akerlof-style adverse selection death spiral. 8 In the case of car safety, the 2000 mandated




6
  A glimpse at Consumer Reports and similar publications suggests that these factors are present in virtually all
consumer goods markets where the goods are traded nationally or internationally, so that a single disclosure report
can reach millions of potential consumers. Voluntary disclosure has traditionally been less common for local
services where the costs of systematically collecting and disseminating information may be prohibitive relative to
the size of the audience. The Internet may be reducing these costs, however.
7
  When producers self-disclose quantifiable quality information, consumers might infer that such information can be
verified by third parties and is therefore trustworthy. Whether certifier-provided information is indeed more
trustworthy than producer disclosure or consumer experience depends on certifier incentives, an active research
topic we will review in details in Sections 4 and 5.
8
  Cutler and Zeckhauser (1997).

                                                         8
disclosure of rollover risks 9 has fostered the set up of minimum performance standards for auto

rollovers in 2005. 10



I.2 A Brief History of Disclosure

        Quality assurance has a long history. The term branding is derived from the practice of

marking livestock that dates back as far as 2000 BC. 11 Averill Paints secured the first U.S.

trademark (an eagle) in 1870 while Bass and Company (the brewer) and Lyle’s Golden Syrup

both claim to be Europe’s oldest brand, sometime in the late 19th century. 12 Licensing in the

United States can be traced to colonial days, when physicians had to obtain permission to

practice from colonial governors.

        Voluntary disclosure by industry participants emerged in the United States in the 19th

century. The Chicago Board of Trade established a system for grading wheat (an example of

voluntary disclosure) in 1848. In 1894, the National Board of Fire Underwriters established the

Underwriters’ Electrical Bureau (the predecessor to Underwriters Laboratories), which, in

exchange for a fee, tested and reported on the safety of fittings and electrical devices. This gave

high quality sellers a way to distinguish themselves from inferior competitors.

        According to Fung, Graham and Weil (2007), U.S. government-mandated disclosure

began with the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act, which provided for inspection of meat products

and monitoring of food and drug labeling. Since then, disclosure laws have spread to other

markets. For example, the 1934 Securities and Exchange Act requires public companies to file

unaudited financial statements quarterly and audited financial statements annually, the 1968


9
 Specified by the 2000 Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability, and Documentation Act.
10
   Specified by the 2005 Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users.
11
   This information was obtained from Daye, D. and Van Auken, B., 2006, “History of Branding”.
http://www.brandingstrategyinsider.com/2006/08/history_of_bran.html Searched 12/15/2008.
12
   Source: Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trademark#Oldest_trademarks and
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brand#History

                                                         9
Truth in Lending Act requires clear disclosure of key terms and all costs associated with a

lending contract), and the 1986 Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act

produces EPA’s Toxics Release Inventory Report. Other examples include the 1990 Nutritional

Labeling and Education Act, and the hospital and doctor report cards adopted by New York and

Pennsylvania in early 1990s.

        The 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act was a response to Upton Sinclair’s The Jungle,

Samuel Hopkins Adams’ The Great American Fraud and other accounts of the meat packing and

patent medicines industries. Horrific accounts of “Thalidomide babies” led to the 1962 FDA

Amendments. 13 Despite these high profile examples, Wilson (1982) argues that mandatory

disclosure laws are difficult to enact because the potential benefits are diffused among millions

of individual consumers whereas the costs are concentrated among a few highly motivated

sellers who can better capture the regulatory system. Graham (2002) gives three detailed

examples of how public attention, industry lobbying, and political compromise shape mandatory

disclosure laws.

        Disclosure does not necessarily require legislation. Market driven, third-party disclosure

first occurred in 1909 when John Moody issued bond ratings, followed quickly by Poor's

Publishing in 1916 and Standard Statistics in 1922. 14 The first issue of Consumers’ Union

Reports (the predecessor to Consumer Reports) appeared in May 1936 and featured evaluations

of milk, breakfast cereals, soap, and stockings. The Internet has profoundly affected quality

disclosure. Not only does the Internet facilitate the dissemination of quality information, it has

spawned quality-rating websites such as cnet.com (consumer electronics), imdb.com (movie

reviews), and tripadvisor.com (hotels). Rather than rely on experienced certifier(s) attesting to

product quality, most of these web sites aggregate the experiences of individual consumers.
13
   Thalidomide was a sleeping pill. Some pregnant women who used Thalidomide gave birth to infants with horrible
deformities.
14
   The two companies merged in 1941, forming S&P, which was absorbed by McGraw-Hill in 1966.

                                                      10
I.3 Central Questions

       The cursory history of disclosure raises numerous questions about the economics of

disclosure:

       · How do consumers respond to disclosure? Does the response depend on the source of

       the quality information (mandatory versus voluntary versus third party)? Does the

       response differ by the contents and presentation of the disclosed information?

       · How do sellers respond to disclosure? Why do some sellers disclose but not others?

       Why do some industries disclose but not others? Do sellers improve quality after a

       disclosure system is in place? Does disclosure drive out low quality sellers?

       · Do we need mandatory disclosure, or will the market provide sufficient quality

       assurance through voluntary or third-party disclosure?

       · What is the economics of certifiers? Do they have incentives to be truthful and

       thorough? Does it matter if they collect revenue from sellers or buyers? How would

       competition, reputation, monitoring and the disclosure of conflicted interest affect

       certifier behavior?

       In the remainder of this essay we review the theory and evidence on disclosure and

certification. Most of the theoretical work focuses on the incentives for firms to voluntarily

disclose quality and for certifiers to provide unbiased certification about product quality.

Several empirical papers also address voluntary disclosure. Much of the empirical literature

identifies challenges facing the practice of disclosure, ranging from measurement problems to

unintended consequences and certifier bias. In the final section, we present some preliminary

thoughts on the potential directions of future research. Our review is by no means exhaustive,

nor do our examples cover all the industries that have adopted or attempted to adopt quality


                                                 11
disclosure in practice. Even so, we cite scores of studies; for easy reference Table 2 lists the

citations by themes of insight.

                                         Table 2 about here



II. Theory

        The theory of quality disclosure can be divided into two strands. The first strand

examines seller incentives to disclose quality information to uninformed buyers and often

assumes that a third-party certifier can verify seller information. In this strand of literature, the

main tension is between consumers who want more quality information to guide their choice of

product and low-quality sellers who would like to hide in a pool of high-quality sellers. In

addition to redistributing the gains from trade between sellers and buyers, quality disclosure may

also result in efficiency gains if better information leads to a better sorting between consumers

and products, encourages sellers to improve quality, or forces low-quality sellers to exit the

market. In contrast, the second strand of literature puts certifiers under scrutiny. It emphasizes

that the interest of certifiers may not be aligned with that of buyers, and that certifiers can

manipulate the information flow to the public. This introduces a number of complications,

because seller behavior is likely to change in response to certifier behavior and competition

among certifiers could generate additional incentives for both sellers and certifiers.

        Below we review the two strands of theory separately. In Sections II.1, we summarize the

existing theories on seller incentive to voluntarily disclose quality information and then address

the merits of mandatory disclosure. In Section II.2, we review theories regarding the role of

third-party certifiers.



II.1 Seller disclosure


                                                  12
            The best known theory of quality disclosure is the so-called “unraveling result.” 15 The

term “unraveling” refers to the process whereby the best quality firm is first to disclose as a way

to distinguish itself from lower quality firms. Once the best firm discloses, the second best firm

has the same incentive to disclose, and so forth until all but the worst firm discloses. According

to Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981), if a seller possesses better information about product

quality than consumers do and there is zero cost to verifiably disclose it, sellers will always

disclose. This occurs because rational consumers will infer non-disclosure as having the lowest

quality. It follows that sellers will voluntarily disclose quality unless consumers already have

that information, implying that costly government-mandated disclosure is inefficient and non-

necessary.

            In reality, there are many markets in which voluntary disclosure is incomplete. This is

not surprising, because the basic unraveling result requires several often strong assumptions:

            · Products are vertically differentiated along a single, well-defined dimension of quality

            · Sellers have complete and private information about their own product quality

            · Disclosure is costless

            · Monopoly or competitive market with no strategic interaction among competing sellers

            · Consumers are willing to pay a positive amount for any enhancement of quality

            · Consumers are homogeneous

            · Consumers hold a rational expectation on the quality of non-disclosed products

            · The distribution of available quality is public information

While any violation of these assumptions could lead to a failure of unraveling, theoretical

research has focused on the problems posed by disclosure costs, market structure, and the role of

consumers.


15
     The term “unraveling” is first used in Viscusi (1978) who provides an example in the context of labor markets.

                                                           13
        Grossman and Hart (1980) and Jovanovic (1982) show that when disclosure is costly,

only sellers with product quality above a specific threshold will disclose. Casual observation

suggests that hospitals that are highly ranked by healthgrades.com and other rating services often

advertise their rankings, while “average” hospitals remain silent. 16 Though Jovanovic focuses

on a market with a large number of sellers, it is easy to extend the logic to monopoly as in

Grossman (1981) and Milgrom (1981) because disclosure incentives are driven by skeptical

consumers instead of competition among sellers. Matthews and Postlewaite (1985) and Shavell

(1994) show that if it is costly to acquire quality information, mandatory disclosure may

motivate sellers to reduce information collection. For example, a drug company might limit

studies of side effects if required to disclose all findings from such studies.

        Several theories link disclosure incentives to market structure. Board (2008) shows that

under certain conditions duopolists may fail to disclose quality even if disclosure cost is zero.

The main intuition is that disclosure may intensify price competition and this can outweigh any

consumer perceptions of inferior quality. Guo and Zhao (2008) demonstrate that the amount of

information disclosed depends on whether the duopolists disclose simultaneously or sequentially.

As compared to simultaneous disclosure, the leader discloses unambiguously less information

while the follower may reveal less or more information depending on disclosure cost.

        Unraveling requires consumers to play their part. Even if a third party verification

agency rates quality, sellers may hide their ratings if consumers are unaware of them (Faure-

Grimaud, Peyrache and Quesdada, 2007). For example, restaurants have not usually disclosed

their health and sanitation reports until compelled by regulation. 17 By the same token,

unraveling may not occur if consumers do not pay attention to the available information, if


16
   Most consumers are unaware of hospital report cards although newspaper accounts of report card scores do seem
to improve awareness. See Dranove and Sfekas (2009) for further discussion.
17
   See Napa News February 13, 2005 “Local restaurants skirt the law when it comes to telling diners about
cleanliness and health.”

                                                       14
attentive consumers don't understand the disclosed content, or if consumers make naïve

inferences about non-disclosure (Fishman and Hagerty, 2003; Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh, 2004;

Schwartz, 2005; Stivers, 2004). Under any of these conditions, lower quality sellers may not

disclose because at least some consumers do not perceive non-disclosure as a signal of the lowest

quality. This may further explain the lack of disclosure of hospital quality report card scores –

patients may stubbornly believe that their health providers are above average even without

disclosure. 18 Unraveling may also fail if consumers have heterogeneous preferences for quality.

Board (2008) shows that when duopolists fail to disclose quality, competition for heterogeneous

consumers softens. Hotz and Xiao (2009) highlight the importance of consumer heterogeneity

when products differ in one vertical attribute (quality) and one horizontal attribute (location).

Under some configurations, providing consumers with more information may result in more

elastic demand and more intensive price competition, which discourages both low and high

quality firms from voluntarily disclosing their product quality.

        Unraveling also assumes that consumers have perfect knowledge about the distribution of

available quality. In some cases, disclosure can adversely shift the distribution of quality, thereby

depressing consumer demand for the whole industry (Milgrom and Roberts, 1986). This explains

why all cigarette manufacturers are reluctant to disclose the long-term harm of cigarettes, even if

some cigarettes are less harmful than others.

        Other reasons for the failure of full disclosure include (1) the standard of certification is

unclear or endogenous (Harbaugh, Maxwell and Roussillon, 2007), (2) a seller with high

measured quality at a given point in time may fear the obligation to disclose in the future when

measured quality might be lower (for example due to mean regression) (Grubb, 2007)), and (3)

high quality (and often non-profit) sellers may face capacity constraints and/or price regulations

18
  Dranove (2008) calls this the “Lake Woebegone effect,” named for humorist Garrison Kiellor’s fictional town of
Lake Woebegone, where “all of the children are above average.”

                                                       15
and therefore do not benefit from quality disclosure (Lizzeri and Gavazza, 2007). Some teaching

hospitals have been reluctant to embrace report cards for the last reason.

       Is it desirable to mandate seller disclosure? Market structure, unsophisticated consumers

and heterogeneous preferences may all precipitate against voluntary disclosure. Many of the

papers cited above argue that under these conditions mandatory disclosure laws can promote

competition and raise consumer surplus, often at the expense of firm profits. Indeed, the failure

of disclosure, often revealed in public disasters, has fostered a number of government mandates.

But mandatory disclosure does not always raise social welfare. When non-disclosure is due

solely to disclosure costs, Jovanovic (1982) shows that mandatory disclosure is socially

excessive. Mandatory disclosure can also have unintended consequences, such as the

aforementioned impact on seller effort in detecting quality (Matthews and Postlewaite, 1985).

Mandatory disclosure may encourage “gaming” behavior that boost reported quality but actually

reduce consumer welfare, as may be the case for hospital report cards that encourage providers to

avoid the sickest patients (Dranove, Kessler, McClellan, and Satterthwaite, 2003) or result in

rationing of high quality outputs because high quality suppliers (for example schools and

hospitals) face a binding capacity constraint (Lizzeri and Gavazza, 2007). If there are multiple

dimensions of product quality, mandatory disclosure on one dimension may encourage firms to

invest in the disclosed dimension but cut back in other dimensions, leading to potential reduction

in consumer welfare (Bar-Isaac, Caruana, and Cuñat 2008).



II.2 Third-party disclosure and the economics of certifiers

       Third party disclosure can eliminate the need for government mandated disclosure if the

certifier can provide precise and unbiased information about product quality. However, that

condition is hard to meet, sometimes due to the noise in the data generating process and


                                                16
sometimes due to conflict of interest. The theoretical literature has pinpointed how these

problems inhibit third party disclosure, with a particular emphasis given to market and

nonmarket mechanisms that might limit certifier conflict of interest.

        Quality ratings based on consumer feedback provide a prominent example of noisy data.

Even if we limit attention to products that consumers can easily evaluate after consumption

(think of Zagat’s rating of restaurant services and eBay’s rating of seller service), consumer

ratings may be noisy or biased because: (1) different consumers may use different criteria to

measure quality and these criteria are often implicit and unstable; (2) those consumers who

report quality may not represent all consumers (casual empiricism suggests that the most

disgruntled consumers are overrepresented), (3) consumers may be reluctant to leave negative

feedback in fear of retaliation in the future, and (4) consumer feedback is unverifiable, as

consumers may offer feedback without ever having consumed the product and sellers may leave

favorable reviews of their own products (while disparaging competitors). 19

        Researchers have offered solutions to problems inherent in consumer evaluations.

Glazer, McGuire, Cao, and Zaslasky (2008) observe that reporting a simple average of consumer

scores invites sellers to improve performance for the majority of consumers while ignoring

product features that are costly to improve but only affect a small number of consumers. For

example, health plan report cards may encourage insurers to improve prevention services but

spend little on improving cancer care. They propose assigning utility weights on different

consumer respondents in order to correct this problem. Alternatively, Miller, Resnick and

Zeckhauser (2005) propose rewarding individuals whose ratings predict peer ratings.




19
   Only half of eBay buyers leave feedback and very few (<1%) are negative (Resnick and Zeckhauser, 2002).
Researchers have attributed the lack of negative feedback to consumer desires to be “nice” and fear of seller
retaliation (see a detailed review in Dellarocus 2003).


                                                        17
        Recent events have put a spotlight on the potential conflict of interest in certifiers. The

Enron scandal raised questions about the veracity of firms that both audit financial statements

and sell consulting services, ultimately leading to the downfall of Arthur Anderson. 20 In the

wake of Enron, SEC disallowed accounting companies to perform audit and consulting services

for the same client. 21 The 2008 financial meltdown turned attention to bond ratings. The

Securities and Exchange Commission requires that all public bonds receive a rating from a

certified agency. The four agencies that are currently certified to rate bonds – Moody’s,

Standard and Poor’s, Fitch Ratings, and Dominion Bond Rating Service – have access to detailed

financial information about bond issuers and can provide valuable information to bond

purchasers. However, a conflict of interest may arise because bond issuers select their rating

agency and pay a fee for the rating service. This may motivate bond rating agencies to give

excessively generous ratings in order to secure future rating business. Defenders of bond rating

agencies have suggested that an agency’s reluctance to downgrade may instead reflect a

longstanding policy of smoothing bond ratings over the peaks and valleys of the business

cycle. 22

        Can competition, reputation, or external monitoring mitigate the incentive problem of

certifiers? The role of competition is ambiguous. On the positive side, theorists show that the

information content of quality ratings can be enhanced if a monopoly certifier commits to a

rating criterion before sellers choose their quality investment (Albano and Lizzeri 2001), if there

is competition among certifiers along both price and rating criteria (Lizzeri, 1999; Hvide and

Heifetz, 2001; Miao, 2006), or if consumers already possess some noisy information about


20
   For further discussion see Flegm (2005).
21
   See the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act, http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8220.htm.
22
   Beaver et al. (2006) argue that smoothing may reflect the wishes of large institutional investors, many of which
have rules that require them to sell bonds that fall below investment grade. Because such sales can be costly and
some downgraded bonds may revert to the mean, investors may prefer that bond ratings are smoothed. In addition to
the four bond rating agencies, brokerage firms may issue their own debt reports.

                                                        18
product quality (Guerra, 2001). Except for perfect competition, the presence of multiple

certifiers does not result in full information because noisy grading allows certifiers to extract

more profits from low-quality sellers. 23 On the negative side, competition may even worsen the

problem because the presence of multiple certifiers encourages sellers to shop around, especially

when the application for certificate is non-transparent (Farhi, Lerner and Tirole 2008). In

combination, certificate shopping and selective disclosure could create a systematic bias in the

disclosed ratings even if each rating agency produces an unbiased estimate of true quality (Skreta

and Veldkamp, 2009).

         Like competition, reputation concerns do not always help correct the incentives of

certifiers. Even if consumers can evaluate disclosed information, it may take a long time to

distinguish honest error from strategic manipulation, which leads to an equilibrium where

certifiers may first provide accurate information and then take advantage of this reputation in

later periods (Benabou and Laroque, 1992). Motivated by the recent financial crisis, Mathis,

McAndrews and Rochet (2009) show that reputation is sufficient to discipline credit rating

agencies only when a large fraction of the agencies’ income come from rating simple assets. The

effectiveness of reputation becomes more doubtful in a market with naïve consumers.

Accounting for certifiers' incentives to understate credit risk and security issuers' incentives to

shop around, Bolton, Freixas, and Shapiro (2009) show that certifiers are more likely to inflate

ratings when a larger fraction of consumers take ratings at face value or when the expected

reputation costs of rating inflation is lower.

         In some cases, reputation concerns may even drive certifiers to report biased information.

For example, smog check inspectors may pass a failing car if a reputation for giving “easy”


23
  Albano and Lizzeri (2001) show that a monopoly certifier may choose to reveal full information if it can employ a
non-linear pricing scheme depending on the certified quality. When the certifier is constrained to charge a flat fee
for all certificates, it can implement a noisy grading criterion to achieve the same profit. In either case, the seller will
under invest in quality as compared to the social optimal setting where all information is available free of charge.

                                                            19
passes increases future business (Hubbard, 1998). To address this problem, many local motor

vehicle departments test smog check inspectors anonymously, serving the role of “certifier of

certifiers”. Of course, this raises the problem of who certifies the certifier of certifiers. Another

form of external monitoring is disclosing conflicts of interest of certifiers. Cain, Loewenstein and

Moore (2005) argue that the disclosure can have perverse effects because consumers do not

discount advice from biased certifiers as much as they should and the disclosure may lead

certifiers to feel morally licensed and strategically encouraged to exaggerate their advice even

further.

       Besides competition, reputation and external monitoring, the fourth potential solution to

the incentive problem of certifiers is isolating them from sellers. Intuitively, if certifiers can

evaluate the product without seller consent and sell the ratings directly to final consumers, they

should not have incentives to please sellers. However, this does not mean the certifier has full

incentive to reveal unbiased information. For example, a financial analyst may bias a stock

analysis due to career or reputation concerns (Scharfstein and Stein 1990, Ottaviani and Sorensen

2006). Even in the absence of conflict of interest, Durbin (2001) argues that certifiers may find it

difficult to extract profits from information provided directly to consumers because uninformed

consumers may infer quality from market prices and quantities (e.g., by observing a long line at a

well-reviewed restaurant), limiting demand for the guidebooks.

       The theoretical literature casts some doubt on the ability of third party certifiers to

accurately measure quality and, on occasion, their incentives to truthfully disclose it. The former

problem can be alleviated if the certifier knows the sources of noise in quality data. The latter is

more problematic because all the usual mechanisms, including competition, reputation and

external monitoring, do not necessarily correct the incentives of certifiers.




                                                  20
III. The Practice of Quality Disclosure

       The theoretical literature demonstrates that voluntary disclosure, government mandates,

and third party certifiers do not necessarily improve social welfare. For certification to enhance

welfare, it is important to design quality-rating systems carefully, evaluate their effectiveness ex

post, and improve system design based on theory and evidence. In this section, we will review a

number of lessons that empirical researchers have learned from the practice of quality disclosure

in education, health care, and other sectors. For reference, table 3 lists cited papers by industry.

                                         Table 3 about here

        We motivate the discussion in this section by considering hospital provider report cards.

Patients often have little idea of a hospital staff’s competence in diagnosis and surgery and

would be hard pressed to obtain systematic data about quality. A hospital might disclose that a

certain percentage of its staff is board certified. This is a relatively noisy indicator of quality,

however. In contrast, a disclosing agency could easily gather data on patient outcomes such as

mortality. Thus, hospital report cards seem like a natural arena for testing theories about

disclosure. Yet most evaluations of hospital report cards bear only slightly on the theoretical

issues described above; unraveling and the incentives of certifiers are not addressed at all.

Instead, the empirical literature focuses on simple questions such as whether patients even pay

attention to report cards. Other analyses focus on the statistical properties of hospital report

cards, questioning whether they confound the quality of the hospital with unobservable

differences in patient severity, thereby generating unreliable rankings and encouraging harmful

selection behavior.

        Bearing in mind the frequent disconnect between the issues that attract theorists and those

that emerge in practice, we begin our review of the empirical literature in Section III.1 with a


                                                  21
discussion of quality measurement. Section III.2 examines the evidence on unraveling and, if

voluntary disclosure is incomplete, the kinds of firms that are more likely to disclose. Section

III.3 explores whether and how consumers respond to report cards and section III.4 considers

providers’ responses, including whether providers improve quality or try to game the system.

We conclude in section III.5 by reviewing empirical papers that have examined certifier behavior

in the financial industries.



III.1 Defining and Reporting Quality

        Perhaps the most common approach to reporting quality is to compute average scores for

one or more quality dimensions. For example, certifiers often report average mortality rates for a

hospital or mean test scores for a school. A major problem with the “average” approach is

precision; there often is not enough data to generate small confidence intervals around the

reported scores. Consider evaluating hospital mortality. Medicare Hospital Compare recently

identified hospitals whose mortality rates were statistical outliers. Because mortality is a rare

event, confidence intervals were large and only 3 percent of the nation’s hospitals were identified

as having either high or low quality. Or consider school performance. There are typically fewer

than 100 students in a given grade in a given U.S. public school. Kane and Staiger (2002) argue

that as a result of this small numbers problem, the 95 percentage confidence interval of a school's

mean score is as wide as the gap between the 25 and 75 percentiles of the score distribution. Not

only does this imply that much of the score difference between two schools is likely due to

sampling error, it also implies that the best and worst ranked schools are more likely to be small

schools. Some certifiers report improvements in quality. These reports are compromised by

mean reversion. Kane and Staiger (2002) argue that it is misleading to reward or punish schools

depending on how their average scores have changed from one year to the next.


                                                 22
         Large sample size can minimize sampling error but does nothing for mean reversion.

Nor can a large sample size filter out confounding factors if many individuals in the sample share

a common unobservable attribute and this attribute is correlated with the final score. For

example, a simple average of patient mortality can underestimate the quality of a large teaching

hospital because such a hospital tends to admit sicker patients. By the same logic, a school

located in a high-income area may achieve better test scores because children from high-income

families tend to have highly educated parents.

         Although these problems seem to be well-known among certifiers, they are often ignored.

For example, some health insurers emphasize vaccination rates in pediatrician report cards, even

though these rates are known to vary with patient income and education. Many other certifiers

do adjust raw quality scores using data on demographics and other relevant exogenous

characteristics. Medicare computes risk-adjusted mortality rates for heart attack patients in two

steps. 24 First, a hierarchical regression model is used to regress 30-day mortality of heart attack

patients on age, gender and comorbidities. This regression yields the predicted mortality rate for

a specific hospital given its own patient case mix, as well as an expected mortality rate that the

same patients with the same characteristics would have should they be treated at an “average”

hospital. Second, a hospital's risk-adjusted mortality rate is defined as [(actual mortality /

expected mortality) * (U.S national unadjusted mortality rate of heart attack patients)]. To the

extent that the regression model has controlled for all the health conditions that affect a patient's

mortality risk, it permits a direct comparison of hospitals that treat patients with different

severities. 25




24
   http://www.hospitalcompare.hhs.gov/Hospital/Static/InformationforProfessionals_tabset.asp?activeTab=2&Langu
age=English&version=default&subTab=3.
25
   The algorithm claims to have a special control for small hospitals or small number of cases. See the website cited
in the last footnote for more details.

                                                         23
       Risk adjustment is no panacea. In a field as complex as medicine, the range of potential

risk adjusters is vast, the availability of specific adjusters varies, and implications of choosing

specific adjusters can be profound. Iezzoni (1997) obtains markedly different rankings by

applying different risk adjusters to the same outcomes data. This suggests the need for uniform

and complete risk adjusters. Unfortunately, the predictive power of mortality regressions

remains low, suggesting that important risk adjusters are unavailable to certifiers. As more risk

adjusters become available, Iezzoni’s results suggest that rankings may change.

       All of the problems mentioned above are magnified if quality is multi-dimensional or if

outcomes are not readily tied to suppliers. Consider reporting the quality of urologists for the

treatment of prostate cancer. Outcomes of interest include mortality, pain, incontinence and

impotence. While theoretically possible to compute four quality measures, patients might find it

difficult to compare them. Moreover, some outcomes such as incontinence may continue months

or years after treatment, necessitating complex data collection. Similar issues arise in measuring

quality in education, where the performance of a grade school teacher may not be apparent until

the students are in high school or beyond.



III.2 Does unraveling generate full disclosure in practice?

        Sellers often do not disclose their quality. Left to their own devices, hospitals did not

report risk adjusted mortality, perhaps because it would be difficult for patients to verify and

interpret the data. It is perhaps more difficult to explain why public schools have not voluntarily

reported standardized test scores. Using salad dressing as an example, Mathios (2000)

demonstrates that many producers of higher-fat salad dressing withheld fat information before

the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act came into effect. Moreover, there remained large

variation in fat content among the non-disclosing dressings and those with the highest fat levels


                                                  24
experienced a significant decline in sales after they were required to disclose. This experience

suggests that unraveling may fail to occur even in markets with credible, low-cost mechanisms

to disclose.

       Theory predicts that firms are more likely to disclose if disclosure cost is lower, product

quality is higher, or the expected benefits from disclosure are greater conditional on quality and

disclosure cost. There is substantial evidence supporting these predictions: on the cost side,

Bushee and Leuz (2005) find that regulation of disclosure information for firms that were traded

on the over-the-counter bulletin board has increased disclosure costs and forced smaller firms out

of the market. Using whether a seller uses professional software to post photos on eBay as a

proxy for disclosure cost, Lewis (2009) finds that “low cost” sellers (those with access to

professional software) post far more photos than average and that sellers post more photos after

switching to professional software. On the benefit side, Francis, Khurana, and Pareira (2005)

present evidence that firms in industries with greater external financing needs choose to disclose

more financial information to the market, and an expanded disclosure policy for these firms leads

to a lower cost of both debt and equity capital. Conversely, Leuz, Triantis, and Wang (2008)

presents evidence that firms are more likely to go “dark” in the financial market because of poor

future prospects, distress, and increased compliance costs after the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.

       However, contrary to the common wisdom, even when the disclosed information is

certified by a third-party, disclosing firms do not necessarily have higher quality than the non-

disclosing firms. This may be because the non-disclosing firms already have a good reputation

and therefore do not need certification. Edelman (2006) presents evidence that TRUSTe-

certified websites are more than twice as likely to be untrustworthy as uncertified sites. He

argues that this occurs because the online “trust” authority issues certifications without

substantial verification of the actual trustworthiness of recipients.


                                                  25
       In another example, Jin (2005) explores why only half of all health maintenance

organizations (HMOs) voluntarily disclose quality via the National Committee on Quality

Assurance (NCQA). Disclosure cost is definitely not the main story, as some reporting HMOs

explicitly instruct NCQA to withhold the information from plan-identifiable publication. After

controlling for cost and demand factors, Jin finds that the disclosure decision is likely driven by

incentives to differentiate from competitors. She shows that early disclosers are more likely to

operate in highly competitive markets but the average disclosure rate tends to be lower in such

markets. These findings are consistent with product differentiation. The counter-intuitive

relationship between competition and disclosure is not necessarily surprising; theorists have

argued that zero-cost disclosure should unravel in a monopoly market (Grossman, 1981;

Milgrom, 1981) but may not unravel in a differentiated duopoly (Board, 2008). Jin and Sorensen

(2006) further show that the distribution of quality among reporting HMOS that authorize

NCQA to disclose quality overlaps the distribution of quality among HMOs that do not authorize

public disclosure, although the former do report better quality on average.



III.3 Does disclosure improve consumer choice?

       One of the purported benefits of disclosure is that it facilitates better matches between

consumers and products. Consumers may migrate towards higher quality sellers (“vertical

sorting”) or to sellers whose product characteristics best meet their idiosyncratic needs

(“horizontal sorting.”) Both vertical and horizontal sorting effect could substantially increase

welfare even if product attributes remain unchanged.

       All available evidence pertains to vertical sorting. For example, Ippolito and Mathios

(1990) show that consumers switched to breakfast cereals with higher fiber content after

producers were allowed to make health claims about fiber. Hastings and Weinstein (2008) find


                                                 26
that parents who responded to government-mandated information about public school quality by

switching their children’s enrollment chose schools scoring 0.5 student-level standard deviations

above the schools their children left behind.

       Several studies of vertical sorting examine health insurance and health provider report

cards. Wedig and Tai-Seale (2002) examine health plan choices when plan report cards were

introduced to federal employees in the mid 1990s. Scanlon et al. (2002) study how General

Motor employees responded to the dissemination of health plan ratings in 1997, Beaulieu (2002)

studies plan choices among Harvard employees, Jin and Sorensen (2006) examine how federal

annuitants respond to publicized health plan ratings, and Dafny and Dranove (2008) focus on

Medicare enrollees choices of Medicare managed care plans subsequent to the publication of

Medicare & You quality rankings. In all these situations, higher ranked plans enjoy increases in

market share. Most of these studies also consider plan choices prior to report cards, finding that

consumers seem to have some knowledge of quality differences that report cards augment.

       Quality disclosure may fail to affect demand if ratings are difficult to understand or

provide irrelevant information. Disclosure may also fail to affect demand if ratings confirm what

consumers already know about quality (Marshall et al. 2000). Following the 1990 introduction

of New York's cardiovascular surgery report cards, Dranove and Sfekas (2008) show that higher

ranked hospitals did not appear to gain significant market shares. This finding concurs with the

previous literature (Schneider and Epstein, 1998; Romano and Zhou, 2004). However, Dranove

and Sfekas also find that hospitals whose rankings differed from prior beliefs experienced a

significant change in market share.

       The endogeneity of voluntary disclosure poses a problem to researchers who may be

unable to observe firm characteristics that are observed by consumers. Using instrumental

variables to address the endogeneity of child care centers decisions to seek voluntarily


                                                27
accreditation by the National Association for the Education of Young Children, Xiao (2007)

finds that an accredited center tends to have lower unobservable (to the researcher) quality.

Researchers who disregard endogeneity will underestimate consumer responses to accreditation.

After correcting for the endogeneity bias, Xiao finds that consumers rely on both reputation and

accreditation status for information and they respond less to accreditation for old firms.

       Many of the aforementioned studies find heterogeneous consumer responses to quality

information. For example, health plan ratings are more likely to affect individuals choosing a

plan for the first time (Wedig and Tai-Seale 2002, Jin and Sorensen 2006), plan ratings are more

effective in the areas where consumers had less information prior to the publication of quality

measures (Dafny and Dranove, 2008), and quality reporting for fertility clinics has a greater

effect in the states that mandate insurance coverage for the reported fertility treatment (Bundorf,

Chun, Goda, and Kessler, 2008).

       Consumer response to disclosure may differ by attention as well. In a study of earnings

disclosures, Della Vigna and Pollet (2009) show that late day Friday announcements (a time

where consumers arguably pay less attention to financial news) have a 15% lower immediate

stock price response and a 70% higher delayed response as compared to announcements made in

other weekdays.

       Consumer response is sensitive to the reported measures of quality. Scanlon, Chernew,

Sheffler, and Fenwick (2002) find that GM employees respond to overall quality indices but not

to specific quality measures. Similarly, Dafny and Dranove (2008) find that the effect of health

plan report cards on Medicare beneficiaries is driven by responses to consumer satisfaction

scores, while other more objective quality measures rate did not affect enrollment decisions.

Pope (2006) studies the effects of hospital rankings in US News and World Reports. He finds

that changes in discrete rankings affected patient choice, even after controlling for continuous


                                                28
quality. This array of findings suggest that consumers may have limited cognitive ability and

therefore tend to focus on a subset of measures that are easier to understand. As a counter

example, Bundorf, Chun, Goda, and Kessler (2008) find evidence of consumer sophistication

when they evaluate the quality of fertility clinics. Clinics with a disproportionate share of young,

relatively easy-to-treat patients were more likely to have high birth rates due to patient mix, yet

such clinics are found to have lower market shares after the adoption of report cards, suggesting

that consumers could see through the simple statistics.

        A significant literature in finance and accounting assesses the financial impact of

disclosure by measuring market price responses to a financial disclosure (by a firm itself or via a

third-party certifier). For example, studies find that share values respond to changes in bond

ratings, with some studies showing that the market responds more to bad news than to good

news. 26 Such asymmetric response may explain why some credit rating agencies are reluctant to

downgrade (Beaver, Shakespeare, and Soliman, 2006) and why firms tend to announce bad news

on late Friday (Della Vigna and Pollet 2009). In a similar spirit, Greenstone, Oyer and Vissing-

Jorgensen (2006) find strong market response when the 1964 Securities Acts Amendments

extended the mandatory disclosure requirements for listed firms to large firms traded over the

counter.

        It is difficult to apply the event-study approach to quality disclosure of non-financial

products because no centralized market exists to aggregate the disclosed information into a

universal market price. Alternatively, Jin and Sorenson (2006) use demand estimates to monetize

the value of disclosure. They let ui(j) denote individual i’s indirect utility from product j. Let Ai

denote the product that individual i would choose if quality information is available, and Bi the

product that would be chosen in the absence of the information. Then the dollar value of the

26
  See Kliger and Sarig (2000) for how security market responds to the refinement of Moody’s credit rating system.
This paper also reviews previous research on market response to changes in credit rating.

                                                       29
information to individual i is [ui(Ai)−ui(Bi)]/αi, where αi is the marginal utility of a dollar. Under

this definition, information is valueless (ex post) if it doesn’t change the individual’s choice. In

other words, it does not count the psychological utility gain (loss) that people may derive from

being told that their chosen product is rated high (low) even if that information would not have

affected their choice.

       Following this framework, Jin and Sorensen (2006) estimate that the publication of plan

ratings only motivate 0.7 percent of federal annuitants to change their health plan choices, due to

the enormous inertia in individual plan choice. For those individuals whose decisions are

materially affected by the ratings, the value of the information is estimated to be $160 per person

per year. Averaged over all individuals in the sample, the value of the published scores is only

$1.11 per person. Adding a Bayesian learning structure to a similar random utility model,

Chernew, Gowrisankaran, and Scanlon (2008) estimate that GM employees were willing to pay

about $330 per year (about 5 percent of premiums) to avoid one subpar performance rating, and

the average value of the report card was about $20 per employee per year. Finally, Dranove and

Sfekas (2008) find that hospitals whose report card scores are two standard deviations below the

expected score stood to lose $1.4 million dollars in revenues annually.

       Since the estimated value of information depends on the estimated marginal utility of a

dollar (which is often obtained from the coefficient of price), this estimation is sensitive to the

endogeneity of price. If price is correlated with unobserved plan quality, it tends to bias the

estimates toward finding relatively inelastic demand, which in turn leads to an upward bias in the

estimated dollar value of information. Again, this identification issue stresses the importance of

controlling for the information that consumers already know before quality disclosure.

       Estimating consumer response to quality information becomes more complicated if the

industry is subject to price regulation or capacity constraints. School ratings provide an excellent


                                                  30
example. In light of the 2001 No Child Left Behind Act, many states require elementary and

secondary schools to collect, submit, and publicize a report card describing school quality in a

specific grade. Even if we put aside the measurement problems in school ratings, publicizing

ratings could lead to very different consumer responses as compared to other markets for three

reasons: first, most students obtain public education free of tuition; second, whether a public

school is in a student's choice set often depends on student residence; and third, even within a

student's choice set, most local schools are subject to capacity constraint and therefore students

may not be able to attend their first-choice school. All three factors suggest that one cannot use

the above utility framework to monetize the value of school ratings. Instead, researchers might

prefer to examine other factors such as improvements in test scores (see references in Section

III.4) or even real estate values (Figlio and Lucas, 2004).

        To summarize, empirical studies have found evidence that consumers respond to quality

disclosure when rankings differ from preconceptions. The nature of the response depends on

whether the disclosed information is easy to access and understand, and whether consumers pay

attention to disclosure.



III.4 Does disclosure improve quality?

        If disclosure affects demand, the returns to quality should increase, as high quality firms

increase sales, boost prices, or both. 27 This, in turn, should prompt sellers to raise quality.

Several studies document this salutary provider response. Using detailed data before and after

Los Angeles County adopted restaurant hygiene grade cards in 1998, Jin and Leslie (2003) find

that after Los Angeles County posted restaurant hygiene grade cards in 1998, hospitalizations

from food-borne diseases declined by 20 percent, largely because restaurants and consumers

27
  Wimmer and Chezum (2003) and Dewan and Hsu (2004) have shown that certified goods have higher market
price than non-certified goods.

                                                   31
preparing meals at home improved hygiene as opposed to consumers choosing more hygienic

restaurants. Similarly, Bennear and Olmstead (2007) examine how Massachusetts drinking

water suppliers responded to 1996 Amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act, which

mandated disclosure of contaminant levels. They find that larger utilities required to mail

consumer confidence reports directly to customers reduced total violations by 30-44 percent and

reduced more severe health violations by 40-57 percent.

       Seller responses to disclosure can be heterogeneous. Focusing on the effect of India's

Green Rating Project on the largest pulp and paper plants in India, Powers, Blackman, Lyon and

Narain (2008) find that the GRP drove significant reductions in pollution loadings among dirty

plants but not among cleaner ones. Moreover, plants located in wealthier communities were more

responsive to GRP ratings, as were single-plant firms. Chen (2008) studies the effect of the

Nursing Home Quality Initiative (NHQI), finding that lower quality nursing homes improved

relative to high quality homes, with the most striking changes occurring in more competitive

markets.

       While disclosure appears to provide firms with incentives to improve quality, Bar-Isaac

et al. (2008) point out that this may harm consumers if quality is multidimensional and only

some dimensions are disclosed, as firms may boost reported quality but shirk on unreported

quality. Lu (2009) notes that the NHQI collects data on a wide variety of quality dimensions but

only reports a subset of this data. She finds evidence that after the introduction of the NHQI: (1)

the proportion of effort allocated to unreported dimensions decreases; (2) quality improves

insignificantly along the reported dimensions but deteriorates along the unreported ones; (3)

there is no evidence that nursing homes increase quality-related inputs. These findings suggest

that firms may respond to information disclosure by reallocating effort across dimensions of

quality, with potentially no net benefit for consumers.


                                                32
        Because quality measures are often imperfect, it is possible to increase the reported

quality measures without any improvement in actual quality. In particular, when reported quality

depends on the characteristics of the consumer as well as the performance of the seller, sellers

can improve performance by strategically selling to the “right” consumers. Hospital report cards

provide an excellent example. In 1990-1992, New York and Pennsylvania adopted hospital and

surgeon report card based on cardiovascular mortality rates. Although these mortality rates are

risk adjusted, the adjustment is imperfect. Consequently, hospitals subject to mandatory report

cards may have greater incentives to refuse to treat severely ill patients. The patients who

inappropriately receive nonsurgical treatments may suffer greater long term health problems and

potentially die due to treatment delays. Using national data on Medicare patients at risk for

cardiac surgery, Dranove, Kessler, McClellan and Satterthwaite (2003) find that cardiac surgery

report cards in New York and Pennsylvania led both to selection behavior by providers leading

to higher levels of resource use and to worse health outcomes, particularly for sicker patients.

They conclude that, at least in the short run, these report cards decreased patient and social

welfare. As further evidence of selection, Werner and Asch (2005) find that the incidence of

cardiac surgery for minority patients relative to white patients declined in New York subsequent

to the introduction of report cards.

        Similar concerns have been expressed about school report cards. Highlighted by the

2001 No Child Left Behind Act, both federal and state accountability laws require schools to

report statistics of student performance as a measure of school quality. Most available studies

find that accountability has had a positive effect on student outcomes (Carnoy and Loeb, 2002;

Hanushek and Raymond, 2004; Jacob, 2005; Peterson and West, 2003). But the effect is not

always attributable to disclosing school report cards to the public. Using student performance

data across 42 states in 1993-2002, Hanushek and Raymond (2005) find that accountability laws


                                                 33
have a significant, positive effect on math and reading test scores, but the publication of school

reports cards has zero impact. This suggests that quality improvement is more attributable to

consequential accountability rather than disclosure per se.

       Critics of school report cards express concerns about gaming. Schools may increase

grade retention or place poor-performing students into special education so that they are not

counted in school ratings. These gaming activities have been documented by Jacob (2005) for

Chicago public schools, by Haney (2000), Deere and Strayer (2001) and Cullen and Reback

(2006) in Texas, and by Figlio and Getzler (2006) in Florida. However, Hanushek and Raymond

(2005) argue that state-specific evidence of gaming, often obtained by comparing special

education placement rate immediately before and after the introduction of accountability, may be

driven by national trends instead of strategic gaming of school ratings.

       Changing the pool of subjects is not the only way to game a performance-based

disclosure system. Other types of gaming include teaching to the test, extending test time, or

blatant cheating. Using data from the Chicago Public Schools, Jacob and Levitt (2003) develop

an algorithm to detect teacher cheating based on unexpected test score fluctuations and

suspicious patterns of answers for students in a classroom. They find that severe teacher or

administrator cheating on standardized tests occurs in at least 4 to 5 percent of elementary school

classrooms annually. The observed cheating frequency increased after a 1996 accountability

regulation holds schools accountable for low achievement in test scores.

       In summary, empirical studies confirmed the theoretical arguments that quality disclosure

has strength and pitfalls. On the positive side, there is fairly strong evidence from healthcare and

finance that disclosure enables consumers to identify superior sellers. Evidence from education

in this regard is less compelling. There is also some evidence from a variety of markets

including healthcare that disclosure motivates sellers to improve quality. However, there is also


                                                 34
considerable evidence from healthcare and education that sellers have attempted to game the

system at the expense of consumers, especially if the measured quality does not cover all

dimensions of quality or does not adjust for characteristics of consumers that can affect the

rankings. There is no consensus as to whether the benefits outweigh the costs.



III.5 Evidence on certifier behavior

       Most evidence of certifier behavior focuses on (1) the content of the certified information

and (2) competition among certifiers.

       A certifier can manipulate both the bias and precision of reported information. It is easy

to see how a certifier can bias information. Certifiers can also alter precision by intentionally

adding noise to the signals they observe. The latter phenomenon has been highlighted in

theoretical work predicting that a certifier may have incentive to adopt crude rating intervals (e.g.

pass or fail) even if it observes the true product quality with zero cost (Lizzeri, 1999).

       The most comprehensive studies of certifier bias and precision focus on financial analysts

because their forecast of corporate earnings can be easily tested in the market. A large literature

has documented that earnings forecasts are systematically overoptimistic and the extent of bias is

predictable from publicly available information. Some attribute the bias to conflict of interest.

For example, Michaely and Womack (1999) show that the “buy” recommendations made by

analysts affiliated with the underwriting brokerage perform significantly worse than similar

recommendations made by unaffiliated analysts. Their evidence suggests that underwriter

analysts have a significant positive bias due to conflict of interest and, interestingly, the market

does not recognize this bias to the full extent. Using the well-known hierarchy of brokerage firms

as a proxy for career outcomes, Hong and Kubik (2003) find that optimistic analysts (relative to

the consensus after controlling for forecast accuracy) are more likely to move up in career. This


                                                 35
suggests that career concern can be an important reason for the positive forecast bias. Lim (2001)

presents evidence that rational analysts may choose to forecast with a positive bias so that the

analyst can access better information from the management in the future and therefore improve

her overall accuracy.

        Studies of credit ratings suggest that SEC-certified bond ratings agencies are more

conservative than non-certified agencies (Beaver, Shakespeare, and Soliman, 2006) and rating

agencies revise grades only when they are unlikely to reverse their decision shortly afterwards

(Loffler 2005). Concerns about such conservative behavior have prompted policy makers to

encourage competition and transparency in order to raise the quality of rating services (SEC

2008). However, the theoretical prediction on competition is mixed: on the one hand,

competition may motivate certifiers to provide refined information; on the other hand, it may

also invite strategic certificate shopping and result in coarse ratings.

        Even when reporting on the same set of firms, certifiers may not agree on the ratings.

This fact has been documented in many markets but has received the most scrutiny in credit

markets. 28 In bond ratings, different ratings from different agencies are often referred to as “split

ratings.” Focusing on the comparison between Moody's and Standard & Poor’s ratings,

researchers have found that the market treats U.S. bonds with split ratings differently from the

bonds with equal ratings and the bonds with only one of the two ratings (Thompson and Vaz,

1990; Cantor, Packer and Cole, 1997). This could be driven by (a) Moody's and Standard &

Poor’s using different rating criteria, or by (b) the bond issuers that select to be rated by both

agencies are different from those choosing only one rating and the bonds with split ratings are

systematically different the bonds with equal ratings.




28
 Differential ratings are documented in consumer products (Friedman 1990), health plan report cards (Scanlon,
Chernew, Sheffler, and Fendrick, 1998) and college rankings (Pike, 2004).

                                                       36
       To distinguish the two explanations, Cantor and Packer (1997) examine the factors

driving the split ratings between Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s, and two other rating agencies that

accept voluntary request for bond rating. They find limited evidence of selection bias, which

implies that different rating agencies may use different rating criteria. Similarly, Doherty,

Kartasheva and Phillips (2009) take S&P’s entry as a natural experiment and show that S&P

applies a more stringent rating standard than the incumbent (A.E. Best). As a result, better-than-

average insurers within each A.E. Best’s rating category are more likely to seek a second rating

from S&P. Berger, Davies, and Flannery (2000) broaden the scope of professional certifiers to

include both private certifiers and regulators. They use price and rating data to infer whether the

government rating of a bank holding company causes a movement in Moody's rating of the same

company, or vice versa. They find Granger-causality in both directions, suggesting that

supervisors and bond rating agencies both acquire some information that aids the other group in

forecasting changes in bank condition.

       These studies use both price and rating data to infer differences across certifiers but they

do not reveal the full structure of grading differentiation. To overcome this problem, Jin, Kato

and List (2008) uses two field experiments to study three professional sports card certifiers. They

find that the two new entrants adopt more precise signals and use finer grading cutoffs to

differentiate themselves from the incumbent certifier. The measured grading cutoffs map

consistently into prevailing market prices, suggesting that the market recognizes differences

across multiple grading criteria.

       Consistent with the theory, several studies suggest that competition among certifiers is

not always helpful. Becker and Milbourn (2008) show that increased competition from Fitch's

growth in the corporate bond rating market led to more issuer-friendly ratings and also less

informative ratings. Similarly, Tan and Wang (2008) find that credit ratings are less stable when


                                                 37
more rating agencies rate a bond. Hubbard (2002) finds that auto smog emissions testers may

issue favorable test results in order to cultivate future business.

         Unlike for-profit certifiers who may have an incentive to understate problems in order to

attract business, most government certifiers have little direct financial incentive to bias their

ratings. But government certifiers face a different set of incentive issues: they may not be

sufficiently rewarded for their effort, they may rely on subjective quality measures, and their

personal preference may be in line with or against the interests of their clients (Prendergast

2007).      Examining more than 1000 inspections by the Nuclear Regulatory Commissions,

Feinstein (1989) finds considerable variation in the probability of detecting violations.

Interestingly, detection rates increased sharply after the Three Mile Island accident of 1979.

Similar inspector heterogeneity is also found in FDA inspection of drug manufacturing facilities

(Macher, Mayo and Nickerson, 2008).

           To summarize, empirical studies of certifiers have confirmed the theoretical insights:

both public and private certification can be noisy and not fully revealing; in addition,

competition among certifiers does not necessarily improve information as it may motivate

certifiers to relax their rating criterion or encourage sellers to strategically shop for favorable

ratings.



IV. Future research

           Quality disclosure is an important tool for facilitating consumer purchases when other

forms of quality assurance are inadequate. There are many examples in which quality disclosure

has allowed consumers to find sellers who best meet their needs, including restaurants, education

and healthcare. There is less evidence that sellers respond by boosting quality. Instead, most

studies of seller responses seem to focus on gaming behavior that often harms consumers.


                                                   38
Research suggests that quality disclosure is a two-edged sword in other ways, with problems

including measurement error, consumer misunderstanding, and inspector bias. It is difficult to

state with confidence that disclosure in such important sectors as healthcare, education, or

finance has unambiguously helped consumers.

       Much additional research is required to help certifiers design optimal quality disclosure

schemes. A well designed quality measure should be precise, inexpensive to generate, easy to

understand, all while minimizing opportunities for sellers and certifiers to game the system. For

example, a hospital quality report card might be more effective than a surgeon report card. One

simple reason is that sample size is larger. Perhaps more importantly, many hospitals have the

ability to allocate patients across surgeons and will be able to assign the toughest cases to the

best surgeons. If surgeon quality was directly reported, then the best surgeons (indeed, all

surgeons) might instead shun the toughest cases. Certification of hospitals raises unexplored

issues concerning regulated industries including health care and education. If high quality

sellers are unable to raise prices, how will they ration demand?

       Optimal disclosure design will likely borrow from the literature on multitasking

(Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1991). The effects of disclosing some dimensions of quality but not

others is similar to the effects of directly rewarding some dimensions but not others (Lu, 2008).

Thus, it will be important for disclosing organizations to consider substitution and

complementarities in production, the organization of productive teams, and other factors that

affect optimal contract design in agency relationships.

       There is also a considerable gap in our understanding of certifier behavior, the

importance of which was underscored by the 2008 subprime crisis. Theoretical work points to

the potential benefits of regulating certifiers and empirical evidence is beginning to emerge on

certifier bias and competition among credit rating agencies. Given the perception that


                                                 39
certification failed financial markets on a massive scale and the potential scope for regulation,

work in this area is needed urgently.

       Finally, while most existing studies have examined the short run consequences of quality

disclosure, little is known about long run effects Quality disclosure may drive out low quality

firms, invite entry by high quality competitors, or encourage incumbents to improve quality.

Even consumers who ignore disclosure can benefit from these responses, which may prove to be

an important benefit of report cards.




                                                40
VI. References

Akerlof, G. (1970), “The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,"

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488-500.

Albano, G. and A. Lizzeri (2001), “Strategic Certification and the Provision of Quality,”

       International Economic Review.

Bagwell, K. (2007), "The Economic Analysis of Advertising," in Mark Armstrong and Rob

       Porter (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3, North-Holland: Amsterdam,

       2007, 1701-1844.

Bar-Isaac, H. Caruana, G., and V. Cuñat (2008), “Information gathering externalities in product

       markets” available at http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~hbar-isa/hbigcvccheap.pdf.

Becker, B. and T. Milbourn (2008), “Reputation and Competition: Evidence from the Credit

       Rating Industry,” Harvard Business School Finance Working Paper No. 09-051.

       Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1278150.

Beaulieu, N. (2002), “Quality Information and Consumer Health Plan Choices,” Journal of

       Health Economics 21(1): 43–63.

Beaver, W., C. Shakespeare, and M. Soliman (2006), “Differential Properties in the Ratings of

       Certified vs. Non-Certified Bond Rating Agencies” Journal of Accounting & Economics,

       42(3): 303-334.

Benabou, R. and G. Laroque (1992), “Using Privileged Information to Manipulate Markets:

       Insiders, Gurums, and Credibility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3): 921-958.

Berger, A., Davies, S. and M. Flannery (2000), “Comparing Market and Supervisory

       Assessments of Bank Performance: Who Knows What When?” Journal of Money, Credit

       and Banking, 32, Part 2, pp. 641-66.




                                               41
Bennear, L. S. and S. Olmstead (2009), “The Impacts of the 'Right to Know': Information

       Disclosure and the Violation of Drinking Water Standards,” Journal of Environmental

       Economics and Management, forthcoming.

Board, O. (2009), "Competition and Disclosure," Journal of Industrial Economics, forthcoming.

Bolton, P., Freixas, X. and J. Shapiro (2009), “The Credit Ratings Game,” NBER Working Paper

       W14712.

Bundorf, M., Chun, N., Goda, G. and D. Kessler (2008), “Do Markets Respond to Quality

       Information? The Case of Fertility Clinics,” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

Bushee, B.J. and C. Leuz (2005), “Economic consequences of SEC disclosure regulation:

       evidence from the OTC bulletin board” Journal of Accounting & Economics 39(2): 233-

       264.

Cain, Loewenstein and Moore (2005), “The Dirt on Coming Clean: Perverse Effects of

       Disclosing Conflicts of Interest” Journal of Legal Studies, 34, January 2005.

Carnoy, M. and S. Loeb (2002), "Does External Accountability Affect Student Outcomes? A

       cross-state Analysis," Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(4):305-331.

Cantor, R. and F. Packer (1997), “Differences of Opinion and Selection Bias in the Credit Rating

       Industry,” The Journal of Banking and Finance, 21:1395-1417.

______, Packer, F. and Kevin Cole (1997), “Split Ratings and the Pricing of Credit Risk,” The

       Journal of Fixed Income, December:72-82.

Chen, M. (2008), “Minimum Quality Standards and Strategic Vertical Differentiation: An

       Empirical Study of Nursing Homes,” Northwestern University PhD Dissertation.

Chernew, M., Gowrisankaran, G. and D. Scanlon (2008), “Learning and the Value of

       Information: the Case of Health Plan Report Cards,” Journal of Econometrics, 144: 156-

       74.


                                               42
Cullen, J. and R. Reback (2006), “Tinkering Toward Accolades: School Gaming Under a

       Performance Accountability System,” NBER Working Paper W12286.

Cutler, D. and R. Zeckhauser (1997), “Adverse Selection in Health Insurance,” NBER Working

       Paper W6107.

Dafny, L. and D. Dranove, (2008), “Do Report Cards Tell Consumers Anything They Don't

       Already Know? The case of Medicare HMOs,” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(3):790-

       821.

Daye, D. and B. Van Arlen (2006), “History of Branding,”

       http://www.brandingstrategyinsider.com/2006/08/history_of_bran.html, searched

       12/15/2008.

Deere, D. and W. Strayer (2001), "Putting Schools to the Test: School Accountability,

       Incentives, and Behavior, "Working Paper 113, Private Enterprise Research Center,

       Texas A&M University.

Dellarocus, C. (2003), “The Digitization of Word-of-Mouth: Promise and Challenges of Online

       Feedback Mechanisms,” Management Science, 49(10):1407-1424

Della Vigna, S. and J. Pollet (2009), "Investor Inattention, Firm Reaction, and Friday Earnings

       Announcements," Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Dewan, S. and V. Hsu, (2004), “Adverse Selection in Reputations-Based Electronic Markets:

       Evidence from Online Stamp Auctions,” Journal of Industrial Economics 52(4): 497-516.

Doherty, N. A., Kartasheva, A. and R. Phillips (2009), “Competition among Rating Agencies

       and Information Disclosure” (February 13, 2009). Available at SSRN:

       http://ssrn.com/abstract=1101700.

Dranove, D. (1988), “Demand Inducement and the Physician Patient Relationship” Economic

       Inquiry, 26(2):281-98.


                                               43
_______, Kessler, D., McClellan, M. and M. Satterthwaite (2003), "Is More Information Better:

       The Effects of 'Report Cards' on Health Care Providers,” Journal of Political Economy,

       111: 555-88.

_______ and A. Sfekas (2008), “Start Spreading the News: A Structural Estimate of the Effects

       of New York Hospital Report Cards,” Northwestern Kellogg Working Paper.

_______ (2008), Code Red, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Durbin, E. (2001), “Moody's or the Michelin Guide? Revealing Quality Through Private-sector

       Certification,” Washington University Working Paper.

Edelman, B. (2006), “Adverse Selection in Online ‘Trust’ Certifications,” mimeo.

Epstein, A. (1998) , “Rolling Down the Runway – the Challenges Ahead for Quality Report

       Cards,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 279(21): 1691-96.

Farhi, E., Lerner, J. and J. Tirole (2008), “Fear Rejection? Tiered Certification and

       Transparency” NBER working paper #14457.

Faure-Grimaud, A., Pevrache, E. and L. Quesada (2009), “The Ownership of Ratings,” RAND

       Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Feinstein, J. (1989), "The Safety Regulation of U.S. Nuclear Power Plants: Violations,

       Inspections, and Abnormal Occurrences," Journal of Political Economy, 97(1): 115-54.

Feng, L. (2009), “Multitasking, Information Disclosure and Product Quality: Evidence from

       Nursing Homes,” University of Rochester, Working Paper.

Figlio, D. and M. Lucas (2004), “What's in a Grade? School Report Cards and the Housing

       Market,” American Economic Review, 94(3): 591-604.

_____ and L. Getzler. (2006), "Accountability, Ability and Disability: Gaming the System?"

       NBER W9307, Advances in Microeconomics, T. Gronberg, ed., Amsterdam: Elsevier.




                                                44
Fishman, M. and C. Hagerty (2003), "Mandatory Versus Voluntary Disclosure in Markets with

       Informed and Uninformed Customers," Journal of Law, Economics and Organization

       19(1).

Flegm, E. (2005), “Accounting at a Crossroad” CPA Journal Accessed online on 10/6/2009.

Francis, J.R.; I.K. Khurana and R. Pereira (2005), “Disclosure incentives and effects on cost of

       capital around the world” Accounting Review 80(4): 1125-1162.

Friedman, M. (1990), "Agreement between Product Ratings Generated by Different Consumer

       Testing Organizations: A Statistical Comparison of 'Consumer Reports' and 'Which?'

       from 1957 to 1986," Journal of Consumer Affairs, 24(1):44-68.

Fung, A., Graham, M. and D. Weil (2007), Full Disclosure: the Perils and Promise of

       Transparency, Cambridge University Press.

Glazer, J., McGuire, T., Cao, Z. and A. Zaslavsky (2008), “Using Global Ratings of Health Plans

       to Improve the Quality of Health Care,” Journal of Health Economics, 27(5):1182-1195.

Graham, M. (2002), Democracy by Disclosure: The Rise of Technopopulism, Brookings

       Institution Press.

Greenstone, M., Oyer, P. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2006), “Mandated disclosure, stock returns,

       and the 1964 Securities Acts Amendments” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006.

Grossman, S. and O. Hart (1980), “Disclosure Laws and Takeover Bids,” The Journal of

       Finance, 35(2): 323-334.

Grossman, S. (1981), “The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure about

       Product Quality,” Journal of Law and Economics, 24: 461-489.

Grubb, M. (2007), “Developing a Reputation for Reticence,” MIT Sloan Working Paper, mimeo.




                                                45
Guerra, G. (2001), "Certification Disclosure and Informational Efficiency: A Case for Ordered

       Rankings of Levels," University of Oxford Department of Economics Discussion Paper

       Series.

Guo, L. and Y. Zhao (2009), “Voluntary Quality Disclosure and Market Interaction,”

       Management Science, forthcoming.

Haney, W. (2000), "The Myth of the Texas Miracle in Education," Education Policy Analysis

       Archives 8(41).

Hanushek, E. and M. Raymond, (2004), “The Effect of School Accountability Systems on the

       Level and Distribution of Student Achievement,” Journal of the European Economic

       Association, 2(2-3):406-415.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Margaret E. Raymond (2005), “Does School Accountability Lead to

       Improved Student Performance?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 24(2):

       297-327.

Harbough, R.,     Maxwell, J and B. Roussillon (2007), “The Groucho Effect of Uncertain

       Standards,” Indiana University, Working Paper.

Hastings, J. and J. Weinstein (2008), “Information, School Choice and Academic Achievement:

       Evidence from Two Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,123(4):1329-1372.

Hirshleifer, D., Lim, S. and S. Teoh (2004), “Disclosure to an Audience with Limited Attention,”

       Ohio State, Working Paper.

Holmström, B. and P. Milgrom (1991), “Multitask Principal-agent Analyses: Incentives

       Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and

       Organization, 7:24-52.

Hong, H. and J, Kubik (2003), “Analyzing the Analysts: Career Concerns and Biased Earnings

       Forecasts” Journal of Finance, 58(1): 313-351.


                                              46
Hotz, V. and M. Xiao (2009),"Strategic Information Disclosure: The Case of Multi-Attribute

       Products with Heterogeneous Consumers," Working Paper.

Hubbard, T. (1998), “An Empirical Investigation of Moral Hazard in the Vehicle Inspection

       Market," RAND Journal of Economics, 29(2):406-426.

______ (2002), “How Do Consumers Motivate Experts? Reputational Incentives in an Auto

       Repair Market, Journal of Law and Economics, 45(2): 437-468.

Hvide, H. and A. Heifetz (2001), “Free-Entry Equilibrium in a Market for Certifiers, "

       Norwegian School of Economics, Working Paper.

Iezzoni, L. (1997), “The Risks of Risk Adjustment,” Journal of American Medical Association

       278(19):1600-7.

Ippolito, P. and A. Mathios (1990), "Information, Advertising and Health Choices: A Study of

       the Cereal Market," RAND Journal of Economics, 21(3): 459-480.

Jacob, B. (2005), “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: Evidence from School Reform in

       Chicago,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(5-6): 761-796.

______ and S. Levitt (2003), "Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and Predictors

       of Teacher Cheating," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3).

Jin, G. and P. Leslie (2003), "The Effects of Information on Product Quality: Evidence from

       Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2).

______ (2005), “Competition and Disclosure Incentives: An Empirical Study of HMOs,” RAND

       Journal of Economics, 36(1):93-112.

______ and A. Sorensen (2006), "Information and Consumer Choice: The Value of Publicized

       Health Plan Ratings,” Journal of Health Economics, 26(2).

______, A. Kato and J. List (2008), "That's News to Me! Information Revelation in

       Professional Certification Markets," Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.


                                              47
______ and A. Kato (2006), “Price, Quality and Reputation: Evidence From an Online Field

       Experiment,” RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4).

Jovanovic, B. (1982), “Truthful Disclosure of Information,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13:36-

       44.

Kane, T., and D. Staiger (2002), “The Promise and Pitfalls of Using Imprecise School

       Accountability Measures, ” Journal of Economic Perspectives 16(4): 91-114.

Kliger, D. and O. Sarig (2000), “The Information Value of Bond Ratings” Journal of Finance,

       55(6): 2879-2902.

Leuz, C.; A. Triantis; and T.Y. Wang (2008), “Why do firms go dark? Causes and economic

       consequences of voluntary SEC deregistrations” Journal of Accounting & Economics:

       45(2-3): 181-208.

Lewis, G. (2009),“Asymmetric Information, Adverse Selection and Online Disclosure: The Case

       of eBay Motors,” Harvard University, Working Paper.

Lim, T. (2001), “Rationality and Analysts’ Forecast Bias” Journal of Finance, 56(1): 369-385.

Lizzeri, A, (1999), “Information Revelation and Certification Intermediaries,” The RAND

       Journal of Economics.

______and A. Gavazza (2007), “The Perils of Transparency in Bureaucracies,” American

       Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings.

Loffler. G., (2005), “Avoiding the Rating Bounce: Why Rating Agencies are Slow to React to

       New Information” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 56(3): 365-81.

Macher, J., Mayo, J. and J. Nickerson (2008), “Exploring the Information Asymmetry Gap:

       Evidence from FDA Regulation,” Working Paper.




                                              48
Marshall, M., Shekelle, P., Leatherman, S. and R. Brook (2000), “The public release of

       Performance Data: What Do we Expect to Gain? A Review of the Evidence,” Journal of

       the American Medical Association, 283:1866-1874.

Mathios, A. (2000), “The Impact of Mandatory Disclosure Regulations on Health Choices: An

       Analysis of the Salad Dressing Market,” Journal of Law and Economics, 43: 651-678.

Mathis, J., Mc Andrews, J. and J. Rochet (2009), “Rating the Raters: Are Reputation Concerns

       Powerful Enough to Discipline Rating Agencies?” forthcoming Journal of Monetary

       Economics.

Mattews, S. and A. Postlewaite (1985), "Quality Testing and Disclosure," The RAND Journal of

       Economics , 16(3): 328-340.

Miao, C. (2009), "Competition in Quality Standards" Journal of Industrial Economics Volume

       LVII, Notes, March 2009, published at www.essex.ac.uk/jindec/

Michaely, R. and K. (1999), “Conflict of Interest and the Credibility of Underwriter Analyst

       Recommendations” The Review of Financial Studies, 12(4): 653-686.

Milgrom, P. (1981), “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applications,”

       The Bell Journal of Economics, 12: 380-391.

_______ and J. Roberts (1986), Relying on the information of interested parties,” RAND Journal

       of Economics, 17:18-32.

Miller, N., Resnick, P. and R. Zechhauser (2005), “Eliciting Information Feedback: The Peer-

       Prediction Method,” Management Science, 51(9):1359-1373.

Ottaviani, M. and P. Sorensen (2006) “Professional Advice.” Journal of Economic Theory

       126(1): 120-142.

Peterson, P. and West, M., eds. (2003), “No child left behind? The Politics and Practice

       of Accountability,” Washington, DC: Brookings.


                                               49
Pope, D. (2006), “Reacting to Rankings: Evidence from ‘America’s Best Hospitals and

       Colleges’,” University of California, Berkeley, PhD Dissertation.

Pike, G. (2004), “Measuring Quality: A Comparison of US News Rankings and NSSE

       Benchmarks,” Research in Higher Education, 45(2).

Powers, N., Blackman, A., Lyon, T. and U. Narain (2008), “Does Disclosure Reduce Pollution?

       Evidence from India's Green Ratings Project,” University of Michigan, Working Paper.

Prendergast, C. (2007), “The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats” American Economic Review

       97(1): 180-196.

Resnick, P. and R. Zeckhauser (2002), “Trust Among Strangers in Internet Transactions:

       Empirical Analysis of eBay’s Reputation System,” in The Economics of the Internet and

       E-Commerce, M. Bayes, ed., Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 11: 127-157.

Romano, P. and H. Zhou (2004), “Do Well-publicized Risk-adjusted Outcomes Reports Affect

       Hospital Volume?” Medical Care, 42(4):367-377.

Scanlon, D., Chernew, M., Sheffler, S. and A. Fendrick (1998), “Health Plan Report Cards:

       Exploring Differences in Plan Ratings,” Journal on Quality Improvement, 24(1): 5-20.

__________________, McLaughlin, G. and G. Solon (2002), “The Impact of Health Plan Report

       Cards on Managed Care Enrollment,” Journal of Health Economics, 21(1):19–41.

Scharfstein, D. and J. Stein (1990), “Herding Behavior and Investment,” American Economic

       Review, 80(3): 465-479.

Schneider, E. and A. Epstein (1998), "Use of Public Performance Reports: A

       Survey of Patients Undergoing Cardiac Surgery," Journal of the American Medical

       Association, 279(20): 1638-1642.

Schwartz, A. (2008), "How Much Irrationality Does the Market Permit?" Journal of Legal

       Studies, Vol. 37.


                                              50
Securities and Exchange Commission (2008), "Annual Report on Nationally Recognized

       Statistical Rating Organizations." available at

       http://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/ratingagency/nrsroannrep0608.pdf.

Shavell, S. (1994), "Acquisition and Disclosure of Information Prior to Sale," RAND Journal of

       Economics, 25(1): 20-36.

Skreta, V. and L. Veldkamp (2009), “Ratings Shopping and Asset Complexity: A Theory of

       Ratings Inflation” NBER working paper, W14761.

Stigler, G. (1971), “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” The Bell Journal of Economics,

       Spring: 3–21.

Stivers, A. (2004), “Unraveling of Information: Competition and Uncertainty,” B.E. Journals:

       Topics in Theoretical Economics, 4(1).

Tan, W. and F. Wang (2008), “Credit Rating Agency Interaction and Credit Rating Quality,”

       mimeo.

Thompson, G. and P. Vaz (1990), "Dual Bond Ratings: A Test of the Certification Function of

       Rating Agencies," The Financial Review, 25(3): 457-471.

Viscusi, W. (1978), “A Note on 'Lemons' Markets with Quality Certification,” The Bell Journal

       of Economics, 9(1): 277-279.

Wilson, J. (1982), The Politics of Regulation, New York: Basic Books.

Wimmer, B., and B. Chezum (2003), “An Empirical Examination of Quality Certification in a

       `Lemons Market’,” Economic Inquiry, 41(2): 279-91.

Wedig, G. and M. Tai-Seale (2002), “The Effect of Report Cards on Consumer Choice in the

       Health Insurance Market,” Journal of Health Economics 21(6):1031–1048.

Werner, R. and D. Asch (2005), “The Unintended Consequences of Publicly Reporting Quality

       Information,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 293(10):1239-44.


                                                51
Xiao, M. (2007), “Is Quality Certification Effective? Evidence from the Childcare Market,”

       University of Arizona, Working Paper.




                                               52
  Table 1: Quality Assurance Mechanisms Used in Various Markets


                Brand     Experience      Warranties      Industry-       Third-party      Government-       Licensing
                          /Word of                        sponsored       Disclosure       mandated
                          mouth                           Voluntary                        Disclosure
                                                          Disclosure
Airlines       X          X                                               X                X

Appliances     X          X               X                               X

Automobiles    X          X               X                               X                X 29

Consumer        X         X               X                               X
Electronics
Hospitals       X         X                               X               X                X 30              X

Lawyers         X         X                                                                                  X

Movies         X          X                               X               X

Plumbers                  X                                                                                  X

Restaurants     X         X                                               X                X 31

Universities    X         X                               X 32            X                                  X




  29
     Fuel economy standards and other safety standards.
  30
     Several states and the federal Medicare program publish quality report cards.
  31
     Notably, health and safety inspections.
  32
     A number of regional and national accreditation agencies accredit universities, colleges, and vocational programs
  for post-secondary education.

                                                           53
                         Table 2: List of cited papers by themes of insight

Themes                   Citations
Theory: voluntary vs. mandatory disclosure
                         Grossman (1981); Milgram (1981); Jovanovic (1982); Viscusi
Unraveling results       (1978)

Failure of unraveling: seller- Board (2008); Guo and Zhao (2008); Jovanovic (1982); Matthews
side reasons                   and Postlewaite (1985); Shavell (1994)
                              Fishman and Hagerty (2003); Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh (2004);
Failure of unraveling:        Hotz and Xiao (2009); Milgrom and Roberts (1986); Schwartz
buyer-side reasons            (2005); Stivers (2004)
Failure of unraveling: other Grubb (2007); Harbaugh, Maxwell and Roussillon (2007); Lizzeri
reasons                      and Gavazza (2007)
                             Bar-Isaac, Caruana, and Cuñat (2008); Jovanovic (1982); Lizzeri
Consequence of mandatory and Gavazza (2007); Matthews and Postlewaite (1985)
disclosure
Theory: the economics of certifiers
                            Glazer, McGuire, Cao and Zaslavsky (2008); Miller, Resnick and
Quality measurement         Zeckhauser (2005)
                            Albano and Lizzeri (2001); Faure-Grimaud, Peyrache and Quesdada
Certifier competition and   (2007); Guerra (2001); Hvide and Heifetz (2001); Farhi, Lerner and
information content of      Tirole (2008); Lizzeri (1999); Miao (2006); SEC (2008); Skreta and
quality certificates        Veldkamp (2009) ;
                            Benabou and Laroque (1992); Bolton, Freixas and Shapiro (2009);
Reputation and other        Cain, Loewenstein and Moore (2005); Durbin (2001); Mathis,
mechanisms that discipline McAndrews and Rochet (2008); Ottaviani and Sorensen (2006);
certifier behavior          Scharfstein and Stein (1990)
Practice on quality disclosure
Quality measurement         Dellarocus (2003); Iezzoni (1997); Kane and Staiger (2002)
                            Bushee and Leuz (2005); Edelman (2006); Francis et al. (2005); Jin
                            (2005); Jin and Sorensen (2006); Leuz et al. (2008); Lewis (2009);
Who volunteers to disclose? Mathio (2000)
                            Beaulieu (2002); Bundorf, Chun, Goda and Kessler (2008);
                            Chernew, Gowrisankara and Scanlon (2008); Dafny and Dranove
                            (2008); Della Vigna and Pollet (2009); Dranove and Sfekas (2008);
                            Figlio and Lucas (2004); Greenstone, Oyer and Vissing-Jorgensen
                            (2006); Hastings and Weinstein (2008); Ippolito and Mathios
                            (1990); Jin and Sorensen (2006); Marshall, Shekelle, Leatherman
                            and Brook (2000); Pope (2006); Romano and Zhou (2004); Scanlon
Consumer response to        et al. (2002); Schneider and Epstein (1998); Xiao (2007); Wedig and
quality disclosure          Tai-Seale (2002)




                                                54
                              Bennear and Olmstead (2007); Carnoy and Loeb (2002); Chen
                              (2008); Cullen and Reback (2006); Deere and Strayer (2001);
                              Dranove et al (2003); Figlio and Getzler (2006); Haney (2000);
                              Hanushek and Raymond (2004); Hanushek and Raymond (2005);
                              Jacob (2005); Jacob and Levitt (2003); Jin and Leslie (2003);
Seller response to quality Peterson and West (2003); Powers et al (2008); Lu (2009); Werner
disclosure                    et al. (2005)
                              Beaver, Shakespeare and Soliman (2006); Becker and Milbourn
                              (2008); Berger, Davies and Flannery (2000); Cantor, Packer and
                              Cole (1997); Cantor and Packer (1997); Doherty, Kartasheva and
                              Phillips (2009); Feinstein (1989); Friedman (1990); Hong and Kubik
                              (2003); Hubbard (1998); Hubbard (2002); ); Jin, Kato and List
                              (2008); Kliger and Sarig (2000); Lim (2001); Loffler (2005);
                              Macher, Mayo and Nickerson (2008); Michaely and Womack
Certifier bias, heterogeneity (1999); Pike (2004); Scanlon, Chernew, Sheffler, and Fendrick
and competition               (1998); Tan and Wang (2008); Thompson and Vaz (1990)
Political forces behind
quality disclosure            Wilson (1982); Graham (2002); Fung, Graham and Weil (2007)




                                              55
                      Table 3: List of cited empirical papers by industry

Industry/Market Segment Citations

                             Carnoy and Loeb (2002); Cullen and Reback (2006); Figlio and
                             Getzler (2006); Figlio and Lucas (2004); Hanushek and Raymond
                             (2004); Hastings and Weinstein (2008); Jacob (2005); Jacob and
                             Levitt (2003); Kane and Staiger (2002); Peterson and West (2003);
Education                    Pike (2004); Xiao (2007)
Food, beverage, and food     Becker et al., (2009); Bennear and Olmstead (2007); Jin and Leslie
service                      (2003); Mathios (2000); Ippolito and Mathios (1990)
                             Becker and Milbourn (2008); Beaver, Shakespeare and Soliman
                             (2006); Berger et al. (2000); Bushee and Leuz (2005); Cantor and
                             Packer (1997); Cantor et al. (1997); Doherty, Kartasheva and
                             Phillips (2009); Farhi, Lerner and Tirole (2008); Francis et al.
                             (2005); Greenstone, Oyer and Vissing-Jorgensen (2006); Hong and
                             Kubik (2003); Kliger and Sarig (2000); Loffler (2005); Lim (2001);
                             Leuz et al. (2008); Michaely and Womack (1999); Ottaviani and
                             Sorensen (2006); Scharfstein and Stein (1990); SEC (2008); Tan
Finance                      and Wang (2008); Thompson and Vaz (1990)
                             Beaulieu (2002); Bundorf et al. (2008); Chen (2008); Dafny and
                             Dranove (2008); Dranove et al (2003); Dranove and Sfekas (2008);
                             Iezzoni (1997); Jin (2005); Jin and Sorensen (2006); Lu (2009);
                             Macher et al. 2008); Pope (2006); Romano and Zhou (2004);
                             Scanlon et al. (1998); Scanlon et al. (2002); Schneider and Epstein
Health care                  (1998); Wedig and Tai-Seale (2002); Werner et al. (2005)
Internet businesses          Dewan and Hsu (2004); Edelman (2006); Lewis (2009)
                             Feinstein (1989); Friedman (1990); Hubbard (2002); Powers et al
Miscellaneous                (2008)
Sports                       Jin, Kato and List (2008); Wimmer and Chezum (2003)




                                              56
