                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ELECTED VERSUS APPOINTED POLICYMAKERS:
                          EVIDENCE FROM CITY TREASURERS

                                           Alexander Whalley

                                         Working Paper 15643
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15643


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2010




I thank Leah Brooks, Richard Boylan, Tom Hansford, Shawn Kantor, Josh Kinsler, Stephan Litschig,
John Matsusaka, Kevin Milligan, Enrico Moretti, Ronnie Pavan, Lori Raineri, Todd Sorenson, Guido
Tabellini, Jessica Trounstine, Gergely Ujhelyi, Christine Vuletich, Kelley Williams and seminar participants
at the Canadian Public Economics Group, Texas A & M University, the University of California -
Merced, the University of Houston/Rice University, the University of Rochester, and the University
of Virginia for helpful comments and discussions. Matt Siordia and Chris Abrescy provided outstanding
research assistance. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Alexander Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Elected Versus Appointed Policymakers: Evidence from City Treasurers
Alexander Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 15643
January 2010
JEL No. D7,H1,H7

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether methods of public official selection affect policymaking in cities.
I draw on the unique characteristics of California's city referendum process to identify the causal effect
of city treasurers' method of selection on their cities' debt management policies. I utilize a regression
discontinuity strategy based on the effect of narrowly-passing appointive city treasurer referendums
on city borrowing costs. The results indicate that appointive treasurers reduce a city's cost of borrowing
by 13% to 23%. The results imply that if all cities in California with elected treasurers were to appoint
them, total borrowing expenditures would be reduced by more than $20 million per year. Appointive
city treasurers appear to reduce borrowing costs primarily through the refinancing of expensive debt
at lower interest rates.


Alexander Whalley
School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Arts
University of California, Merced
5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343
and NBER
awhalley@ucmerced.edu
1        Introduction

Understanding how political institutions aﬀect policy outcomes has long been a central issue
in economics.1 Many diﬀerences in political institutions center on how leaders are selected and
held accountable. In this paper, I compare the policy choices of public oﬃcials who are selected
and held accountable in very diﬀerent ways - bureaucrats and politicians - for the case of city
treasurers.

        The case of case of city treasurers is particularly compelling to examine for two reasons. First,
as both elected and appointed city treasurers’ are responsible for debt management policy, the
diﬀerences in costs cities pay to borrow provide a clear measure of diﬀerent debt management
policy choices.2 Second, quasi-experimental variation in the method of selection for city treasur-
ers is available from votes on city referendums, allowing for concerns about the endogeneity of
institutions to be eﬀectively addressed. The context of city treasurers provides a rare opportu-
nity to examine whether diﬀerences public oﬃcial selection methods actually cause meaningful
diﬀerences in policymaking.

        Methods of public oﬃcial selection can aﬀect policymaking through the competence and
eﬀort policymakers supply to the policy task (e.g. Besley, 2006). Recent theoretical contributions
argue that bureaucrats have a comparative advantage in technical policymaking (see for example
Maskin and Tirole, 2004; Alesina and Tabellini, 2007, 2008; and Vlaicu, 2008). Empirically
the most compelling evidence that shows politicians choose policies more favorable towards
voters. Besley and Coate (2003) ﬁnd that elected electricity rate regulators choose lower prices
than appointed regulators. Besley and Payne (2006) ﬁnd that more employment discrimination
lawsuits are submitted when a judge is elected rather then appointed.3
    1
        Besley and Case (2003) provide an excellent survey of the literature.
    2
        Treasurers are also allocated the primary tasks of the receipt and safekeeping of public money coming into
the Treasury, compliance with laws governing the deposit and paying out of public money, and submission to the
city council of a monthly report accounting for all revenue, expenses, and balances in city accounts. Treasurers
may also be in charge of collection of city revenues, as well as, cash ﬂow and investment policy for city funds.
See CMTA (2001) for further details. City treasurers are not responsible for city ﬁscal policy or the decision to
borrow however.
   3
     There is large literature on the eﬀects of appointed and elected regulators that has generally found mixed
results. The mixed ﬁndings in the earlier literature are likely due to not addressing the institutional endogeneity
issue as carefully as the more recent studies. See Besley and Coate (2003) for an excellent survey of the prior
literature.




                                                          1
       Whether the empirical evidence squares with the theoretical arguments remains an open
question. It is unclear, for example, whether evidence from electricity rate regulation and judicial
decision making outcomes primarily reﬂects diﬀerences in public oﬃcial policy performance or
diﬀerences in pandering to public opinion. In this paper I study the appointive eﬀect for a
diﬀerent technical policy issue, one where policy choices aﬀect the cost of a speciﬁc government
service and closely reﬂect public oﬃcial policy performance. The results of my analysis inform
the debate about whether the theoretical predictions of recent models line up closely with the
empirical evidence.

       Beside an obvious interest for political economists, the existence of policy outcome and
performance diﬀerentials between elected and appointed oﬃcials has tremendous practical rel-
evance. In particular, with many cities spending substantial sums to service their debt every
year, improved debt management policy could well increase government eﬃciency. As Arthur
Levitt, the former chairmen of the Securities and Exchange Commission, writes:

       “State, county and municipal entities across the nation enjoy a privileged position in the
debt markets – the interest they pay is often tax-free and their market is lightly regulated. So,
how is it possible that local entities frequently pay too much to borrow money?... Many elected
and appointed oﬃcials simply don’t care... Taxpayers should be irate.” Levitt (2009).

       The key empirical challenge faced in estimating the appointive eﬀect is to disentangle the
eﬀect of city treasurer selection methods on policy choices from other determinants of city
borrowing costs. One central factor that aﬀects city borrowing costs is default risk. Factors that
aﬀect default risk, such as the level of city debt or the economic conditions of the local economy,
may well aﬀect the choice of city treasurer selection methods. For example, as the beneﬁts of
eﬀective debt management policy are especially large for cities with large amounts of debt these
cities may be more likely to choose city treasurer selection methods resulting in lower borrowing
costs. As cities with large levels of debt are subject to more default risk, these cities are likely
to pay higher borrowing costs anyway. Furthermore, as many components of default risk are
frequently unobserved, city treasurer selection methods are likely to be endogenously related to
the unobserved default risk of a city.4

       The central contribution of this paper is to estimate the causal eﬀect of bureaucratic ver-
   4
       See Besley and Case (2003) and Acemoglu (2005) for discussions on the implications of endogenous institutions
for estimating the causal eﬀect of institutions. Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi (2004) and Acemoglu, Ticchi and
Vindigni (2006) introduce theoretical models of the endogenous determination of institutions.



                                                          2
sus political selection methods on policymaking. I implement a regression discontinuity (RD)
research design to estimate the causal eﬀect of city treasurer selection methods on city bor-
rowing costs.5 The design takes advantage of the unique characteristics of California’s local
referendum process to isolate quasi-experimental variation in city treasurer selection methods.
Many diﬀerences in city treasurer selection methods across cities are likely due to diﬀerences
in unobserved city institutions, resident preferences, or special interest strength that also likely
aﬀect borrowing costs. Cities where residents vote to pass an appointive city treasurer referen-
dum may well diﬀer on both observable and unobservable dimensions from those that do not.
However, cities in which an appointive treasurer referendum passes by a very narrow margin are
likely to be quite similar on average to cities where an appointive treasurer referendum fails by a
very narrow margin. Taking advantage of this feature, I use a regression discontinuity research
design to identify the causal eﬀect of city treasurer selection methods on city borrowing costs. I
apply this estimator to a newly available rich data set from cities in California combining over
a decade of information on local referendums with annual measures of city borrowing costs.

       My main results concern the treasurer appointive eﬀect on city borrowing costs. I ﬁnd
that having an appointed rather than elected city treasurer reduces city borrowing costs by
between 13% and 23%. The results imply that if all cities in California with elected treasurers
were to appoint them, total borrowing expenditures would be reduced by $20 million per year.
These eﬀects do not appear to be driven by other unobserved determinants of borrowing costs
discontinuously changing at the threshold of referendum passage. In addition, I ﬁnd little
evidence that either ﬁscal policy or other costs of borrowing are aﬀected by the method of
selection for the city treasurer.

       I also examine whether the appointive eﬀect is primarily due to diﬀerences in debt restruc-
turing policy or debt issuance policy choices. Reducing borrowing costs with debt restructuring
policies requires active monitoring of public debt markets, as well as, the expertise to evalu-
ate likely changes future market interest rates. Reducing borrowing costs with debt issuance
policies, in contrast, requires the use of competitive debt sales that reduce payments to (poten-
tially politically connected) ﬁnancial intermediaries. As debt restructuring policies require more
treasurer eﬀort and expertise than debt issuance policies, understanding the channel for the
appointive eﬀect provides evidence on the importance of treasurer supplied inputs in explaining
   5
       Several previous papers have used elections as sources of identiﬁcation in regression discontinuity models.
See for example, Lee (2008), Ferreira and Gyourko (2009), and Cellini, Ferreira, and Rothstein (2008). Lee and
Lemeuix (2008) and Angrist and Pischke (2009) provide excellent surveys of the regression discontinuity research
design.



                                                         3
the central ﬁndings.

    I separately measure debt restructuring and debt issuance policy choice diﬀerences by using
cross-sectional debt issue level data containing information on the date of the debt issue, in
addition to, the interest rate. Information on the date that the debt is issued is useful in
disentangling the two types of policies, as debt issuance policies are chosen by the treasurer
in oﬃce at the time the debt is issued. Thus, diﬀerences in debt restructuring policies can
be measured by diﬀerences in borrowing costs for debt issued before the referendum as high
interest rate debt issues are selectively retired. Similarly, diﬀerences in debt issuance policies
can be measured by the appointive eﬀect on debt issued after the referendum. The evidence
indicates that the appointive eﬀect is primarily due to debt restructuring, but not debt issuing
policies.

    More broadly this paper also contributes to recent literature on the eﬀects of electoral ac-
countability and leader selection on policymaking and public goods provision. Recent empirical
work has demonstrated the important role for electoral accountability in policymaking and the
provision of public goods in a variety of contexts (Besley and Case, 1995; List and Sturm, 2006;
and Ferraz and Finan, 2007, 2008). It has also been shown that leadership change has an
important eﬀect on institutional and economic performance (Jones and Olken, 2005).

    My results provide clear evidence that bureaucratic control of city debt management policy
reduces city borrowing costs. Caution is required, however, in attempting to generalize these
results beyond my context and sample. Even within my sample, eﬀects may diﬀer for cities
not at the margin in passing an appointive treasurer referendum. Nevertheless, ﬁnding that
bureaucratic control of debt management policy reduces city borrowing costs is an important
result that provides empirical support for recent theoretical work emphasizing the comparative
advantage of bureaucratic control for technical policymaking (Maskin and Tirole, 2004; Alesina
and Tabellini, 2007, 2008; and Vlaicu, 2008).

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the context and
empirical approach. Section 3 describes the data and descriptive statistics. Section 4 presents
the main results and validates the research design. Section 5 examines evidence of diﬀerences
in debt restructuring and issuance policy choices between politician and bureaucrat treasurers.
Section 6 concludes.




                                                4
2        Context and Empirical Approach


2.1        City Treasurers, Policy Choices, and City Borrowing Costs


In this section I provide a brief overview of the operation of public debt markets, the role of city
treasurers in city government, and debt management policies which aﬀect borrowing costs.

        There are three sets of participants in public debt markets: city issuers, ﬁnancial interme-
diaries, and investors. The debt issuing process begins with the city deciding that a capital
project (or other need) requires ﬁnancing, ﬁnancial intermediaries are then hired, the issue is
then presented to the debt rating agencies, and ﬁnally the issue is sold to investors.6



City Treasurers             City treasurers are delegated the tasks of managing public funds in accor-
dance with the law (CMTA, 2001). They are primarily delegated the tasks of developing debt
management, accounting, and cash management policies to implement legislative policy. The
city treasurer inﬂuences city borrowing costs by their choice of debt management policies.                       7



        Appointed and elected treasurers are likely to diﬀer in the level of expertise and eﬀort the
supply to the policy task. In terms of expertise, the only requirements for a person to be
an elected city treasurer is that they are a resident of the city, and usually, do not have a
criminal conviction. In contrast, appointed city treasurers can be selected for their expertise in
managing public debt. This diﬀerence often results in appointed treasurers having higher levels
of education (often an MBA or MPP degree) than elected treasurers.8 In terms of eﬀort, elected
and appointed treasurers face very diﬀerent returns to eﬀort as the eﬀect of policy performance
on reelection for the politician and promotion for the bureaucrat are likely to be quite diﬀerent.
These eﬀort diﬀerences crucially hinge on how well voters can observe policy performance by the
politician and how city managers use policy performance to hire, ﬁre, and promote bureaucrats
    6
        For a more detailed discussion of the issuance laws, rules, and regulations which govern the process of public
debt for cities in California see CDIAC (2006). For a more general discussion of public debt issuance and
management by local governments see Joseph (1994) and Leonard (2004). See Feldstein and Fabozzi (2008) for
an excellent and very thorough overview of the municipal debt market.
   7
     These policies are sometimes chosen in a committee rather than by the city treasurer alone, but the city
treasurer often plays a large role in setting the policy agenda regardless.
   8
     I have attempted to directly collect information on individual city treasurer education levels from cities
themselves under a Public Records Act request. Unfortunately, many cities only keep very limited records on the
educational qualiﬁcations of their treasurers, and the resulting data set is too incomplete to be useful.



                                                            5
(Alesina and Tabellini, 2007).



City Borrowing Costs The cost that a city ultimately pays to ﬁnance a debt issue is com-
posed of two factors: (1) the interest rate that investors demand to hold the debt and; (2) the
spread between the interest rate spot price investors demand and what the city pays. The inter-
est rate that investors require to hold the city debt depends principally on the default risk of a
city.9 Aspects of the local economy and city ﬁscal policy aﬀect default risk, and are reﬂected in
the city debt rating. These factors can range from the diversity of the tax base, to whether city
expenditure policies are sustainable, etc. In addition, other aspects of a debt issue such as the
term length of the issue, and the principal amount aﬀect borrowing costs. The characteristics
of the debt issue are often determined by the nature of the project to be funded. However,
the spread that a city pays above the spot market price for a debt issue depends on two debt
management policies: debt issuance and debt restructuring.



Debt Issuance Policies            Debt issuance policies primarily aﬀect the spread that intermediaries
receive. The key debt issuance policy choice is whether to sell the debt in a competitive auction,
where sealed bids are submitted by underwriters and the lowest bid is chosen, or as a negotiated
sale with a single underwriter chosen in advance of pricing. Competitive sales lead to lower
borrowing costs for the issuer, but likely a smaller spread for the underwriter.10 Other debt
issuance policy choices include when to issue the debt, and the characteristics of the debt issue
such as term length etc.



Debt Restructuring Policies               Debt restructuring policies are the second type of policies that
can inﬂuence borrowing costs. City debt, much like conventional mortgages, can be reﬁnanced.
As market interest rates ﬂuctuate according to many factors, reﬁnancing when it is worthwhile
to do so can result in lower average borrowing costs on city debt. The potential beneﬁt of
   9
       Municipal defaults are rare, but not unheard of. There were over 2000 defaults by cities and incorporated
townships in the United States between 1939 and 1969 (Spiotto, 2008). Historically defaults have been due to
provision of nonessential services, fraud and mismanagement, adverse local economic conditions, and natural or
man-made disasters (Spiotto, 2008).
 10
    The evidence is very clear on this diﬀerence in borrowing costs. See Robbins and Simonson (2007) and
Simonson, Robbins and Helgerson (2001) for recent studies showing that competitive sales reduce borrowing costs
for cities. Levitt (2009) criticizes non-competitive sales as ‘pay to play’ rewards for the campaign ﬁnance provided
to elected oﬃcials by ﬁnancial intermediaries




                                                         6
reﬁnancing a debt issue is expressed nicely in the municipal ﬁnance saying: “While doctors bury
their mistakes, in municipal ﬁnancing, they are refunded [reﬁnanced].” Spiotto, 2008 p. 707.

   As Figure 1 demonstrates there is signiﬁcant variability in the market interest rate for munic-
ipal securities. There are predictable patterns of demand for an issue depending on the timing
other issues from the U.S. Treasury and other large issuers, national holidays, seasonal demand
from investors, etc. Unexpected changes in monetary or tax policy may also aﬀect the cost of
borrowing.

   A debt reﬁnancing policy of responding to favorable market conditions can signiﬁcantly
reduce average borrowing costs. For example, in a typical year a city treasurer who sells a
revenue anticipation note on a week in the top 10% of the interest rate distribution will pay
a 22 percent higher interest rate than one who sells the note in the bottom 10%. While it
is possible that reﬁnancing may result in some characteristics of the debt issue the residents
may value changing, the fact reﬁnancing opportunities are primarily driven by the variation in
market interest rates over time that all treasurers face suggests that changes in characteristics
are likely to be second order.



2.2   Empirical Approach


The fundamental identiﬁcation problem in generating unbiased estimates of a pure appointive
eﬀect on policy outcomes is that cities do not choose political institutions randomly. For a start,
cities may well choose political institutions to maximize local social welfare. For example, as
the beneﬁt of a low cost debt management policy increases with the city debt level, cities with
higher levels of debt may be more likely to choose treasurer selection methods that lead to the
lower costs of borrowing. However, the size of the city debt is also likely to aﬀect city borrowing
costs anyway. In addition, many factors that inﬂuence both borrowing costs and the choice
of political institutions are frequently unobserved. Therefore, a naive comparison of borrowing
costs between cities with and without appointed treasurers may well lead to biased estimates
of the appointive eﬀect. Credible estimates require variation in the method of selection for city
treasurers which is independent of other unobserved factors that aﬀect city policy outcomes.



Ordinary Least Squares           To provide a benchmark for the regression discontinuity (RD)
analysis that addresses the issue of institutional endogeneity I ﬁrst estimate the appointive


                                                7
eﬀect by ordinary least squares (OLS). The simple model I estimate can be expressed as,

(1)                             Yit = δappointedit + Xi β + ωt + it ,

where i indexes the referendum and t indexes the year. The variable appointedit is a dummy
variable that takes a value of one if the treasurer is appointed and value zero otherwise. Xi is
a vector of covariates from the 1990 census in the city where the referendum occurs, ωt is a set
of year ﬁxed eﬀects, and it is the error term. The variables I control for in the Xi vector to
capture variation in default risk across cities are: Income Per Capita,Population Size, Percentage
White, Percentage Black, Percentage Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-
Five, Percentage College Graduate, Percentage High School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of
Government, and Employment-Population Ratio. The conditional mean diﬀerence in policy
outcomes between appointed and elected treasurers is reﬂected by δ.

      While it is possible to control for many easily measured city characteristics in the Xi vector
there are many unobserved components of borrowing costs. For example, cities may diﬀer in their
budgetary institutions that can aﬀect the level of debt and probability of default. Poterba (1994)
provides evidence that budgetary institutions aﬀect debt levels and the adjustment to ﬁscal
shocks for US states. Other factors such as the strategic use of debt by politicians (Alesina and
Tabelinni, 1990) or high spending city legislative institutions (Coate and Knight, 2009) may lead
to substantial debt accumulation and high borrowing costs. Diﬀerences in cities in these factors
may well inﬂuence treasurer selection method choices in a city. In addition, poor performance by
an elected treasurer may well lead city residents to push for a change in the treasurer selection
method. To address concerns about correlations of treasurer selection methods with important
unobservables I also estimate a regression discontinuity speciﬁcation.



Regression Discontinuity Estimation Strategy To address the concern that treasurer
method of selection may be endogenous related to other determinants of city borrowing costs
I use a regression discontinuity (RD) strategy to compare cities where an appointive treasurer
referendum barely passed to cities where an appointive treasurer referendum barely failed.

      To understand how this strategy addresses concerns about the endogeneity of political in-
stitutions consider a city where residents vote on treasurer appointive referendum i, and the
referendum receives vote share si . A referendum passes if it receives a vote share of greater than
0.5 so an indicator variable for the referendum passage can be expressed as: passi = 1(si > 0.5).



                                                  8
       We can then express a post-referendum city policy outcome (Yi ) as,

(2)                                           Yi = α + δpassi + i ,

where δ is the causal eﬀect of an appointed treasurer relative to an elected treasurer on the
policy outcome, and i represents all other determinants of Yi . This simple model would yield
an unbiased estimate of the appointive eﬀect if the referendum outcome, passi , was uncorrelated
with the other determinants of policy, i . However, as many of the unobserved determinants of
borrowing costs are likely reﬂected in voter preferences there are good reasons to suspect that
the referendum outcome may well be correlated with other determinants of borrowing costs. If
so, a simple regression of model (2) will yield a biased estimate of δ. However, one can identify
the causal eﬀect of referendum passage by using the referendums that are barely rejected to
form a counterfactual for the referendums that barely pass. Lee (2008) demonstrates that this
strategy provides quasi-random variation in referendum outcomes, because for narrowly decided
referendums, whether the referendum passes is likely to be determined by pure chance as long
as there is some unpredictable component of the ultimate vote.

       The implementation of the RD strategy I focus on here uses all of the referendums but
controls the variation coming from non-close referendums using ﬂexible controls for the vote
share.11 Assuming that the conditional expectation of the unobserved determinants of Yi given
the realized vote share, is continuous, we can approximate it by a polynomial of order g.

       To implement my regression discontinuity approach I estimate models of the following form
for each policy outcome, Yit ,

(3)                                Yit = δpassit + Pg (si ) + Xi β + ωt + it ,

where i indexes the focal referenda and t indexes the year. The variable passit is a dummy
variable that takes a value of one in every year after the referendum passes and value zero
otherwise. Pg (si ) is a polynomial function of the referenda vote share, si , of order g. Xi is a
vector of covariates from the 1990 census in the city where the referendum occurs, ωt is a set of
year ﬁxed eﬀects, and it is the error term. Again, the variables I control for in the Xi vector to
capture variation in default risk across cities are: Income Per Capita, Population Size, Percentage
White, Percentage Black, Percentage Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-
Five, Percentage College Graduate, Percentage High School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of
  11
       The RD design can be estimated parametrically or non-parametrically, focusing on only close elections or the
larger sample of all elections. I follow a parametric approach using all referendums because it allows straight-
forward hypothesis testing, and precise estimates. See Lemeuix and Lee (2008) for a detailed comparison of
alternative approaches to estimating RD models.


                                                          9
Government, and Employment-Population Ratio. Thus, the appointive eﬀect, δ, is estimated
controlling for the percent voting in favor with a ﬂexible polynomial functional form.

       The central identifying assumption for δ to estimate the causal eﬀect of treasurer method of
selection on policy outcomes is that all relevant factors vary smoothly at the referendum passage
threshold. We need this assumption for city policy outcomes after a narrowly failing referendum
to form an adequate counterfactual for city policy outcomes after a referendum narrowly passes.
While this assumption is not testable directly, I examine whether city policy outcomes are
smooth, conditional on the polynomial in vote share, in the years prior to referenda to assess its
plausibility.

       To estimate (3) I use all the post referendum data for a focal referendum in a given city.
Observations are uniquely identiﬁed by the city and the date of the referendum. For the cities
that have more than one referendum the same calendar year observation is used more than
once.12 To address this issue I follow Cellini, Ferreira, and Rothstein (2009) and cluster the
standard errors at the city level to account for the dependence created by multiple city-year
observations and any serial correlation in the error term due to persistent debt management
policy.

       A few other estimation details are worth noting. First, as Porter (2003) argues that odd
polynomial orders have better econometric properties, and the preferred order of the polynomial
regression is still open to debate in the RD literature, I present results with both linear and
cubic vote share polynomials. Second, I code the timing of the change in city treasurer selection
method as occurring two years after the referendum, as the referendum to change the city
treasurer selection method takes eﬀect after the incumbent elected treasurer completes their
two year term.

       It is important to be clear on how my main outcome of interest, the average interest rate
paid on the stock of city debt after the referendum, measures city debt management policy
choices. Because debt restructuring policies aﬀect the interest rate on the stock of city debt and
the debt issuance policies aﬀect the interest rate on the ﬂow of city debt, the dynamics of the
eﬀect of treasurer selection methods on the average interest rate depends on which policy choice
is primarily aﬀected. As I have relatively few years of data after a number of the referendums
my analysis likely captures the short run eﬀect of a change in treasurer selection methods. This
  12
       There are four cities that put multiple referendums to the voters, two of which fail the ﬁrst time and subse-
quently pass, in the sample period.



                                                          10
short run eﬀect may well diﬀer from a longer-run eﬀect depending on which policy choice changes
with treasurer selection method. Debt restructuring policies are likely to result in a larger short
than long run eﬀect, as an eﬀective treasurer who inherits a stock of expensive debt from less
eﬀective treasurer could reduce average interest rates quite quickly by reﬁnancing the debt. In
contrast, as the average debt issue matures over 20 years after the debt is issued, and new debt
is typically issued every other year, the eﬀect of a change of debt issuance policy may only have
a small eﬀect on the average interest rate on the stock of city debt in the short run. In any case,
changes in the average interest rate on the stock of city debt are informative about the short
run eﬀect of treasurer selection methods on debt management policies.



2.3       Treasurer Appointive Referendums


Historically, all general law cities in California began with elected treasurers. The State Code
allows for a general law city to make the treasurer position appointive if city residents vote for
this change, and many cities have done so. Referendums for the appointment of city treasurers
are placed on the ballot by city councils in accord with procedures outlined in the California
State Code.13 The exact text of the measure is given in the California State code as, “Shall the
oﬃce of city treasurer be appointive?”, with the words “yes” and “no” following the question.
If greater than 50% of the voters choose “yes” the referendum is carried. If the referendum
is carried, the elected position is ﬁlled with a candidate of the city council’s choosing on the
expiration of the current treasurer’s term.

       I list the treasurer referendums in Table A1.14 During my sample period there are 36 ap-
pointive treasurer referendums, occurring in over 20% of the general law cities in California.
Ten of the appointive treasurer referendums pass. Many referendums fail, likely because many
  13
       Local ballot measures mostly concern local issues of land use, governance, and safety (Gordon, 2004). As
Gordon (2004) notes, the California local Initiative and Referendum process was enacted in 1911 in response to the
perceived inﬂuence of special interests, in particular the railroads. Currently the initiative process is available in
all of California’s 475 cities. All general law cities follow the procedures outlined in the state code for an initiative
to become eligible for the ballot. While charter law cities have the option of having their own speciﬁc set of
requirements that do not directly contravene the state code, most follow the set of requirements outlined in the
state code. About 17% of local initiatives cover local government structure and organization. The local initiative
process is more common in large, growing and economically diverse cities with larger public sectors; however, local
income and other local political institutions play little role. Local initiatives can appear on the ballot in state
and local (concurrent) or local-only (non-concurrent) elections. For an overview of the local initiative process in
cities throughout the United States, see Matsusaka (2003).
   14
      I discuss details of the exact data source and sample selection below in the data section.


                                                           11
Americans view bureaucrats negatively, as Wilson (1989) and others have noted. The distri-
bution of the vote shares is plotted in Figure 1. This distribution indicates that many of the
referendums are quite close to the passing threshold, which is particularly useful for my RD
estimation strategy to be compelling.

         Whether a referendum that would be very close to passing does, indeed, barely pass (or
conversely, barely fail), is unlikely to be driven by changes in the performance of the local
economy, ﬁscal policy, other city institutions, or pressure from interest groups. Referendums
may pass or fail for a variety of reasons. The work of Bowler and Donovan (1998), Gerber (1999),
and Nicholson (2005) has shown that many features of ballot measures unrelated to the actual
policy issue being voted on can aﬀect their passage. For example, the salience of an issue on
the national or state agenda, or cues in the question text, can determine the passage of a ballot
measure. Marginal referendums may pass or fail depending on the public’s view of bureaucrats
at the time of the election, how other issues in the election crowd-in or crowd-out attention to
the measure, the views of the swing voters who turn out to vote, etc. Exogenous shocks to who
turns out to vote (perhaps due to weather conditions), or media coverage of national political
or bureaucratic corruption scandals, could easily tip the balance.



3         Data

The empirical analysis in this paper studies the eﬀect of treasurer appointve referendum passage
on borrowing costs. In general, data on vote shares and the question text for local referendums
are not compiled by state agencies. Fortunately, the newly available California Elections Data
Archive (CEDA) database compiled by the Center for California Studies in cooperation with
the California Secretary of State contains the key information required for this study. This
database contains information on the date, content, and vote outcomes for all local initiatives
and referendums appearing on the ballot in California cities from 1995 until 2006.15 I obtain
my measure of whether an appointive city treasurer referendum passes and the vote share from
this source.

         I match the referendum data to data on city borrowing costs obtained from the City Finan-
cial Transactions Report (CFTR) data for ﬁscal years 1992 to 2008 for each city. The CFTR
    15
         As the treasurer selection methods change two years after the referendum is voted on I am unable to use any
of the post 2006 referendums.



                                                           12
data comprise a uniquely detailed database with extensive coverage of many ﬁnancial variables
collected annually by the California State Controller for each city. All of the current 475 cities
in California are required to ﬁle a report. More than 99% of cities ﬁle a ﬁnancial transactions
report in any given year.16 I use variables on total interest expenditure, total debt outstanding,
total expenditures, and total local source revenues, all from the CFTR data. I construct my
measure of city borrowing costs, the average interest rate paid on the stock of city debt, by
dividing total interest expenditure by total debt outstanding. Importantly, this interest rate
measures the borrowing costs that cities actually pay, including both the gross margin ﬁnancial
intermediaries charge, as well as, payments to investors. To match both data sources together I
code the passage of a referendum based on the ﬁscal year as deﬁned in the CFTR data.17

       Together the data from CFTR and CEDA form the panel of California cities that I use in
my central analysis. I match in data from two further sources. First, I match in data from
the 1990 Decennial Census to measure population, demographic, and economic characteristics
of each city. Second, I match in data from the 1992 Census of Governments on city government
organization. I use this dataset to measure the baseline method of selection of the city treasurer
position.

       For the last section of the paper I also use data on individual debt issues matched to cities
from the CFTR data in 2008. This data includes the interest payments, outstanding balance,
type of debt, and term for each issue. I am only able to analyze the issue data for the 2008
cross-section as data from earlier years contain many missing values for the interest expenses.18

       I construct my analysis sample in the following way. I ﬁrst use California cities that appear
in the 1992 Census of Governments as my base population of cities, which is 456 cities. The
few cities that incorporate after 1992 are not in the sample. I also drop charter cities, as the
referendum process and question as speciﬁed applies only to general law cities, and charter cities
are free to redeﬁne the duties and role for the city treasurer.19 This gives a sample of 361 cities.
I then match these data to 1990 Decennial Census, CFTR, and CEDA data by city. I drop the
  16
       Government Code section 12463 directs the California State Controller to annually compile and report to the
public the ﬁnancial transactions of all California cities.
  17
     The city ﬁscal year runs from July to July, so for example I code referendums occurring between July of 1995
and the end of June 1996 as occurring in the 1996 ﬁscal year. I use the 1996 ﬁscal year as the ﬁrst year of the
sample as I do not have referendum data for the entire 1995 ﬁscal year.
  18
     Interest expenses are missing for over 65 percent of the pre-2008 issue observations, but only 5 percent for
the 2008 issue observations.
  19
     General law cities follow the local government procedures and policies in the California State Code, whereas
charter cities may adopt any policies and procedures which do not directly contradict state law.


                                                         13
cities without positive reported interest costs in each year, as a number of smaller cites do not
have outstanding debt in every year. I also drop the few observations with an interest rate of
greater than 25%; as observed interest rates on debt issues are never above 18% these are likely
due to coding errors. My ﬁnal sample analysis sample contains 203 cities for my full sample of
cities, with the 36 treasurer appointive referendums taking place in 31 referendum cities for the
referendum sample.

       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for all of the cities in my sample. Columns (1) and
(2) show the means and standard deviations computed over all city-year observations dividing
cities by treasurer method of selection.20 The comparison yields a number of interesting results.
First, cities with elected treasurers pay higher borrowing costs. The borrowing costs in cities
with elected treasurers more than 15% greater than those in cities with appointed treasurers.
Cities that have elected and appointed treasurers are also quite diﬀerent in other ways. Cities
with elected treasurers tend to have more debt, and are more likely to have directly elected
mayors and clerks. Cities with elected treasurers also have lower levels of income per capita,
and a less educated population. Many of these diﬀerences are likely to make cities with elected
treasurers subject to more default risk, leading to higher borrowing costs for elected treasurer
cities regardless of treasurer method of selection. Thus, the descriptive statistics indicate that
cities with appointed treasurers pay lower borrowing costs, but diﬀer on key observable measures
which are likely to aﬀect borrowing costs independently of treasurers’ method of selection.

       As my main analysis focuses on the referendum cities sample that have elected treasurers
in 1992 and subsequently vote on a treasurer appointive referendum a natural question to ask
is whether it is representative of cities with elected treasurers. I present descriptive statistics
comparing cities with an elected treasurer in 1992 that do and do not subsequently vote on a
referendum in Table A2. By and large the cities are very similar, though the cities that vote on
a referendum have somewhat lower levels of economic activity.
  20
       Treasurer method of selection in a given year is deﬁned from the baseline method of selection variable and
any subsequent passing treasurer appointive referendums.




                                                        14
4         Results


4.1         Main Results


Column (1) of Table 2 presents the baseline OLS estimates of δ from ﬁtting equation (1).
This estimate indicates a negative relationship between having an appointed city treasurer and
borrowing costs. Conditional on city government and economic characteristics, an appointed
city treasurer is associated with a reduction in borrowing costs of 13% of the baseline. As there
are signiﬁcant concerns about whether cross-sectional diﬀerences in, or even changes in, city
treasurer method of selection are independent of unobserved determinants of borrowing costs, I
next present estimates using the variation in city treasurer method of selection due to narrowly
passing referendums.

         In columns (2) and (3) of Table 2, I present the estimates of δ from ﬁtting two versions of
equation (3). In column (2) I present the RD estimates with a linear polynomial in vote share.
This estimate indicates that appointed city treasurers do indeed cause city borrowing costs to
be lower. The eﬀect appears to be both statistically and economically signiﬁcant. The passage
of an appointive treasurer referendum reduces borrowing costs by 19% of baseline. The eﬀect is
also economically large. As interest payments in cities with elected treasurers account for nearly
$43 per capita, appointive treasurers reduce interest expenditure by more than $8 per capita or
$250,000 for the city in total. Thus, the results imply that if all 137 cities with elected treasurers
in the baseline period were to switch to appointed city treasurers total borrowing expenditures
would fall by over $30 million.

         The baseline RD results in column (2) of Table 2 are depicted visually in Figure 3. The
graph clearly shows the positive vote share-interest rate gradient, and the discontinuous drop in
interest rates that occurs at the referendum passage threshold.21

         While the linear vote share speciﬁcation seems to capture the distribution of borrowing
costs fairly well, one might still be concerned that non-linearities in the interest rate-vote share
relationship might be driving the result in column (2) of Table 2. To address this potential
concern I also estimate RD models with the more ﬂexible cubic vote share polynomial. I present
    21
         In Figure 3 I plot the raw data of the interest rates observations and the RD linear model without any controls
for transparency. The comparable regression results for the linear RD model without the 1990 census controls are
very similar to those in Table 2. The coeﬃcient on the pass dummy is -0.89, with a city-clustered standard error
of 0.34.


                                                             15
the results of the cubic polynomial RD model in column (3) of Table 2. The estimated eﬀect
is slightly larger than in column (2) translating into an eﬀect of 23% of baseline, but remains
statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at the 5% level.

   The fact the RD estimates imply that borrowing costs are more responsive to treasurer
method of selection then the OLS estimates could indicate that cities with higher levels of
unobservable default risk are more likely to have appointed treasurers. Another possibility is
that unobserved default risk has little relationship with treasurer method of selection, but the
short run eﬀect of an appointive city treasurer is larger than the eﬀects in the longer run. The
short run eﬀect of switching treasurer appointive methods may be larger than the long run
eﬀect if elected treasurers fail to take advantage reﬁnancing opportunities so that the scope for
reﬁnancing to aﬀect borrowing costs on average is especially large in the short run.



4.2   Robustness Tests


Identiﬁcation of the eﬀects of institutions is challenging because any factor that aﬀects both
the cost of borrowing and institutional reform in a city may induce spurious correlation. For
example, one might be concerned that cities with particularly ineﬀective elected treasurers im-
plement policies that lead to a city paying higher borrowing costs. If having an ineﬀective elected
treasurer leads citizens to narrowly pass an appointive treasurer referendum, we will estimate a
negative eﬀect where none exists. In this context, however, I believe that this issue is unlikely
to be a serious problem. First, the passage of the referendum by a small margin is unlikely to
be aﬀected by signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the eﬀectiveness of a given treasurer, city ﬁscal policy,
or other institutional characteristics. More importantly the central identiﬁcation assumption
is based on the smoothness of other confounding factors at the referendum passage threshold.
Mean diﬀerences between cities that do and do not pass a referendum in their economic funda-
mentals, government, and other institutions do not contribute to identiﬁcation. One might still
be concerned that the narrow passage of an appointive treasurer referendum may be related to
discontinuous changes in other key confounding variables. I next estimate a number of models
to address this potential concern.



City Policy Outcomes Prior to Referendum Voting One advantage of having panel
data on city policy outcomes is that I can test for a discontinuous jump in city borrowing
costs and other policy outcomes at the referendum passage threshold before the referendum


                                                16
is actually voted on. If the narrow passage of a city treasurer referendum simply reﬂects a
discontinuity in unobservable determinants of city borrowing costs my identiﬁcation strategy
could be threatened.

       In Table 3 I estimate versions of equation (3) using only pre-referendum data on city ﬁnancial
outcomes. In the ﬁrst panel of Table 3 I present the results for borrowing costs prior to the
referendum vote. The results indicate that no statistically signiﬁcant discontinuity exists in
borrowing costs at the threshold of passage of the appointive referendum prior to the vote. The
relationship between prior interest rates and future referendum vote share and passage is shown
graphically in Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows clearly the lack of a signiﬁcant discontinuity in interest
rates prior to voting on the referendum.22 The fact that there is little evidence of a signiﬁcant
discontinuity in the main outcome prior to the referendum lends credence to the identiﬁcation
assumption.

       I next examine whether there is any evidence for a discontinuity in city ﬁscal policy outcomes
before the referendum is voted on in Panels B to D in Table 3. In general, the results of these
regressions show little statistically signiﬁcant relationship between pre-referendum ﬁscal policy
outcomes and future referendum outcomes. Moreover, even the sign of the point estimates
are highly sensitive to the order of the vote share polynomial. The one exception is that the
coeﬃcient on future referendum passage on Total Local Source Revenue is statistically signiﬁcant
at the 10% level with a linear polynomial in vote share. However, this discontinuity is highly
non-robust, as the estimate switches sign and is no longer statistically signiﬁcant when higher
order polynomial terms are included. The results of this exercise suggest there is little reason
to be concerned the main results above are driven by pre-existing non-linearities in city debt
management or ﬁscal policy.23



Other City Institutional Changes                   The next threat to identiﬁcation I consider is that the
narrow passage of a treasurer referendum is tied to other institutional changes or reforms that
might aﬀect a city’s cost of borrowing. As noted by Acemoglu and Robinson (2005), institutional
  22
       The visual depiction of the data in Figure 3 does demonstrates that some extreme outlier interest rate
observations do exist. In an unreported analysis I have also estimated the models in Table 3, Panel A excluding
interest rates great than 8%. The coeﬃcient and standard error on the pass dummy from this analysis are nearly
identical to those reported in Table 3.
  23
     I also show in Table A3 that there is little evidence for a discontinuity in the control variables in the Xi matrix
from the 1990 census at the referendum passage threshold. As less than 10% of the coeﬃcients are statistically
signiﬁcant at the 10% signiﬁcance level the results reﬂect what we would expect from pure chance.



                                                          17
changes are often bundled together. As a city council decides whether to place an appointive
treasurer referendum before voters, this decision may be correlated with changes other insti-
tutions that might also aﬀect the costs of borrowing such as city budgetary institutions. An
example of this would be the adoption of balanced-budget rules. In this case, the estimated trea-
sured appointive eﬀect may simply reﬂect other correlated changes in city government budgetary
institutions, rather than changes in the method of selection of the city treasurer.

       To shed light on this issue I examine whether the narrow passage of an appointive clerk
referendum has a similar eﬀect to narrow passage of the treasurer appointive referendum. This
speciﬁcation is informative for two reasons. First, as shown in Table 2 cities with elected trea-
surers are far more likely to have elected clerks. This fact suggests that unobservable factors
that lead to the adoption of an appointive treasurer institution may also lead to the adoption
of an appointive clerk institution. Indeed, many cities place appointment referendums for city
clerk and city treasurer positions on the ballot simultaneously and even structure the referen-
dum as vote to make both positions appointive. Second, as city clerks have little to do with
debt management policies we would expect to see little change in borrowing costs if the trea-
surer appointive eﬀect actually reﬂects diﬀerences in debt management policy choices by city
treasurers. For these reasons clerk appointive referendum make a compelling test of whether
other unobserved institutional changes are responsible for the main results.

       I present the results of the appointed clerk models in Table 4. I ﬁrst estimate a model similar
to (1) by OLS where the appointed treasurer dummy variable is replaced by the appointed clerk
variable. I then estimate an RD model similar to (3) where the referendum pass and vote
share variables are from the appointive clerk referendum rather than the appointive treasurer
referendum. The sample for the RD models includes all post-referendum data for the 20 cities
that put an appointive city clerk referendum to the voters.24

       In Table 4 I present OLS and RD estimates the appointive clerk eﬀect on borrowing costs.
In the ﬁrst column of the table we see that the OLS estimate of the coeﬃcient is negative, but
not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional signiﬁcance levels. The point estimates switches sign
in the linear RD model in the second column of Table 4, but remains statistically insigniﬁcant.
  24
       A number of cities either put a treasurer appointive referendum and a clerk appointive referendum to the
voters in the same election, or put a single referendum question to the voters that would switch both positions to
be appointed. To the extent that appointive clerk and treasurer referendum are voted on jointly we would expect
that the passage of a treasurer or clerk referendum would have the same measured impact. However, as the list
of treasurer referendums in Table A1 shows, in practice only a few of the treasurer appointive referendums are
also clerk appointive referendums.


                                                       18
In the last column of Table 4 we see that the point estimate again switches sign, and again
remains statistically insigniﬁcant. The fact the point estimates are not statistically signiﬁcant
provides further reassurance that the city treasurer appointive eﬀect in Table 2 is causal and is
not simply due to other unobservable institutional changes.



Narrow Margin of Victory Sample            The central identiﬁcation assumption in my RD anal-
ysis is that borrowing costs in cities that narrowly fail to pass a referendum form a valid counter-
factual for those that narrowly do pass a referendum. Thus far I have used all the referendums
available to conduct my analysis and relied on the vote share polynomial to smooth other unob-
served determinants of borrowing costs. While the tests for smoothness prior to the referendum
support this assumption, it is natural to ask whether the appointive eﬀect is similar in the
smaller sample of referendums that barely pass and barely fail. This sample is often termed the
‘RD sample’ (Angrist and Pischke, 2009). I estimate my models on this RD sample next.

   In Table 5 I present estimates of RD speciﬁcations for the sample of twenty referendums that
either pass or fail by less than 10 percent. The ﬁrst column in Table 5 shows that the passage of
treasurer appointive referendum in the linear RD speciﬁcation reduces the city borrowing costs.
The point estimate is substantially larger than the models in Table 2. However as the baseline
level of borrowing costs is also higher in the narrow margin of victory sample the implied eﬀect
is about 28% of baseline, only slightly larger than found in the full referendum sample. The fact
that the eﬀect size is similar in the RD sample to the eﬀect in the full referendum sample in Table
2 is comforting. The second column of Table 5 presents the results of the RD speciﬁcation with a
cubic polynomial estimated with the narrow margin of victory sample. Again, the results reveal
that treasurer appointive referendum passage leads to lower borrowing costs. The magnitude of
the estimate is even larger that that in column (1) of Table 5.



4.3   Other Policy Outcomes


Fiscal Policy Outcomes The results thus far have indicated that appointed city treasurers
implement debt management policies that result in lower borrowing costs. I next turn to the
question of whether treasurer selection method also indirectly aﬀects ﬁscal policy. These eﬀects
are of interest for two reasons. First, it is interesting to know whether narrowly focused changes
in political institutions have broader eﬀects across multiple policy areas, as policymakers con-
trolling diﬀerent policy levers may respond to one another. Second, voters might hold treasurers


                                                19
accountable by observing the indirect eﬀects of treasurer policy choices through changes in ﬁscal
policy, rather then debt management policy per se. For this form of indirect accountability (with
appropriate attribution) to be eﬀective ﬁscal policy would need to respond to changes in debt
management policy.

   In Table 6 I present RD estimates the appointive treasurer eﬀect for ﬁscal policy. In the ﬁrst
panel of the table I examine the appointive eﬀect on total city expenditure. In this panel we
see that the while point estimate of the coeﬃcient is positive, it is not statistically signiﬁcant
at conventional signiﬁcance levels in both RD speciﬁcations. That there is little evidence of an
eﬀect on total expenditure likely indicates the reduction in borrowing costs is spent on other
public goods. In the second panel of Table 6 I look at the appointive eﬀect on locally generated
revenue. In the ﬁrst column the estimate is positive and statistically signiﬁcant at the 10%
level. In the second column the point estimate is similar, but no longer statistically signiﬁcant.
The lack of a negative eﬀect suggests that the reduction in borrowing costs is not passed on to
taxpayers. The weak evidence of an increase in revenue could be due to an eﬀect of appointive
city treasurers on tax collection rather then ﬁscal policy per se. The last panel in Table 6
examines the appointive eﬀect for the stock of total debt outstanding. Again, the results show
little evidence of an appointive city treasurer eﬀect on total debt outstanding.



Debt Issuance and Management Costs In this section I investigate whether other bor-
rowing or administrative costs are aﬀected by treasurer method of selection, as interest rates are
not the only cost cities pay to borrow. I examine whether a city treasurers’ method of selection
also aﬀects other costs directly related to the issuance of debt. Whether other costs of debt
issuance respond to treasurer method of selection is important for understanding the eﬀect of
treasurer method of selection on total borrowing costs.

   I consider two additional costs. I ﬁrst examine whether cities with appointed treasurers
spend more or less on per issue fees to private sector debt issuance consultants. The eﬀect
could plausibly go in either direction. Eﬀective city treasurers may be able to substitute their
eﬀort and expertise for that of a consultant, reducing city expenditure on advisory services.
On the other hand, eﬀective city treasurers may be eﬀective because they select higher quality
ﬁnancial advisors whose services may be more costly. It is also possible that private sector debt
consultants are able to extract rents from ineﬀective city treasurers who are not aware of the
services they really need or the price they should be willing to pay.




                                               20
    In the ﬁrst panel of Table 7 in columns (1) and (2), I present the results of estimating a
RD model similar to equation (3) with the outcome of debt issuance consultant expenditure.
The results clearly show little statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of appointive treasurer referendum
passage on expenditure on debt consultants.

    Second, I also examine whether the cost of government administration in the city treasurer
department increases with an appointed city treasurer. Department costs might change if the
appointive city treasurers’ eﬀect is due to hiring more or better quality staﬀ in the ﬁnance
department, or spending more on the city treasurer position itself. In practice, the eﬀect on
spending from reallocating the city treasurer position from a politician to a bureaucrat may
well be small. Many small cities reallocate the debt management task to the ﬁnance director in
response to the ballot measure passing, and do not create additional positions.

    In the ﬁrst panel of Table 7 in columns (1) and (2), I present the results of estimating a
RD model similar to equation (3) with the outcome of total expenditure on general government
administration. The results are mixed. The linear RD estimate in column (1) indicates that
appointive city treasurers do signiﬁcantly increase general government administration expendi-
ture. However, the results with a cubic polynomial in column (2) indicate that the impact of
an appointive treasurer on government administration is not statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, the
results in Table 7 provide little consistent evidence of strong appointive city treasurer eﬀect on
the cost of government administration.



5    Debt Restructuring or New Debt Issuance Policies?

The results presented thus far indicate that appointed treasurers reduce city borrowing costs.
What explains these ﬁndings? In this section, I utilize highly detailed issue level data from
the 2008 cross-section to examine evidence on whether the appointive eﬀect is primarily due to
debt restructuring or debt issuance policies. I ﬁrst examine whether appointed and elected city
treasurers’ choose diﬀerent debt restructuring policies. I then consider whether appointed and
elected treasurers choose diﬀerent debt issuance policies.

    Understanding the channel for the appointive eﬀect allows us to assess whether the eﬀect can
be interpreted as reﬂecting public oﬃcial performance. As both treasurer eﬀort and expertise
are required to restructure existing debt at a lower cost, debt restructuring is closely related



                                               21
to treasurer eﬀort and skill inputs. It is possible that reﬁnancing may result in some charac-
teristics of the debt issue the residents may value changing, the fact reﬁnancing opportunities
are primarily driven by the variation in market interest rates over time that all treasurers face
suggests that changes in characteristics are likely to be second order. Thus, an interpretation of
borrowing cost reductions due to reﬁnancing as public oﬃcial performance seems warranted. In
contrast, the central policy choice aﬀecting the cost of borrowing for new debt is the method of
sale, which seems more closely related to catering to special interest lobbying than to the inputs
supplied by a city treasurer.



5.1       Measuring Debt Restructuring and Debt Issuance Policies


To separately measure debt restructuring and new debt issuance policies one would ideally use
data on the ﬂow of debt issues over time. Unfortunately, I only have access to a single cross
section of debt-issue level data that reports interest rates reliably. The debt issue level data
available as prior to the 2008 cross-section does not record an interest rate for the majority of
the records.25

       I am able to separately measure debt restructuring and debt issuance policies indirectly by
examining how the appointive eﬀect depends on when the debt was issued. The test is based
on the idea that a city treasurers debt issuance policies can only aﬀect the interest rates on the
debt issued after they take oﬃce. Debt issuance policies will then only aﬀect the interest rate on
debt issued after the referendum. In contrast, the appointive eﬀect on debt issued prior to the
referendum must be due to the selective retiring of expensive debt through reﬁnancing. Debt
restructuring policies will then only aﬀect the interest rate on debt issued before the referendum.

       I again use my regression discontinuity approach to estimate the eﬀect of treasurer methods
of selection on debt issuance and debt restructuring policies. I estimate models of the following
form for the interest rate, Iij ,

(4)                                    Iij = δpassij + Pg (si ) + Xi β + ij ,

where i indexes the referendum and j indexes the issue. The variable passi is a dummy variable
that takes a value is a referendum passes in a prior year and value zero otherwise. Pg (si ) is
a polynomial function of the referenda vote share, si , of order g. Xi is the same vector of
  25
       As the debt issue data is for the ﬁscal year 2008 it ends on June 30 2008, so the interest rates on these issues
are not aﬀected by the subsequent ﬁnancial crisis in fall 2008.


                                                           22
covariates from the 1990 census in the city where the referendum occurs as in model (1), and it
is the error term. Thus, the appointive eﬀect, δ, is estimated controlling for the percent voting
in favor with a ﬂexible polynomial functional form, as usual.



5.2       Results


The results of estimating (4) are reported in Table 8. I ﬁrst present the results for all debt issues,
and then turn to estimating on the models on the samples with: (1) all pre-referendum debt
issues, to measure the debt reﬁnancing policy response and (2) all post-referendum debt issues,
to measure the debt issuing policy response. I also estimate models where I control for the type
term length of the debt issue in columns (2), (4) and (6). The results in columns (1) and (2)
demonstrate a similar appointive eﬀect as noted above, about 25% of the baseline interest rate,
though they are less precisely estimated.



Debt Restructuring              The results from estimating equation (4) for the debt issued before
the referendum are presented in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8. These results indicate that
diﬀerences in city treasurer methods of selection cause diﬀerences in debt restructuring policies.
The coeﬃcient estimates are quite large and statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at the
5% level. The magnitude as a percentage of baseline is substantial, representing an eﬀect of over
40% of baseline.26

       It is also important to note that the results hardly diﬀer when debt characteristics are
included as controls. This is important as attributes of a public debt issue other than the
interest rate may aﬀect resident welfare. For example, long-term debt with a ﬁxed interest rate
could be more valuable to risk averse city residents than short-term or variable interest rate debt.
Thus far I have discussed borrowing costs as if lower borrowing costs are a public good, however
if borrowing cost reducting are simply due to changes in other debt attributes residents dislike
welfare intreprerations are diﬃcult. The fact that the results are so similar with and without
debt characteristic controls indicates that the appointive eﬀect is not primarily due to changes
in debt attributes residents may value. Thus these results suggest that lower borrowing costs
from reﬁnancing can be interpreted as welfare improving. In any case, the debt restructuring
  26
       The baseline level of interest rates may not be the relevant counterfactual as the highest interest debt is
most likely to be reﬁnanced. The eﬀects are still quite large compared the maximum level of interest rates in the
sample, representing a response of over 20%.



                                                         23
response is substantial and provides support for a public oﬃcial performance interpretation of
the appointive eﬀect.



Debt Issuance      The results of estimating equation (4) for the debt issued after the referendum
are presented in columns (5) and (6) of Table 8. These results provide little support for debt
issuance response. The point estimates in both columns are actually positive and not statistically
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. Thus, there is little evidence that appointed treasures choose
a diﬀerent debt issuance policy.

    In sum, the results shed some light on how diﬀerences in policy choices between elected and
appointed treasurers account for the appointive eﬀect. Appointed treasurers are more likely to
restructure expensive debt, but not issue new debt at lower cost. The fact that the primary debt
management policy diﬀerence between appointed and elected treasurers is debt restructuring
lends further credence to the results above. As the median term length of a debt issue in the
sample is 21 years there is little scope for debt issuance policy to aﬀect the average interest rates
on the stock of city debt in the short run. In contrast, the scope for the reﬁnancing of expensive
debt to have an especially large eﬀect on average interest rates on the stock of city debt shortly
after the method of selection of the treasurer switches is far greater.



6    Conclusion

This paper has documented that there are substantial eﬀects from bureaucratic control of city
debt policy: assigning the debt task to a bureaucrat reduces city borrowing costs. The results
indicate that appointive treasurers reduce a city’s cost of borrowing by 13 % to 23%. The
appointive eﬀect is also economically signiﬁcant. The results imply that if all cities in California
with elected treasurers were to appoint them, total borrowing expenditures would be reduced
by more than $20 million per year. Thus, this paper has demonstrated that alternative political
institutions do indeed cause meaningful diﬀerences in policymaking.

    I also present evidence that the appointive eﬀect is primarily due to diﬀerent debt restruc-
turing, not diﬀerent debt issuance, policy choices. As both treasurer eﬀort and expertise are
required to restructure existing debt at a lower cost, the evidence for a debt restructuring channel
indicates an important role for treasurer supplied inputs in explaining the ﬁndings. In addition,
as the appointive eﬀect seems to have little to do with changes in attributes of the debt issue

                                                 24
interpreting the appointive eﬀect as reﬂecting better public oﬃcial performance seems to be
warranted.

   There are several implications for future research. First, it would be interesting to examine
whether similar diﬀerences in policymaking are found for less technical policy choices. The
theoretical arguments noted above indicate politicians likely have a comparative advantage in
less technical policy areas. It would be interesting to examine empirical evidence on whether or
not this is the case. Second, as highly detailed data on policy maker expertise are unavailable
for city treasurers, it would be interesting to examine how diﬀerences in expertise aﬀect policy
choices and performance in a context where such measures are available.

   The results of this study also have broader implications for the organization of public good
provision. They suggest, for example, that the division of policymaking tasks typical in many
advanced democracies, with appointed oﬃcials conducting the more-technical monetary and
regulatory policy, and elected oﬃcials conducting the less-technical ﬁscal policy, is appropriate.
Eﬀorts to improve governance in developing countries may well be enhanced by emulating the
division of policymaking tasks in advanced democracies.




                                               25
7   References

Acemoglu, Daron (2005) “Constitutions, Politics and Economics: A Review Essay on Persson and
    Tabellini’s “The Economic Eﬀects of Constitutions”,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43(4): pp.
    1025-1048.

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson (2005) “Unbundled Institutions,” Journal of Political Economy,
    113(5): pp. 949-995.

Acemoglu, Daron, David Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2006) “Emergence and Persistence of Ineﬃcient
    States,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 12748.

Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi (2004) “Endogenous Political Institutions,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2): pp. 565-613.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (1990) “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deﬁcits and Government
    Debt,” Review of Economic Studies, 57:pp. 403-414.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (2007) “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A Single Policy Task,”
    American Economic Review, 97(1): pp. 169-79.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (2008) “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part II: Multiple Policy
    Tasks,”Journal of Public Economics, 92(3-4): pp. 426-447.

Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steﬀen Pischke (2009) Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Com-
    panion, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Besley, Timothy (2006) Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government. Oxford, UK:
    Oxford University Press.

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case (1995) “Does Electoral Accountability Aﬀect Economic Policy Choices?
    Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3): pp. 769-798

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case (2003) “Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence from the
    United States,” Journal of Economic Literature, 41(1): pp. 7-73.

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (2003) “Elected versus Appointed Regulators: Theory and Evi-
    dence,” Journal of the European Economics Association, 1(5): pp. 1176-1206.

Besley, Timothy and Abigail Payne (2006) “Implementation of Anti-Discrimination Policy: Does Judi-
    cial Selection Matter?,” McMaster University, Working Paper.

Bowler, Shaun and Todd Donovan (1998) Demanding Choices, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan
    Press.

California Debt Issuance and Advisory Commission (2006) California Debt Issuance Primer, Sacra-
    mento, CA: CDIAC.

California Municipal Treasurers Association (2001) City Treasurers Handbook. Sacramento, CA: CMTA.



                                                 26
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, Fernando Ferreira and Jesse Rothstein (2008) “The Value of School Facili-
    ties: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design,” National Bureau of Economic
    Research, Working Paper 14516.

Coate, Stephen and Brian Knight (2009) “Government Form and Public Spending: Theory and Evidence
    from U.S. Municipalities,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 14857.

Feldstein, Sylvan and Frank Fabozzi (2008) The Handbook of Municipal Bonds, Hoboken, NJ: John
    Wiley and Sons.

Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan (2007) “Electoral Accountability and Corruption in Local Govern-
    ments: Evidence from Audit Reports.” UCLA, Working paper.

Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan (2008) “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Eﬀect of Brazil’s Pub-
    licly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,123(2): 703-745.

Ferreira, Fernando and Joseph Gyourko (2009), “Do Political Parties Matter? Evidence from U.S.
    Cities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1): pp. 349-397.

Gerber, Elisabeth (1999) The Populist Paradox, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gordon, Tracy (2004) The Local Initiative in California, San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of
    California.

Jones, Ben and Ben Olken (2005) “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership and Growth Since World
    War II,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (3): pp. 835 -864.

Joseph, James (1994) Debt Issuance and Management: A Guide for Smaller Governments, Chicago, IL:
    Government Financial Oﬃcers Association.

Lee, David (2008)“Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S. House Elections, Jour-
    nal of Econometrics, 142 (2008): pp. 675-697.

Lee, David, and Thomas Lemieux (2008) “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” National
    Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 14723.

Leonard, Paul (2004) “Debt Management,” in Management Policies in Local Government Finance,
    edited by Aaronson, Richard and Eli Schwartz, Washington, DC: ICMA.

Levitt, Arthur (2009) “Taxpayers Fleeced When Leaders Tap Muni Market,” Bloomberg.com (October
    21, 2009): http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchivesid=aZo2O7uRC.Ok.

List, John and Daniel Sturm (2006) “How Elections Matter: Theory and Evidence from Environmental
    Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): pp. 1249 - 1281.

Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole (2004) “The Politician and the Judge: Accountability in Government,”
    American Economic Review, 94(1): pp. 1034-1054.

Matsusaka, John (2003) “I & R in American Cities: Basic Patterns,” in Initiative and Referendum
    Almanac, edited by M. Dane Waters, Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.


                                                 27
Nicholson, Steven (2005) Voting the Agenda: Candidates, Elections and Ballot Propositions, Princeton,
    NJ: Princeton University Press.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic Eﬀects of Constitutions, Cambridge, MA:
    MIT Press.

Porter, Jack (2003) “Estimation in the Regression Discontinuity Model,” University of Wisconsin, work-
    ing paper.

Poterba, James (1994) “State Responses to Fiscal Crisis: The Eﬀects of Budgetary Institutions and
    Politics”, Journal of Political Economy, 102 (August): 799-821

Robbins, Mark and Bill Simonson (2007) “Competition and Selection in Municipal Bond Sales: Evidence
    from Missouri,” Public Budgeting and Finance, 27(2): pp. 88-103.

Simonson, Bill, Mark Robbins and Lee Helgerson (2001) “The Inﬂuence of Jurisdiction Size and Sale
    Type on Municipal Bond Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis,” Public Administration Review,
    61(6): pp. 709-717.

Spiotto, James (2008) “A History of Modern Municipal Defaults,” in The Handbook of Municipal Bonds,
    edited by Feldstein, Sylvan and Frank Fabozzi, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.

Vlaicu, Razvan (2008) “Executive Performance under Direct and Hierarchical Accountability Structures:
    Theory and Evidence,” University of Maryland, working paper.

Wilson, James (1989) Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do and Why They Do It, Jackson, TN:
    Basic Books.




                                                 28
TABLE 1: Descriptive Statistics, by City Treasurer Appointive Status
                                                                                                                                     (1)-(2)
                                                                   Treasurer Position            Treasurer Position                   t-stat
                                                                      Appointed                       Elected                       [p-value]
                                                                          (1)                           (2)                            (3)
(1) Outcome:
Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt (%)                          2.17                          2.57                          -3.03
                                                                         (1.85)                        (1.93)                        [0.003]
(2) City Finances (2000 $):
Total Local Source Revenue per capita                                      637                           646                          -0.07
                                                                         (1225)                        (1075)                        [0.944]
Total Expenditure per capita                                              1317                          1561                          -1.10
                                                                         (1789)                        (2557)                        [0.273]
Total Debt Outstanding per capita                                         1178                          1691                          -2.01
                                                                         (1813)                        (3189)                        [0.046]
(3) City Government Characteristics:
Mayor-Council Form of Government                                          0.09                          0.21                          -2.72
                                                                         (0.29)                        (0.41)                        [0.007]
Appointed City Clerk                                                      0.91                          0.12                          21.88
                                                                         (0.29)                        (0.33)                        [0.000]
Fraction with Full-Time Elected Officials                                 0.03                          0.01                           1.63
                                                                         (0.18)                        (0.08)                        [0.104]
(4) City Economic Characteristics:
City Population                                                          34416                         31104                          0.75
                                                                        (38509)                       (32416)                        [0.453]
Per Capita Income (1990 $)                                               17521                         14519                          2.98
                                                                        (10133)                        (6835)                        [0.003]
Fraction College Graduate                                                 0.23                          0.17                          3.67
                                                                         (0.17)                        (0.11)                        [0.000]
Employment-Population Ratio                                               0.46                          0.44                          1.85
                                                                         (0.09)                        (0.08)                        [0.065]
Number of Observations                                                    2228                          1894
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California CFTR, and CEDA data from 1992 to 2008, 1990 Decennial Census, and 1992 Census of




                                                                          29
Government data. The unit of observation is city-year. The main entries in column (1) present the mean of the selected variables for cities with appointed
treasurers. The main entries in column (2) present the mean of the selected variables for cities with elected treasurers. The standard deviations of the selected
variable are presented in parenthesis in columns (1) and (2). The main entries in column (3) present the test statistics for a test of differences in means between
column (1) and (2), with the p-value of the test presented in square brackets. The sample includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government
in the 1992 Census of Governments and positive interest expenses in each year. All monetary values are expressed in 2000 $ unless noted otherwise. The
variables Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt, Total Local Source Revenue per capita, Total Expenditure per capita, and Total Debt Outstanding per
capita are based on data from the California City Financial Transactions Reports (CFTR). The variables Mayor-Council Form of Government, Appointed City
Treasurer, Appointed City Clerk, and Full-Time Elected Officials are based on data from the 1992 Census of Governments. The variable City Population is
based on data from the California E-1 Population Tables. The variables Per Capita Income, Fraction College Graduate, and Employment-Population Ratio are
based on data from the 1990 Decennial Census. Definition of the variables: Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt (%) is the ratio of total interest
expenses divided by total debt outstanding; Total Expenditure is the total expenditure to deliver city services; Total Local Source Revenue is total city revenue
net of transfers from the Federal, State, and County governments; Total Debt Outstanding is the total stock of debt outstanding issued by the city; Mayor-Council
Form of Government indicates whether or not the city has a directly elected mayor; Full-Time Elected Officials indicates whether or not the elected officials
serve in a full-time capacity; City Population is the city population annually estimated by the California state Department of Finance; Per Capita Income is the
per capita income in the city; Fraction College Graduate is the fraction of the population with a college degree in the city; and Employment-Population Ratio is
the ratio of employment to population in the city.




                                                                                30
TABLE 2: The Effect of Appointive City Treasurers on City Borrowing Costs

Dependent Variable = Interest Rate on Total Outstanding Debt

                                       Model =             OLS              RD linear            RD cubic
                                                           (1)                (2)                  (3)

Treasurer Appointed                                      -0.34**
                                                          (0.13)
Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                                         -0.68**              -0.81**
                                                                              (0.31)               (0.38)

Number of Observations                                      4122               254                  254
1990 Census controls                                        Yes                Yes                  Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                            2.64               3.52                 3.52
[Standard Deviation]                                       [2.43]             [2.11]               [2.11]

Sample                                                 All Cities                Referendum Cities
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions Reports, and
CEDA data from 1992 to 2008, 1992 Census of Government data and 1990 Decennial Census data. The
sample in column (1) includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992
Census of Governments and positive interest expenses in each year. The sample in column (2) and (3)
includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of
Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters
in a prior year. The variable Treasurer Appointed takes a value of one if the treasurer is appointed in city i
in year t. The variable Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass takes a value of one if a local treasurer
appointive referendum passed in a prior year in city i in year t. The unit of observation is referndum-year.
Each column presents the results from one regression specification. The main entries are coefficient
estimates. The entries in parentheses are standard errors clustered at the city level. All models include city
characteristics from the 1990 Census: Population Size, Percentage White, Percentage Black, Percentage
Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-Five, Percentage College Graduate, Percentage
High School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of Government, and Employment-Population Ratio. The
models in columns (2) and (3) also control for a linear and cubic polynomial in vote share respectively. *
indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance; ** indicates significantly
different from zero at the 5% level of significance; *** indicates significantly different from zero at 1%
level of significance.




                                                      31
TABLE 3: City Financial Outcomes Prior to Treasurer Appointive Measure Vote

                                               Model =           RD linear                RD cubic
                                                                   (1)                      (2)

A. Dependent Variable = Interest Rate on Total Outstanding Debt

Future Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                        -0.59                     -0.17
                                                                   (0.45)                   (0.64)

Number of Observations                                              327                      327
1990 Census Controls                                                Yes                      Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                    3.52                     3.52
[Standard Deviation]                                               [2.11]                   [2.11]

B. Dependent Variable = Real Total Expenditure per capita

Future Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                        2.58                   -197.29
                                                                 (161.21)                 (235.03)

Number of Observations                                             327                      327
1990 Census Controls                                               Yes                      Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                  868.86                   868.86
[Standard Deviation]                                             [346.87]                 [346.87]

C. Dependent Variable = Real Total Local Source Revenue per capita

Future Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                       40.76*                    -9.24
                                                                  (20.18)                  (22.56)

Number of Observations                                             327                      327
1990 Census Controls                                               Yes                      Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                  368.53                   368.53
[Standard Deviation]                                             [116.52]                 [116.52]

D. Dependent Variable = Real Total Outstanding Debt per capita

Future Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                       -86.67                  -400.94
                                                                 (380.79)                 (519.76)

Number of Observations                                             327                      327
1990 Census Controls                                               Yes                      Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                  855.76                   855.76
[Standard Deviation]                                             [743.56]                 [743.56]

Sample                                                                   Referendum Cities
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions Reports, and
CEDA data from 1992 to 2008, 1992 Census of Government data and 1990 Decennial Census data. The
sample includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of
Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters



                                                    32
in a future year. The variable Future Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass takes a value of one if a local
treasurer appointive referendum passed in a future year in city i in year t. The unit of observation is
referendum-year. Each column presents the results from one regression specification. The main entries are
coefficient estimates. The entries in parentheses are standard errors clustered at the city level. All models
include city characteristics from the 1990 Census: Population Size, Percentage White, Percentage Black,
Percentage Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-Five, Percentage College Graduate,
Percentage High School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of Government, and Employment-Population
Ratio. The models in columns (1) and (2) also control for a linear and cubic polynomial in vote share
respectively. * indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance; ** indicates
significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance; *** indicates significantly different from
zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                     33
TABLE 4: The Effect of Appointive City Clerks on City Borrowing Costs

Dependent Variable = Interest Rate on Total Outstanding Debt

                                       Model =            OLS              RD linear            RD cubic
                                                          (1)                (2)                  (3)

Clerk Appointed                                            -0.12
                                                          (0.13)
Clerk Appointive Ballot Pass                                                  0.78                 -0.93
                                                                             (0.55)               (1.03)

Number of Observations                                     4122               155                  155
1990 Census controls                                       Yes                Yes                  Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                           2.64               3.43                 3.43
[Standard Deviation]                                      [2.43]             [2.15]               [2.15]

Sample                                                 All Cities                Referendum Cities
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions Reports, and
CEDA data from 1992 to 2008, 1992 Census of Government data and 1990 Decennial Census data. The
sample in column (1) includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992
Census of Governments and positive interest expenses in each year. The sample in column (2) and (3)
includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of
Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an appointive clerk referendum put to voters in a
prior year. The variable Clerk Appointed takes a value of one if the clerk is appointed in city i in year t.
The variable Clerk Appointive Referendum Pass takes a value of one if a local clerk appointive referendum
passed in a prior year in city i in year t. The unit of observation is referendum-year. Each column presents
the results from one regression specification. The main entries are coefficient estimates. The entries in
parentheses are standard errors clustered at the city level. All models include city characteristics from the
1990 Census: Population Size, Percentage White, Percentage Black, Percentage Less Than Seventeen,
Percentage Greater Than Sixty-Five, Percentage College Graduate, Percentage High School Graduate,
Mayor-Council Form of Government, and Employment-Population Ratio. The models in columns (2) and
(3) also control for a linear and cubic polynomial in vote share respectively. * indicates significantly
different from zero at the 10% level of significance; ** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5%
level of significance; *** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                     34
TABLE 5: The Effect of Appointive City Treasurers on City Borrowing Costs: Narrow Margin of
Victory Sample

Dependent Variable = Interest Rate on Total Outstanding Debt

                                                 Model =            RD linear                 RD cubic
                                                                      (1)                       (2)

Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                                -1.13***                  -2.02***
                                                                     (0.23)                    (0.53)

Number of Observations                                                 160                       160
1990 Census Controls                                                   Yes                       Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                       4.01                      4.01
[Standard Deviation]                                                  [1.76]                    [1.76]

Sample                                                                    Referendum Cities,
                                                                    Margin of Victory > -0.1 & < 0.1
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions Reports, and
CEDA data from 1992 to 2008, 1992 Census of Government data and 1990 Decennial Census data. The
sample includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of
Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters
in a prior year with a vote share of between 0.4 and 0.6. The variable Treasurer Appointive Referendum
Pass takes a value of one if a local treasurer appointive referendum passed in a prior year in city i in year t.
The unit of observation is referendum-year. Each column presents the results from one regression
specification. The main entries are coefficient estimates. The entries in parentheses are standard errors
clustered at the city level. All models include city characteristics from the 1990 Census: Population Size,
Percentage White, Percentage Black, Percentage Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-
Five, Percentage College Graduate, Percentage High School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of
Government, and Employment-Population Ratio. The models in columns (1) and (2) also control for a
linear and cubic polynomial in vote share respectively. * indicates significantly different from zero at the
10% level of significance; ** indicates significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance; ***
indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                      35
TABLE 6: The Effect of Appointive City Treasurers on City Fiscal Policy Outcomes

                                                Model =           RD linear                 RD cubic
                                                                    (1)                       (2)
A. Dependent Variable = Real Total Expenditure per capita

Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                                140.79                    166.04
                                                                   (227.64)                  (270.29)

Number of Observations                                               254                       254
1990 Census Controls                                                 Yes                       Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                    868.86                    868.86
[Standard Deviation]                                               [346.87]                  [346.87]

B. Dependent Variable = Real Total Local Source Revenue per capita

Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                               108.57*                    86.19
                                                                   (60.00)                   (74.02)

Number of Observations                                               254                       254
1990 Census Controls                                                 Yes                       Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                    368.53                    368.53
[Standard Deviation]                                               [116.52]                  [116.52]

C. Dependent Variable = Real Total Outstanding Debt per capita

Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                               -139.17                    -23.48
                                                                   (542.71)                  (624.41)

Number of Observations                                               254                       254
1990 Census Controls                                                 Yes                       Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                    855.76                    855.76
[Standard Deviation]                                               [743.56]                  [743.56]

Sample                                                                    Referendum Cities
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions Reports, and
CEDA data from 1992 to 2008, 1992 Census of Government data and 1990 Decennial Census data. The
sample includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of
Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters
in a future year. The variable Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass takes a value of one if a local
treasurer appointive referendum passed in a prior year in city i in year t. The unit of observation is
referendum-year. Each column presents the results from one regression specification. The main entries are
coefficient estimates. The entries in parentheses are standard errors clustered at the city level. All models
include city characteristics from the 1990 Census: Population Size, Percentage White, Percentage Black,
Percentage Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-Five, Percentage College Graduate,
Percentage High School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of Government, and Employment-Population
Ratio. The models in columns (1) and (2) also control for a linear and cubic polynomial in vote share
respectively.* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance; ** indicates
significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance; *** indicates significantly different from
zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                     36
TABLE 7: The Effect of Appointive City Treasurers on Other City Borrowing Costs

                                                Model =           RD linear                 RD cubic
                                                                    (1)                       (2)

A. Dependent Variable = Expenditure on Debt Consultants per capita

Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                                 -17.41                  -48.96
                                                                    (40.48)                  (68.46)

Number of Observations                                                254                      254
1990 Census Controls                                                  Yes                      Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                     28.00                    28.00
[Standard Deviation]                                                [71.43]                  [71.43]

B. Dependent Variable = Expenditure on Management and Support Department per capita

Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass                               65.56**                    47.42
                                                                   (25.17)                   (33.45)

Number of Observations                                                254                      254
1990 Census Controls                                                  Yes                      Yes
Baseline Dependent Variable Mean                                     63.47                    63.47
[Standard Deviation]                                                [44.58]                  [44.58]

Sample                                                                    Referendum Cities
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions Reports, and
CEDA data from 1992 to 2006, 1992 Census of Government data and 1990 Decennial Census data. The
sample includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of
Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters
in a future year. The variable Treasurer Appointive Referendum Pass takes a value of one if a local
treasurer appointive referendum passed in a prior year in city i in year t. The unit of observation is
referendum-year. Each column presents the results from one regression specification. The main entries are
coefficient estimates. The entries in parentheses are standard errors clustered at the city level. All models
include city characteristics from the 1990 Census: Population Size, Percentage White, Percentage Black,
Percentage Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-Five, Percentage College Graduate,
Percentage High School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of Government, and Employment-Population
Ratio. The models in columns (1) and (2) also control for a linear and cubic polynomial in vote share
respectively. * indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance; ** indicates
significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance; *** indicates significantly different from
zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                     37
TABLE 8: The Effect of Appointive City Treasurers on City Borrowing Costs: FY2008 Debt Issue Sample, by Debt Issue Date

Dependent Variable = Interest Rate on Outstanding Debt Issue

                       Debt Issues =             All Debt Issues                 Debt Issued Before Referendum            Debt Issued After Referendum
                           Model =          RD cubic         RD cubic              RD cubic         RD cubic               RD cubic          RD cubic
                                              (1)               (2)                   (3)              (4)                    (5)               (6)

Treasurer Appointive Referendum               -1.28*             -1.33**              -2.32**           -2.54***               1.17                1.36
Pass                                          (0.68)              (0.67)               (0.91)            (0.91)               (1.10)              (1.04)

Number of Observations                          205                205                 129                 129                 76                  76
1990 Census Controls                            Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Debt Issue Characteristic Controls              No                 Yes                 No                  Yes                 No                  Yes

Baseline Dependent Variable:
Mean                                           5.06                5.00               5.33                5.33                4.45                4.45
[Standard Deviation]                          [1.38]              [1.36]             [1.41]              [1.41]              [1.08]              [1.08]
{Min, Max}                                 {0.92, 9.31}        {0.92, 9.31}       {0.92, 9.31}        {0.92, 9.31}        {1.75, 6.86}        {1.75, 6.86}

Sample                                           Referendum Cities                       Referendum Cities                      Referendum Cities
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions Reports from 2008, and CEDA data from 1995 to 2006, 1992
Census of Government data and 1990 Decennial Census data. The sample includes all general law cites in California with a municipal government in the 1992
Census of Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters in a prior year. The variable Treasurer
Appointive Referendum Pass takes a value of one if a local treasurer appointive referendum passed in a prior year in city i in a prior year. The unit of observation
is debt issue. Each column presents the results from one regression specification. The main entries are coefficient estimates. The entries in parentheses are
standard errors clustered at the city level. All models include a cubic polynomial in vote share and city characteristics from the 1990 Census: Population Size,
Percentage White, Percentage Black, Percentage Less Than Seventeen, Percentage Greater Than Sixty-Five, Percentage College Graduate, Percentage High
School Graduate, Mayor-Council Form of Government, and Employment-Population Ratio. The models in columns (2), (4) and (6) also include controls for the
type and term of the debt issue. * indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance; ** indicates significantly different from zero at the
5% level of significance; *** indicates significantly different from zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                                                 38
TABLE A1: List of City Treasurer Appointive Referenda

   Date              City            Vote Yes           Vote No   Total Votes   Percent in   Referendum   Joint Referendum with
                                                                                  Favor          Pass        Appointive Clerk
 7-Nov-95           Ontario            1836              6846           8682       0.21           No
 26-Mar-96        Dunsmuir              214               415            629       0.34           No
 26-Mar-96         Reedley             1701              1379           3080       0.55          Yes
 26-Mar-96           Ukiah             1651              1933           3584       0.46           No
 26-Mar-96          Orange             8730             12428          21158       0.41           No
 26-Mar-96      San Clemente           3495              6874          10369       0.34           No
 26-Mar-96           Brea              3092              3878           6970       0.44           No
 5-Nov-96          Live Oak             559               514           1073       0.52          Yes              Yes
 5-Nov-96         Livermore            8557             14374          22931       0.37           No
 5-Nov-96           Auburn             1951              3226           5177       0.38           No
 5-Nov-96         Waterford             602               897           1499       0.40           No
 5-Nov-96        Santa Paula           2850              3553           6403       0.45           No              Yes
 3-Nov-98      San Juan Bautista        166               346            512       0.32           No
 3-Nov-98        Paso Robles           2386              3486           5872       0.41           No
 3-Nov-98          Gonzales             474               447            921       0.51          Yes
 3-Nov-98           Benicia            2700              5943           8643       0.31           No
 3-Nov-98       Arroyo Grande          2486              3615           6101       0.41           No              Yes
  8-Jun-99         Manteca             1967              1812           3779       0.52          Yes
 2-Nov-99         Livermore            7842              5698          13540       0.58          Yes
  7-Mar-00        Waterford             544               619           1163       0.47           No
  7-Mar-00       Santa Maria           6348              7086          13434       0.47           No              Yes
 7-Nov-00         Tehachipi             889              1173           2062       0.43           No
 7-Nov-00         Woodland             7715              7123          14838       0.52          Yes
 7-Nov-00           Portola             298               459            757       0.39           No
 5-Nov-02           Turlock            5881              6077          11958       0.49           No
 5-Nov-02         Signal Hill           685              1125           1810       0.38           No




                                                                  39
 5-Nov-02             Portola                162               390          552   0.29   No
 5-Nov-02             Barstow               1028              2427         3455   0.30   No
 5-Nov-02            Firebaugh               265               306          571   0.46   No
 5-Nov-02           Paso Robles             2606              3824         6430   0.41   No
 5-Nov-02             Wasco                  952              1096         2048   0.46   No
 28-Jan-03          South Gate              2537              5409         7946   0.32   No
 4-Nov-03             Fontana               1931              1234         3165   0.61   Yes
 2-Mar-04            Calistoga               607               590         1197   0.51   Yes   Yes
 2-Nov-04            Waterford               990               779         1769   0.56   Yes
 8-Nov-05            Pittsburg              4319              6016        10335   0.42   Yes
Notes: California Local Elections (CEDA) data from 1992 to 2006.




                                                                     40
TABLE A2: Descriptive Statistics in 1992, by City Treasurer Appointive Referendum Status
                                                                          Treasurer Elected in 1992:                                 (1)-(2)
                                                            Appointive Referendum        Appointive Referendum                        t-stat
                                                                  Voted On                     Not Voted On                         [p-value]
                                                                       (1)                           (2)                               (3)
(1) Outcome:
Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt (%)                      2.54                          1.95                              1.19
                                                                    (2.43)                         (2.38)                            [0.236]
(2) City Finances (2000 $):
Total Debt Outstanding per capita                                     830                           1021                              -0.88
                                                                     (805)                        (1660)                             [0.379]
Total Expenditure per capita                                          934                           1022                              -0.83
                                                                     (393)                         (816)                             [0.407]
Total Local Source Revenue per capita                                 402                            536                              -1.74
                                                                     (167)                         (724)                             [0.084]
(3) City Government Characteristics:
Mayor-Council Form of Government                                      0.19                          0.24                              -0.51
                                                                    (0.40)                         (0.43)                            [0.610]
Elected City Clerk                                                    0.10                          0.11                              -0.27
                                                                    (0.30)                         (0.32)                            [0.791]
Fraction with Full-Time Elected Officials                               0                           0.01                              -1.00
                                                                       (0)                         (0.10)                            [0.320]
(4) City Economic Characteristics:
City Population                                                     31614                         29035                                0.38
                                                                   (33826)                       (31026)                             [0.703]
Per Capita Income (1990 $)                                          13166                         15628                               -2.09
                                                                    (4543)                        (8810)                             [0.039]
Fraction College Graduate                                             0.15                          0.19                              -1.85
                                                                    (0.09)                         (0.13)                            [0.066]
Employment-Population Ratio                                           0.43                          0.45                              -0.83
                                                                    (0.07)                         (0.09)                            [0.405]
Number of Observations                                                 31                            106
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California CFTR, and CEDA data from 1992 to 2008, 1990 Decennial Census, and 1992 Census of




                                                                          41
Government data. The unit of observation is city. The main entries in column (1) present the mean of the selected variables for cities with elected treasurers and
a referendum voted on. The main entries in column (2) present the mean of the selected variables for cities with elected treasurers and a referendum not voted
on. The standard deviations of the selected variable are presented in parenthesis in columns (1) and (2). The main entries in column (3) present the test statistics
for a test of differences in means between column (1) and (2), with the p-value of the test presented in square brackets. The sample includes all general law cites
in California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of Governments and positive interest expenses in each year. All monetary values are expressed in
2000 $ unless noted otherwise. The variables Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt Total Local Source Revenue per capita, Total Expenditure per
capita, and Total Debt Outstanding per capita are based on data from the California City Financial Transactions Reports (CFTR). The variables Mayor-Council
Form of Government, Appointed City Clerk, and Full-Time Elected Officials are based on data from the 1992 Census of Governments. The variable City
Population is based on data from the California E-1 Population Tables. The variables Per Capita Income, Fraction College Graduate, and Employment-
Population Ratio are based on data from the 1990 Decennial Census. Definition of the variables: Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt (%) is the ratio of
total interest expenses divided by total debt outstanding Total Expenditure is the total expenditure to deliver city services; Total Local Source Revenue is total
city revenue net of transfers from the Federal, State, and County governments; Total Debt Outstanding is the total stock of debt outstanding issued by the city;
Mayor-Council Form of Government indicates whether or not the city has a directly elected mayor; Full-Time Elected Officials indicates whether or not the
elected officials serve in a full-time capacity; City Population is the city population annually estimated by the California state Department of Finance; Per Capita
Income is the per capita income in the city; Fraction College Graduate is the fraction of the population with a college degree in the city; and Employment-
Population Ratio is the ratio of employment to population in the city.




                                                                                42
TABLE A3: Baseline City Characteristics and Post-1992 Treasurer Appointive Referendums
Outcomes

                                                     Mean                 RD linear            RD cubic
                                             [Standard Deviation]
                                                      (1)                       (2)                (3)
Per Capita Income                                   13166                     -255               1138
                                                    (4543)                   (2471)             (3347)
Employment-Population Ratio                          0.43                     -0.01              -0.01
                                                    (0.07)                   (0.04)             (0.06)
Percent White                                        0.73                     -0.02               0.03
                                                    (0.19)                   (0.11)             (0.14)
Percent Black                                        0.03                      0.00              -0.03
                                                    (0.04)                   (0.02)             (0.03)
Percent Less Than 17                                 0.28                      0.00              -0.05
                                                    (0.05)                   (0.03)             (0.04)
Percent Greater Than 65                              0.12                      0.00               0.05
                                                    (0.05)                   (0.03)             (0.04)
Percent College Graduate                             0.15                     -0.02               0.01
                                                    (0.09)                   (0.05)             (0.07)
Percent High School Graduate                         0.70                     -0.02              -0.01
                                                    (0.16)                   (0.09)             (0.11)
Population                                          31614                    12925             -38903*
                                                   (33827)                  (18898)            (21106)
Mayor-Council Government                             0.16                     -0.01               0.04
                                                    (0.40)                   (0.24)             (0.32)
Elected Clerk                                        0.90                    -0.30*              -0.30
                                                    (0.30)                   (0.17)             (0.23)
Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data CEDA data from 1992 to 2006, 1990 Decennial Census
data, and 1992 Census of Governments data.. The sample includes all general law cites in California with a
municipal government in the 1992 Census of Governments, positive interest expenses in each year, and an
appointive treasurer referendum put to voters in a future year. The variable Treasurer Appointive
Referendum Pass takes a value of one if a local treasurer appointive referendum passed in a future year in
city i. The unit of observation is city (n=31). Each entry in columns (2) and (3) presents the results from
one regression specification. The main entries are coefficient estimates. The entries in parentheses are
standard errors. The models in columns (2) and (3) control for a linear and cubic polynomial in vote share
respectively.* indicates significantly different from zero at the 10% level of significance; ** indicates
significantly different from zero at the 5% level of significance; *** indicates significantly different from
zero at 1% level of significance.




                                                     43
FIGURE 1: Weekly Municipal Bond and Note Market Interest Rates, 1996-2006
                  9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5 Year Note
                  8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20 Year AAA Bond


                  7


                  6
  Interest Rate




                  5


                  4


                  3


                  2


                  1


                  0
                                  7/20/1995




                                                                                                                                               1/20/2000



                                                                                                                                                                        1/20/2001

                                                                                                                                                                                    7/20/2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                1/20/2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                            7/20/2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/20/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7/20/2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/20/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7/20/2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1/20/2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7/20/2005



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/20/2006
                      1/20/1995



                                              1/20/1996

                                                          7/20/1996

                                                                      1/20/1997

                                                                                  7/20/1997

                                                                                              1/20/1998

                                                                                                          7/20/1998

                                                                                                                      1/20/1999

                                                                                                                                  7/20/1999



                                                                                                                                                           7/20/2000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/20/2006
                                                                                                                                                                       Date

Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from Global Financial Database – US Municipal
Government Bond Yields.

FIGURE 2: Appointive Treasurer Referendum Vote Distribution
                      4
                      3
        Density
        2             1
                      0




                                                    .2                                                       .3                                        .4                                                                           .5                                                          .6
                                                                                                                                              Percent in Favor

Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California Elections Data Archive
(CEDA) data from 1995 to 2006.




                                                                                                                                                                                    44
FIGURE 3: Treasurer Appointive Effect


                       8
  Interest Rate on Total Outstanding Debt
         2           4 0          6




                                            -.3   -.2        -.1            0        .1
                                                        Margin of Victory

Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions
Report, and CEDA data from 1992 to 2008. The sample includes all general law cites in
California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of Governments, positive interest
expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters in a prior year.
The figure plots the Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt by the margin of victory in
the treasurer appointive referendum. The line plots the predicted values of a regression of
the interest rate on a referendum pass indicator, and a linear polynomial in referendum vote share.




                                                                    45
FIGURE 4: Treasurer Appointive Effect Prior to Treasurer Appointive Measure Vote


                       20
  Interest Rate on Total Outstanding Debt
      0          5     -5 10       15




                                            -.3   -.2        -.1            0         .1
                                                        Margin of Victory

Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions
Report, and CEDA data from 1992 to 2008. The sample includes all general law cites in
California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of Governments, positive interest
expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters in a future year.
The figure plots the Interest Rate Paid on Total Outstanding Debt by the margin of victory in
the future treasurer appointive referendum. The line plots the predicted values of a regression of
the interest rate on a future referendum pass indicator, and a linear polynomial in referendum
vote share.




                                                                   46
FIGURE 5: Appointive Effect on Fiscal Policy

            (a) Total Expenditure
                 4000      3000
   Total Expenditure per capita
  1000        2000
                 0




                                  -.3   -.2        -.1            0                .1
                                              Margin of Victory

Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions
Report, and CEDA data from 1992 to 2008. The sample includes all general law cites in
California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of Governments, positive interest
expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters in a prior year.
The figure plots the Total Expenditure per capita by the margin of victory in the treasurer
appointive referendum. The line plots the predicted values of a regression of the Total
Expenditure per capita on a referendum pass indicator, and a linear polynomial in referendum
vote share.




                                                         47
              (b) Total Local Source Revenue


                     1500
  Total Local Source Revenue per capita
           500       0    1000




                                          -.3   -.2        -.1            0        .1
                                                      Margin of Victory

Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions
Report, and CEDA data from 1992 to 2008. The sample includes all general law cites in
California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of Governments, positive interest
expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters in a prior year.
The figure plots the Total Local Source Revenue per capita by the margin of victory in the
treasurer appointive referendum. The line plots the predicted values of a regression of the
Total Local Source Revenue per capita on a referendum pass indicator, and a linear
polynomial in referendum vote share.




                                                                 48
             (c) Total Debt Outstanding


                    8000
   Total Outstanding Debt per capita
    2000         4000
                    0        6000




                                       -.3   -.2        -.1            0                .1
                                                   Margin of Victory

Notes: Source: Author’s calculations using data from California City Financial Transactions
Report, and CEDA data from 1992 to 2008. The sample includes all general law cites in
California with a municipal government in the 1992 Census of Governments, positive interest
expenses in each year, and an appointive treasurer referendum put to voters in a prior year.
The figure plots the Total Debt Outstanding per capita by the margin of victory in the treasurer
appointive referendum. The line plots the predicted values of a regression of the Total
Debt Outstanding per capita on a referendum pass indicator, and a linear polynomial in
referendum vote share.




                                                             49
