NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION ON WORKER EFFORT:
EVIDENCE FROM PUBLIC SCHOOLING
Brian A. Jacob
Working Paper 15655
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15655

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

Generous financial support was provided by the William T. Grant Foundation. Thanks to Nancy Slavin,
Raquel Saucedo, Art Kim, Joshua Garcia, Lauren McClellan, Amy Nowell, Dan Bugler, Ascencion
Juarez and Angela Alonzo at the Chicago Public Schools, and to Tim Daly and Andy Sokatch at The
New Teacher Project. Thanks to Elias Walsh, Mimi Engel, Sharon Traiberman and Stephanie Rennane
for excellent research assistance. Thanks to Kerwin Charles, John DiNardo, Lars Lefgren, Jonah Rockoff
and Ioana Marinescu and seminar participants at the University of Michigan, University of Chicago,
University of Wisconsin, Madison and UC Davis for helpful comments and suggestions. Any errors
are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Brian A. Jacob. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Effect of Employment Protection on Worker Effort: Evidence from Public Schooling
Brian A. Jacob
NBER Working Paper No. 15655
January 2010
JEL No. I20,I21,I28,J3,J45,J5,J63
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the effect of employment protection on worker productivity and firm output in the
context of a public school system. In 2004, the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) and Chicago Teachers
Union (CTU) signed a new collective bargaining agreement that gave principals the flexibility to dismiss
probationary teachers (defined as those with less than five years of experience) for any reason, and
without the elaborate documentation and hearing process typical in many large, urban school districts.
Results suggest that the policy reduced annual teacher absences by roughly 10 percent and reduced
the prevalence of teachers with 15 or more annual absences by 20 percent. The effects were strongest
among teachers in elementary schools and in low-achieving, predominantly African-American high
schools, and among teachers with highpredicted absences. There is also evidence that the impact of
the policy increased substantially after its first year.

Brian A. Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu

“What kind of person could you get to run a small business if you told them that when they came
in they couldn't get rid of people that they thought weren't any good?”
Apple Cofounder and CEO Steve Jobs, referring to the importance of staffing in public
schools
1. Introduction
Economists have long argued that the lack of incentives in most public school systems
substantially reduces student performance and increases the cost of education (Hanushek 1994;
Hoxby 2003). Teacher employment and compensation policy is one of the most commonly cited
instances of weak incentives leading to suboptimal outcomes. As reflected in the quote by Steve
Jobs, labor contracts in most public school districts make it extremely difficult for administrators
to dismiss teachers for cause. In New York City, for example, only about 50 out of roughly
75,000 teachers were dismissed for performance-related reasons in recent years.1
Recent “value-added” studies on teacher effectiveness documenting substantial variation
in teacher effectiveness both within and between schools (e.g., Steven G. Rivkin, et al., 2005,
Jonah E. Rockoff, 2004) have intensified the scrutiny of teacher hiring, promotion and
compensation policies.2 Many school districts have begun to experiment with pay-forperformance plans, and there is increasing discussion of ways to change to the teacher tenure
system that would provide school administrators with greater flexibility over staffing. The
Chancellor of the Washington, D.C. public schools, for example, recently proposed to substitute

1

Personal communication with Jonah Rockoff, February 19, 2008.
In general, variance estimates indicate that a student with a teacher one standard deviation above the mean would
score roughly .2 student-level standard deviations higher on standardized math exams. The magnitude of this effect
is roughly equivalent to the effect of class size reduction found in the highly acclaimed Tennessee STAR class size
reduction experiment, although it should be noted that recent evidence suggests that the impact of having a
particularly effective (or ineffective) teacher as measured by value-added fades out considerably within a year or
two (see, for example, Jacob et al. Forthcoming).
2

2

higher teacher salaries in exchange for a suspension of tenure privileges for one year (Haynes
2008).
And, yet, there is little empirical evidence on whether such incentives will change teacher
behavior or improve student achievement. Evidence on merit pay is mixed (Springer and
Podgursky 2008, Lavy 2008). There is some evidence that school accountability can improve
student achievement, but these policies (including the federal No Child Left Behind program)
provide few direct incentives for teachers as they do not change teacher compensation and
teachers’ job security is still (mostly) guaranteed by collective bargaining agreements. To the
best of my knowledge, there is no direct evidence whatsoever on whether policies such as those
commonly cited by observers such as Steve Jobs – namely those that reduce employment
protections for teachers – will actually improve productivity. Indeed, several recent reports
document that existing teacher contracts in many large urban school districts actually provide
considerably more flexibility than is commonly believed and yet administrators rarely take
advantage of such flexibility (Ballou 2000, Hess and Loup 2008, Price 2009).
In this paper, I take advantage of a unique policy change to examine how the reduction of
employment protection for teachers impacts teacher effort and student achievement. In 2004, the
Chicago Public Schools (CPS) and Chicago Teachers Union (CTU) signed a new collective
bargaining agreement that gave principals the flexibility to dismiss probationary teachers for any
reason, and without the documentation and hearing process that is typically required for teacher
dismissals. In practice, this dramatically reduced the costs associated with firing young teachers
in the district.3

3

An informal survey of the 10 largest school districts in the country revealed that principals in these districts do not
have the flexibility that Chicago principals were recently granted.

3

To identify the impact of the policy on teacher effort, I utilize a difference-in-difference
estimator that compares changes in teacher absences before and after the policy for probationary
versus tenured teachers. As described in more detail below, employee absences have been used
in studies of employment protection in other industries, and provide a particularly good proxy for
productivity in education. The results suggest that the policy reduced annual teacher absences by
roughly 10 percent and reduced the prevalence of teachers with 15 or more annual absences by
20 percent. The effects were strongest among teachers in elementary schools and in lowachieving, predominantly African-American high schools, and among teachers with highpredicted absences.
While student achievement is a more direct measure of teacher productivity, it is not
possible to link students to teachers in Chicago over the relevant time period, making it
impossible to calculate individual teacher productivity measures.4 For this reason, I rely on
school-year data to examine the impact of the policy change on student achievement, comparing
within-school changes in student achievement over time between schools with higher versus
lower fractions of probationary teachers at the time the policy was implemented.5 I find some
tentative evidence that the policy increased student achievement at the elementary level,
although the results are not particularly robust. Additionally, I find that the effects on teacher
absences likely explain only a small part of the achievement effects, suggesting that the policy
may have impacted teacher behavior in many ways.

4

Moreover, even in the best circumstance, a measure of teacher productivity based on student achievement would
not be available for the large fraction of teachers in grades and subjects where students do not take standardized
exams.
5
While average teacher experience in a school is correlated with student achievement and socioeconomic status, I
show that there is substantial variation in the fraction of probationary teachers across observationally similar
schools. Moreover, by examining within-school changes over time, I can control for any unobservable timeinvariant characteristics of schools that might be associated with initial teacher experience levels and subsequent
student achievement (e.g., a particularly dangerous neighborhood, aging school facilities).

4

This study makes several important contributions. First, it informs the economic
literatures on employment protection policies and teacher incentives. To the best of my
knowledge, it is one of the few empirical studies of the impact of employment protection on
worker effort, and the only study to directly examine this issue in the public sector. By using
detailed administrative data that provides employee- and firm-level productivity measures, and
exploiting a plausibly exogenous source of variation in employment protection, the analysis here
provides among the most compelling evidence on these important issues. Second, the findings
presented here have important implications for current education policy debates. Specifically,
the decline in teacher absenteeism following the introduction of the policy provides the most
compelling evidence to date that changes in teacher contract provisions can improve student
achievement.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the prior literature on
employment protection and teacher incentives. Section 3 provides background on teacher
dismissals in the Chicago Public Schools, and outlines a conceptual framework to help
understand the ways in which the policy might influence teacher effort and school productivity.
Sections IV and V describe the empirical strategy and data respectively. Section VI presents the
results, and Section VII concludes.

2. Prior Evidence
The analysis in this paper speaks most directly to the economics literature on
employment protection. Most previous research in this area focuses on how employment
protection can inhibit a firm from adjusting in response to economic shocks or changes in
technology and examines outcomes such as worker mobility and employment levels (Bertola

5

1990; Lazear 1990; Hopenhayn and Rogerson 1993).6 However, firms may also want to
dismiss workers because of poor performance, in which case one would be concerned with the
impact of employment protections on worker effort and firm productivity.
Surprisingly few studies have examined the impact of employment protection on worker
behavior. In the study most closely related to our analysis, Ichino and Riphahn (2004) use
detailed personnel data from an Italian Bank to examine whether worker absenteeism changes
after the three-month mark, when bank employees are granted tenure. Looking at changes in
absenteeism within employers over time, the authors find that when men get tenure their absence
rate more than triples. Interestingly, they find no comparable effect for women.
Martins (2009) examines the impact of legislation that restricted firings for cause in
Portugal, using a difference-in-difference approach that exploits the fact that many provisions of
the law did not apply to small firms. While he does not find any robust effects on job or worker
flows, the author does find that small firms experienced sizeable increases in their performance
(as measured by sales per worker) relative to large firms after the introduction of the legislation.
The author finds no evidence of either capital deepening or observable changes in worker
composition in small firms, leading him to conclude that the effect is driven by increases in
worker effort and/or changes in management practices.
Several other studies examine the effects on worker behavior less directly. For example,
a related line of research examines the impact of wrongful discharge laws in the United States.7

6

While employment protection should unambiguously reduce job flows, in many models the theoretical impact of
employment protection on employment levels is ambiguous, as higher firing costs reduce both firing and hiring
(Bertola 1992). Recent research using worker- or firm-level data show is mixed, although there is some evidence
that commonly adopted employment protection may reduce job mobility and employment (for important recent
papers in this literature, see Kugler 1999, Hunt 2000, Bauer et al. 2007, Friesen 2005, Kugler and Pica 2007, Autor
et al. 2006, Marinescu 2009).
7
In a series of more recent papers, Autor et al. (2004, 2006 and 2007) reconcile the conflicting findings from prior
research and find evidence that one wrongful-discharge provision (i.e., the implied-contract exception) reduced

6

Using the variation in dismissal costs generated by the adoption of wrongful-discharge protection
by state courts, Autor et al. (2007) find that one of three main wrongful-discharge provisions, the
good-faith exception, seems to decrease total factor productivity. However, the authors caution
that this result is not particularly robust, in part because the good-faith exception does not seem
to impact employment or wages. Indeed, the one provision that the authors find does impact
employment, the implied-contract exception, does not seem to impact productivity.8
This paper also speaks to the growing literature on teacher incentives, a line of research
that fits within the broader work on employee incentives within the personnel economics
literature (see Pendergast 1999 for a review of the literature on employee incentives). Research
on teacher incentives has focused on two types of policies that arguably provide enhanced
incentives for teacher performance: merit pay or other compensation schemes that link pay to
student performance, and school accountability policies that tie rewards or sanctions to student
performance. Two recent reviews of pay-for-performance in education conclude that the
existing evidence on merit pay is limited and shows mixed results (Springer and Podgursky
2008, Lavy 2008). There is some compelling evidence that well-structured teacher incentives
can substantially improve student performance, but this research comes from developing
countries like Kenya and India and may not generalize well to schooling in developed countries.9

employment rates, but that the two other major provisions (i.e., the public-policy and good-faith exceptions) had no
robust employment or wage effects.
8
Using similar variation as Autor et al. (2006), Bird and Knopf (2009) find that wrongful discharge protections
increased labor expenses and reduced profitability in the commercial banking sector and Petrin and Sivadasan
(2006) find that employment protection increased the gap between marginal revenue product and wages. Besley and
Burgess (2004) find that Indian states that reformed laws in a pro-worker direction experienced lower output,
employment, investment and productivity in the formal sector, as Ill as an increase in urban poverty.
9
While pay-for-performance has been around for many years in public education, it has received increasing
attention in recent years. This has led to a dramatic increase in the number of districts experimenting with some
form of merit pay, and to more research on the impact of such policies. Several ongoing studies, including a random
assignment evaluation in Nashville, TN, promise to shed more light on the prospects for merit pay in education.

7

In the area of school accountability, some evidence suggests that policies that link
consequential sanctions to student performance do improve student achievement, particularly in
math (Jacob 2005, Hanushek and Raymond 2005). Similarly, Dee and Jacob (2009) find that the
federal No Child Left Behind legislation increased math performance. On the other hand, there
is evidence that such accountability policies often lead to unintended, negative consequences
(Jacob 2005, Figlio and Winick 2005, Neal and Schanzenbach 2009). Furthermore, school
accountability policies, including the federal No Child Left Behind Act, provide no direct
incentives for teachers and thus do not provide a compelling test of the type of employment
protection policies studied here.
Finally, a recent paper provides evidence that teachers respond to the implicit incentives
generated by career concerns. Using data on public school teachers in North Carolina, Hansen
(2009a) finds that teacher absences are positively correlated with both experience and tenure in a
particular school, and absences increase dramatically in the year prior teacher retirement or
departure. While this study sheds light on teacher incentives broadly, it does not speak directly
to the potential impact of a change in teacher tenure policy.

3. Background

3.1 Teacher Dismissal Policy in the Chicago Public Schools
As in many public school districts, teacher layoffs and dismissals in the Chicago Public
Schools are highly regulated. In situations where teacher positions must be eliminated due to
enrollment changes or a budget shortfall, the collective bargaining agreement outlines a

8

procedure by which the least experienced teachers are let go first. This is typically known as a
reduction-in-force (RIF).
In the past, it has been extremely difficult for principals to dismiss teachers outside the
auspices of a RIF. Like most other districts, the collective bargaining agreement in Chicago
provides considerable protection for tenured teachers that make it very time-consuming and
difficult for principals to dismiss these teachers for cause. Unlike many smaller, suburban
districts in Illinois, however, the collective bargaining agreement in Chicago also made it very
difficult for principals to dismiss non-tenured teachers. Perhaps for this reason, formal principal
evaluations in Chicago are remarkably generous. In 2007, for example, only 15 out of the
11,621 teachers who were evaluated in 2007 received a rating of unsatisfactory, and only 641 out
of 11,621 (roughly 5.5 percent) received a rating of satisfactory. The remaining teachers were
rated excellent or superior.
The adoption of a new collective bargaining agreement on July 1, 2004 made substantial
changes to the tenure system in Chicago that, for the first time in the 2004-05 school year,
provided principals with the ability to easily dismiss non-tenured teachers. So, in the analysis
that follows, the academic years 2001-02 through 2003-04 constitute the “pre-policy” period and
the academic years 2004-05 through 2006-07 constitute the “post-policy” period. The July 2004
contract created a new three-tiered classification system for Chicago teachers: (1) Temporarily
Assigned Teachers (TATs) include individuals who are in a temporary placement (such as a
long-term substitute who is filling in for a teacher on leave) and are not earning tenure; (2)
Probationary Appointed Teachers (PATs) include individuals who have been regularly appointed
to a position but have been teaching for fewer than five consecutive years (i.e., during this
period, Chicago teachers received tenure after four years of service) and; (3) tenured teachers.

9

Non-renewal works in the following way. Each February, principals are able to log into a
district computer system that has a list of all of the PATs in their school. The principal can then
check one of two boxes: renew or non-renew.10 The administrative ease with which
administrators can dismiss a probationary teacher – with a simple “click” of a button – is
noteworthy. In essence, the collective bargaining agreement adopted in July 2004 dramatically
reduced the costs of firing a probationary teacher in the district. This policy change made
Chicago the only large, public school district in the country to provide principals with this type
of flexibility over personnel decisions.11
Teachers are notified by formal letter of non-renewal sometime in late April or early
May. If a principal chooses to non-renew a teacher, the teacher is guaranteed health benefits
through August 31st of the current year, and is allowed to reapply to positions in other Chicago
public schools. Moreover, the teacher is eligible for unemployment benefits as non-renewal is
viewed as a layoff rather than a dismissal for cause.12 However, non-renewed teachers are not
guaranteed another job in the CPS.13 Although principals are required to provide district

10

If the principal checks the “non-renewal” box, he or she must check indicate at least one of the following five
reasons for the non-renewal: deficiencies with instruction (e.g., planning, methods, subject matter knowledge),
deficiencies with environment (e.g., classroom management, teacher-pupil relationships), deficiencies with
professional and personal responsibilities (e.g., attendance, tardiness, professional judgment), deficiencies with
communication (e.g., parent conference skills, relations with staff), or deficiencies with attitude (e.g., lack of
cooperation, lack of respect for others).
11
Principals are not required to make any decision for a particular teacher. If a principal either chooses to renew a
PAT or takes no action, then the teacher is still eligible to be laid off through the standard RIF process.
12
PATs who are rehired by November 1st will not experience a break in service for tenure purposes.
13
PATs who are displaced through the standard RIF process are also guaranteed health benefits through August 31st
and eligible for unemployment insurance. However, they are also guaranteed a position as a cadre teacher, which
means that they are guaranteed work as a substitute every day and receive a higher rate of pay and better benefits
than a day-to-day substitute. In contrast, non-renewed teachers have to apply to be a cadre teacher, and are accepted
on a case-by-case basis after displaced PATs. Tenured teachers who are displaced through the RIF process receive
even more benefits. Personal communication with Nancy Slavin, Director of Teacher Recruitment, Chicago Public
Schools, June 22, 2007.

10

officials with at least one reason for the non-renewal decision, they are not required to justify or
explain their decision and they do not need to provide teachers with this reason.14

3.2 Conceptual Framework
A simple economic model suggests that the reduction in firing costs could influence
worker effort and productivity15 in one of two primary ways: by changing the behavior of
existing workers and/or by changing the composition of workers in the firm. For many workers,
lower firing costs will induce greater effort by creating a stronger link between job performance
and continued employment. Lower firing costs could also change the composition of workers in
the firm. If the effort required to avoid dismissal is sufficiently costly for a particular employee,
for example, the policy might induce her to quit. Perhaps more importantly, the reduction in
firing costs will likely lead the firm to dismiss a larger fraction of workers.
The impact of such compositional changes on worker productivity depends on a variety
of factors including the principal preferences (e.g., the type of teacher the principal chooses to
dismiss and the type hired as the replacement) and the elasticity of supply for teacher quality.16
If teachers dismiss probationary teachers with below average productivity, supply is relatively
inelastic, and principals do not change their hiring behavior, then one would expect the average
productivity in the school to rise over time.17

14

If a principal chooses to non-renew a PAT in his or her fourth year (that is, immediately prior to tenure), the
principal is required to inform the teacher which reason(s) were listed, but is not required to further justify or explain
the decision.
15
I use the term effort and productivity interchangeably in this discussion.
16
In other work, I estimate the relative weight that school administrators place on a variety of teacher characteristics
in making dismissal decisions (Jacob 2009). I find principals are significantly more likely to dismiss teachers who
are frequently absent, have received poor evaluations in the past and are less effective at raising student
achievement, all of which suggests potential composition effects.
17
The policy might also impact worker productivity by altering hiring practices in other ways. The ability to easily
dismiss probationary teachers essentially decreases the cost of hiring a new teacher if one considers the expected
difficulty of dismissing an ineffective teacher as part of the cost. All else equal, this will increase a principal’s

11

There are several other potential channels through which a reduction in firing costs
among a subset of teacher might influence teacher productivity. First, the policy might also
operate through spillovers from probationary to tenured teachers. To the extent that there are
substantial complementarities across teachers within the same school, the policy might increase
the productivity of tenured teachers who were not directly affected by the renewal policy. If, for
example, the three 5th grade teachers in a particular school work together to plan activities,
greater effort and commitment on the part of the one probationary teacher could benefit the two
tenured teachers (Jackson and Bruegmann 2009).18
Second, the reduction in firing costs may lead to a change in management practices
(Martins 2009). For example, the policy may induce school principals to adjust aspects of the
school organization, curriculum or pedagogy. Based on my informal interviews with several
principals and discussions with central office personnel, this does not appear to have occurred
much, if at all. Finally, the policy could impact productivity by influencing teacher supply more
generally. The introduction of the renewal policy increased the risk associated with a new
teaching position in the CPS. In the absence of any increase in financial compensation, the
policy will make teaching positions in the CPS less attractive for risk-averse individuals, which

likelihood of hiring a “higher-risk” teacher – that is, a teacher about whom the principal has less information with
regard to job performance. For example, the introduction of the renewal policy might make principals more inclined
to hire teachers with alternative certification, or individuals entering teaching as a second career. Assuming that
principals are risk-averse in their hiring practices, this might increase the overall productivity of the teacher
workforce. Moreover, to the extent that principals differ in their ability to identify effective teachers (pre- or posthire), this policy might exacerbate across-school differences in teacher quality.
18
Autor (2003) notes that employment protection policies may reduce the incentive of employees to invest in firmspecific skills, which could lower productivity.

12

will tend to shift the supply curve inward.19 In practice, however, this does not seem to have
happened in Chicago.20

3.3 Some Basic Facts about Teacher Dismissals
Table 1 provides summary statistics on the prevalence of teacher dismissal under this
new policy. Several interesting facts stand out. First, while roughly 10-13 percent of
probationary teachers were dismissed each year under the new policy, 30-40 of schools did not
dismiss any teachers. This did not change dramatically between 2005 and 2007. Younger
probationary teachers were substantially more likely to be dismissed than others, consistent with
the idea that principals learn the most about a new teacher in his or her first year.
While there was a positive correlation between low student performance and the
prevalence of teacher dismissal in a school, it was not merely high-performing schools that failed
to dismiss any of their teachers. In 2005, 65 percent of schools in the lowest quartile of student
achievement in the district dismissed at least one teacher compared with 46 percent of the
highest-achieving schools in the district. Splits using school value-added measures yield
comparable results.
In other work, I show that once one controls for teacher background characteristics,
factors such as school achievement level and racial composition of the school are not correlated
with the school’s dismissal rate (Jacob 2007). Indeed, a rich set of observable teacher, school

19

Note that this could influence teacher supply decisions with regard to accepting a position in the CPS initially as
well as continuing to teach in the CPS in subsequent years.
20
Based on my conversations with district officials and a review of teacher application files over this period, it
appears that neither the number of applicants per available position nor the observable characteristics of applicants
changed noticeably after the introduction of the policy. Moreover, the number of voluntary exits among new
teachers has not increased in recent years, although this statistic may be misleading if, prior to the policy, a larger
fraction of the officially voluntary exits were actually “encouraged” on the part of school administrators.
Unfortunately, there is no way to distinguish truly voluntary versus involuntary exits prior to the introduction of the
policy.

13

and principal characteristics explain less than 10 percent of the variation in teacher dismissal
under the new policy. This suggests that there was considerable variation across principals in the
willingness to utilize this particular policy lever.
Finally, it is worth noting that in any given year, over half of the dismissed teachers were
rehired the following year by another school in the district. For example, 50.6% of first-year
probationary teachers who were dismissed in Spring 2005 were rehired by a CPS school in Fall
2005. Among third- and fourth-year probationary teachers who were dismissed, the rate was
over 60%. Given the fact that at least some of the dismissals under the policy were the result of
position cuts, in which case the teacher’s former principal may have provided the teacher with a
good recommendation, it is not surprising that some fraction of dismissed teachers were rehired.
However, it is also likely that some fraction of teachers dismissed due to poor performance were
also rehired by other CPS schools. It is not clear why principals would rehire teachers who had
been dismissed from a different school for performance reasons. Non-renewal decisions are not
made public to all principals in the district, but a hiring principal could almost certainly get this
information by contacting the candidate’s former principal.
These statistics seem to suggest that the introduction of the dismissal policy had a large
impact on job separations in the district. However, the numbers of teachers who were nonrenewed in any given year likely overstates the impact of the policy because a number of young
teachers would likely have left the CPS in the absence of the policy, either voluntarily or due to
subtle “encouragement” on the part of the principals. If the dismissal policy merely formalized
previously informal dismissals, then one would not necessarily expect to find a substantial
change in separations. Even in this case, however, the policy may have influenced teacher
productivity if it changed the expectation or transparency of the dismissal process.

14

To shed light on these issues, Table 2 presents statistics on teacher mobility before and
after the implementation of the non-renewal policy. In the years prior to the introduction of the
policy, roughly 10-15 percent of first-year teachers probationary teachers left the CPS and an
additional 4 percent moved to a different CPS school. In the years after the policy, the
corresponding rates were roughly 18 and 10 percent respectively. Comparing the year
immediately prior to the policy (2004) with the first two years of the policy (2005 and 2006), the
separation rate increased by roughly 9 percentage points (10 percent) in years immediately
following the policy. In contrast, there was virtually no change among more experienced
teachers (i.e., those with 6-15 years of experience) who were not subject to the policy.21 In
summary, the dismissal policy appears to have had at least a modest impact on teacher
separations, although the impact is not as large as the overall nonrenewal numbers would
suggest.22

4. Empirical Strategy
To estimate the impact of the policy on teacher productivity, I utilize a simple differencein-difference (DD) estimator that compares changes in absence rates between teachers who were
subject to the policy and those who were not. The control group in the baseline analysis consists
of all tenured teachers, although I later show that our results are robust to other plausible control
21

Interestingly, I see a quite different pattern among temporary teachers. The separation rates for this group appears
to have decreased following the introduction of the policy. It is not clear what might explain this pattern among
temporary teachers, except that perhaps principals may have kept temporary teachers in part to replace the
probationary teachers that they were able to dismiss.
22
An alternate strategy for estimating the fraction of dismissed teachers who would not have left voluntarily is to
compare the separation rates of renewed vs. non-renewed teachers under the new policy. Among those first-year
teachers in 2004-05 who were renewed, only 89 percent were teaching in the CPS in the following year (and 11
percent left voluntarily). In comparison, 56 percent of first-year teachers who were not renewed in 2004-05 ended
up teaching in the CPS in the following year. Assuming that 11 percent of the non-renewed teachers would have left
voluntarily as was the case with the renewed teachers, I can calculate that 75 percent [(.44-.11)/(.44) = .75 ] of the
separations among non-renewed teachers were involuntary; or rather, would not have occurred in the absence of the
policy.

15

groups (e.g., only young, tenured teachers). I include both probationary and temporary teachers
as treatment groups. As described above, probationary teachers were directly affected by the
policy. Temporary teachers include individuals who are not fully credentialed and were (in
theory) easier to dismiss even before the introduction of the new policy. Under the new policy,
they are first in line for layoffs and easier to dismiss than PATs or tenured teachers. Given that
most temporary teachers hope to become probationary teachers, it seems likely that the dismissal
policy may have influenced their behavior as well. For this reason, I include temporary teachers
in our analysis but allow the policy to have a differential impact on this group relative to
probationary teachers.
For the baseline specification, I estimate the following regression via OLS:
(1)

,

where Aiset , refers to the number of absences of teacher i in school s with experience e (e.g., firstyear teacher, second-year teacher, etc.) in year t. As described below, the data includes
information on teachers from 2003-04 through 2006-07. The variable post is an indicator that
takes on the value of one in years following the introduction of the policy (i.e., 2005-2007). The
variables PAT and TAT are binary indicators for probationary and temporary teachers
respectively. Tenured teachers are the omitted category. Note that these job status variables are
time varying indicators so, for example, an individual teacher may appear as a PAT in one year
and a tenured teacher in subsequent years.23

23

One might be concerned about including probationary teachers who became tenured under the new policy. By
definition, these teachers were not dismissed, and thus presumably have higher productivity than the average teacher
from the same cohort. By including the post-tenure observations for these “survivors” in the analysis, one may be
inflating the productivity of the control group in later years. I later show that, in practice, the exclusion of these
teacher-year observations does not substantially change our estimates. Hence, for simplicity, I include them in the
baseline specification.

16

In all models, I also include time (i.e., academic year) fixed effects denoted by
fixed effects denoted by

, school

, and a full set of teacher experience indicators denoted by Exp. In

some specifications, I also include teacher characteristics (X) and school-year characteristics (Z)
as well. In equation (1), the coefficients on the interaction between PAT/TAT and post,

and

, measure the net effect of the policy.
As noted above, the policy can operate through both incentive and compositional effects.
Ideally, one would like to be able to separate these components. One potential approach is to
focus on within-teacher variation by estimating a variant of equation (1) that includes teacher
fixed effects.24 While this approach will eliminate any compositional effects, it will only identify
the policy impact for a select group of teachers. Specifically, the teacher fixed effect model will
not capture the policy effect for teachers hired in 2005 or later because, by construction, I will
not observe these teachers under both regimes. If there were homogeneous incentive effects, this
would not be a problem. But if the incentive effects of the policy were largest on these young,
newly hired teachers, which seems likely, then the estimates from a teacher fixed effect model
could be a misleading estimate of the average treatment effect.
More generally, if the incentive effects vary by calendar year and/or experience level, it
will not be possible to cleanly separate the incentive and composition effects. Unfortunately, this
also seems quite likely to be the case. For example, incentive effects may have been larger after
the first year of the policy, when teachers realized that there was a non-trivial chance of being
dismissed. Similarly, incentive effects may have been smaller for teachers who had “survived”
dismissal in prior years. I present effects separately by the calendar year and a teacher’s risk

24

In addition to focusing exclusively on the incentive effects, this approach allows one to rule out potential
confounders related to composition changes such as an unrelated influx of high quality individuals from other
occupations spurred by a weak local economy.

17

year (defined below), which shed some light on incentive and composition effects even if they do
not perfectly distinguish the two.

5. Data
The data for this study comes from several sources. Teacher personnel files provide
information on teacher background, current assignment and renewal decisions. I supplement this
teacher-level data with information on school demographics, principal characteristics from
personnel files, and student test score information.

5.1 Determining job status
To determine a teacher’s job status, I rely on administrative teacher assignment data
provided by the CPS. Starting in 2004-05, district files clearly identify whether a teacher is a
temporary, probationary or tenured teacher. In earlier years, temporary teachers are clearly
identified but the district did not utilize a comparable classification system for teachers for other
teachers, so I determine job status using other information. During the Spring/Summer of 2004,
the district conducted a thorough audit of all teachers in the system to determine which were to
be assigned probationary status for the 2004-05 school year. In doing so, this data provides a
teacher’s status in 2003-04. For teachers who were teaching in the district in 2003-04 (or later
years), I use their later job status to impute their job status as of 2002-03. For example, if an
individual was a second year probationary teacher in 2003-04, I consider them a first year
probationary teacher in 2002-03. If a teacher were tenured in 2003-04, then I assume that they
were also tenured in 2002-03 if they also had at least 5 years of experience as of 2002-03. If the
teacher had fewer than 5 years of experience in 2002-03, I consider this teacher probationary.

18

For teachers who left the system after 2002-03, I utilize a combination of experience and
assignment to determine job status. Specifically, if the individual had at least 5 years of
experience and was assigned to a position (as opposed to filling the position of another teacher
on leave, for example), then I consider the individual to be tenured. While this process is
necessarily imperfect, I believe that it is accurate for the vast majority of teachers and any
remaining measurement error should simply lead to attenuation of the policy effect.
There is one final complication regarding job status that is worth noting. Before the
introduction of the non-renewal policy, there was a category of teachers who were fully
credentialed, but not formally appointed to a position (i.e., not on the “tenure track”). These
unassigned teachers composed roughly one-quarter of all probationary teachers in 2003-04.
When the policy was implemented in 2004-05, all of these previously “unassigned” teachers
were formally appointed. At this point, they became first-year probationary teachers regardless
of the number of years they had been working as in the CPS. Hence, there is a wide range of
experience among PATs (as with TATs and tenured teachers). While these teachers were similar
to the appointed, non-tenured teachers prior to the introduction of the new policy in the sense
that both were, in theory, more easily dismissed than their tenured colleagues, there were also
important differences between the two groups. In practice, assigned teachers had more job
security than their unassigned colleagues. I include both unassigned and assigned teachers in the
baseline specifications (along with a full set of experience controls), and later present estimates
that focus on each group individually.

19

5.2 Measures of teacher productivity
Teacher absence data from payroll records serve as our primary measure of teacher
productivity. This measure is appealing for several reasons. First, absences are measured
extremely well in the payroll data and they are easily interpretable. Second, teacher absences
impose substantial financial costs on the district, which has to pay for substitute teachers, as well
as non-pecuniary costs on school administrators and other teachers who must juggle schedules to
accommodate an absent colleague. Third, several recent studies have documented that teacher
absences have a strong, negative association with student achievement, providing evidence that
this association is causal (Clotfelter et al. 2007, Miller et al. 2007).25 Indeed, in other work using
Chicago data from a similar time period, I show that a teacher’s absences are negatively
associated with principal evaluations of the teacher and with a teacher’s value-added contribution
to student achievement (Jacob and Walsh 2009). Finally, there is considerable evidence that
absences are at least partly discretionary. Research suggests that teacher absences are more
frequent on Mondays and Fridays (ERS 1980), higher among temporary teachers and correlated
with more general shirking in the workplace (Bradley et al. 2007) and negatively associated with
buy-back provisions that allow teachers to receive payment for unused absences (Ehrenberg et al.
1991). Hansen (2009a) finds that teacher absences in NC correspond to experience, tenure in a
school, the presence of a new principal and proximity to retirement in ways that would suggest
absences are a good proxy for discretionary effort.

25

Using North Carolina data, Clotfelter et al. (2007) employ teacher fixed effects and find that each 10 days of
teacher absences decrease student achievement by 2.6 percent of a standard deviation. Miller et al. (2007,
forthcoming) focus on one disadvantaged urban district and also use teacher fixed effects. They find that each 10
days of teacher absences reduce students’ mathematics achievement by 3.3 percent of a standard deviation. In the
context of a developing economy, Duflo and Hanna (2006) provide experimental evidence that teacher absences
reduce student performance.

20

Teachers in Chicago are allotted 10-12 paid sick or personal days per year. Teachers can
accumulate unused sick days across years, up to a maximum of 315 days. These days can be
cashed in upon leaving the district at a rate of 100% for those teachers retiring with at least 40
years of experience and at a 90% rate for teachers with 20-40 years of experience. In addition,
teachers get 3 personal days per year, which can be used for emergencies, religious holidays or
personal business. There are some restrictions regarding the use of personal days (e.g., teachers
cannot use all three days in succession and they cannot be used in the first or last week of school,
or on a day before or after a holiday), although unused personal days get banked as sick days.26
The primary outcome measure is simply the total number of days that each teacher was
absent during the academic year, which generally runs from the beginning of September through
mid-June, excluding “excused absences” for professional development or other sanctioned
activities.27 I also present results using indicators for frequent and/or inappropriate absences as
the outcome (e.g., indicator for 15+ absences during the year, number of absences on Fridays, or
fraction of total absences on Mondays or Fridays, etc.).
Table 3 presents summary statistics on the final sample of 33,600 teachers over 5 years
(117,420 teacher-year observations). Looking down column 1, one sees that roughly 77 percent
of teachers are women, 48 percent are white, 35 percent are Black and 14 percent are Hispanic.
The average age is 44 years, but 25 percent of teachers are less than 33 years old. Over 50
percent of teachers received a BA in education, and 16 percent of teachers in the sample had

26

Information on teacher absence policy comes from a review of the recent CPS teacher collective bargaining
agreements. Teachers with 13+ years of experience are entitled to 11 paid sick/personal days per year and (as of
2008) teachers with 18+ years of experience are entitled to 12 paid days. Starting in 2009, teachers were allowed to
accumulate up to 320 days of sick leave across years. Teachers who retire at age 65 or older they would get to cash
in 85% of their sick days. Teachers who retire before 65 years of age with less than 20 years of experience cannot
cash in any of their sick days. For leaves due to illness over 10 days, teachers must apply for a personal illness
leave.
27
Unfortunately, I do not have additional detail such as whether the teacher notified the principal ahead of time, or
simply did not show up in school.

21

failed at least one certification exam in the past, and 28 percent had never passed a certification
exam.28 Columns 2-7 present statistics separately for temporary, probationary and tenured
teachers in pre- and post-reform years. Prior to the introduction of the dismissal policy, the
average number of absences was roughly comparable across groups, although a slightly higher
fraction of temporary teachers had at least 15 absences per year. Most interestingly, one sees
that the number of absences drop by over 1 day per year (roughly 12 percent) for temporary and
probationary teachers, but decrease by less than half that amount among tenured teachers. These
descriptive statistics thus provide the first indication that the new dismissal policy may have
impacted teacher effort.

6. Results
I begin by showing the unadjusted trends of teacher absences by job status. Figure 1a
shows the trends in absences from 2003 through 2007 separately for tenured and untenured
teachers. The two groups appear to have roughly comparable absence rates in 2003 and 2004,
with the average teacher being absent a little more than 8 times during a year. Starting in 2005,
absences within both groups decline, but the change is noticeably larger among untenured
teachers. Trends in the fraction of “high-absence teachers” (i.e., teachers who are absent at least
15 times during a year), shown in Figure 1b, tell a similar story. Figures 2 and 3 present the
analogous trends for elementary and high school teachers respectively. In general, the patterns
are similar, though it appears that the impact of the dismissal policy was somewhat larger among
elementary school teachers.

28

The group that has never passed a certification exam mainly includes older teachers who were grandfathered into
the existing certification regime.

22

Table 4 presents baseline results from equation (1), which includes school, calendar year
and experience year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by school. The results shown in
column 1 imply that the dismissal policy reduced absences among probationary (temporary)
teachers by roughly .71 (.95), which corresponds to a reduction of roughly 8-10 percent of the
pre-reform mean.29
Columns 2-4 show estimates for several other potentially interesting absence measures.
In order to measure the impact of the policy on the incidence of serious shirking, column 2
focuses on the likelihood that a teacher was absent at least 15 days in the year, which
corresponds with the 75th percentile of the absence distribution. Results are comparable using
10+ and 20+ absences. The estimates suggest that the policy reduced the incidence of such
frequent absences by 2.2 percentage points (16 percent) and 4.9 percentage points (30 percent)
among probationary and temporary teachers respectively. Because prior literature has suggested
that Friday absences are more indicative of shirking than absences on other days, columns 3 and
4 focus exclusively on Friday absences. The results are largely the same.
While the point estimates for temporary teachers are slightly larger than those for
probationary teachers, in all but one outcome (15+ absences), the effects on the two groups are
not statistically different. Hence, for the sake of parsimony, subsequent tables present results
that combine probationary and temporary teachers. Columns 5-8 show these baseline estimates
for all untenured teachers (i.e., probationary and temporary) combined.

6.1 Sensitivity analyses
The results shown above suggest that the introduction of the dismissal policy led to a
modest reduction in teacher absences. However, this inference depends on a variety of
29

This is equivalent to an effect size of roughly the same size.

23

assumptions. Perhaps most importantly, I assume that there were no other explicit policies or
other unobserved factors that would have affected tenured and untenured teachers differentially
starting in 2005. In the context of the Chicago policy, one might be particularly concerned about
factors that were changing either the composition or incentives of new/younger teachers in
Chicago.
Based on a review of CPS policies during this time and informal conversations with
district administrators, it does not appear that there were any other programs that one would have
expected to influence outcomes such as teacher absenteeism differentially by job status (though
there were clearly a number of policies aimed at reforming low-performing schools, particularly
at the secondary level). While it is not possible to reliably judge prior trends based only two
years of data, Figures 1-3 do not reveal any substantial differences between probationary and
tenured teachers in the levels or changes in absences.
In addition, a particular feature of the policy implementation provides a further test of
this assumption. As described in the data section, before the introduction of the non-renewal
policy, there was a category of teachers who were fully credentialed, but not formally appointed
to a position (i.e., not on the “tenure track”). When the policy was implemented in 2004-05, all
of these teachers were formally appointed and became first-year probationary teachers regardless
of the number of years they had been working in the CPS. This effectively breaks the link
between teacher experience and probationary status, allowing one to assess whether the
purported policy effects are driven simply by changes among novice teachers.30

30

Even in the absence of this feature, there would have been some variation between teacher experience and job
status because the experience variables in the CPS files correspond with when the teacher began working in the
district in any capacity. A non-trivial fraction of teachers start in temporary or non-teaching positions, and then
transition into standard teacher roles. In addition, some teachers that transfer from other districts can start in a
higher job status.

24

Figures 4a and 4b show the trends in absences separately for teachers less than five years
of experience (tenure is earned after four years of service) and teachers with five or more years
of service (using the same samples as in Figures 1a and 1b). If one thought that unobserved prior
trends or concurrent policies most relevant for younger teachers were driving the apparent policy
impact, then one would expect the trends in Figure 4 to resemble those in Figure 1. However,
the new figures show a very different picture. Comparing the older versus younger teachers, I
see that the novice group has substantially fewer absences than more experienced teachers in all
years but the trends among the groups are nearly identical. This suggests that the results above
are not simply an artifact of some other unobserved phenomenon that disproportionately
influenced novice teachers in Chicago over this period. Column 9 in Table 4 shows estimates
that mirror Figures 4a – namely, our baseline specification but where the treatment group is
defined as teachers with less than five years of experience. Consistent with Figure 4a, there is no
treatment effect in this specification. Figures 5 and 6 present comparable trends separately for
elementary and high schools, revealing a similar pattern across the grade levels.
The model also assumes that the policy was unanticipated. If teachers were aware of the
impending changes during 2003-04, for example, then they may have altered their behavior in
ways that would bias the estimate (e.g., young teachers may have worked harder in an effort to
avoid dismissal in the following years, which would lead one to underestimate any productivity
improvements). My conversations with district administrators responsible for negotiating the
new collective bargaining agreement in 2004 suggest that neither teachers nor administrators
were aware of this policy until close to the time of ratification in July 2004.
A common concern in this type of analysis involves selective attrition. For example, one
might be concerned that the introduction of the policy led certain teachers to leave the system, or

25

discouraged other teachers from accepting jobs in the CPS. In this context, however, attrition
should be considered a legitimate compositional effect of the policy. As discussed above, while
it is quite difficult to cleanly distinguish between incentive and composition effects in our
analysis, I later present some results by calendar and risk year that speak to this issue.
Finally, the analysis assumes that there are no productivity spillovers between eligible
and ineligible teachers. If, for example, greater effort on the part of probationary teachers
induced greater effort on the part of tenured teachers in a school, the DD estimate would tend to
understate any positive impact of the policy. While it is possible that such spillovers exist, the
contention here is that these effects are likely to be small.
Table 5 shows that the main results described above are robust to a variety of alternative
specifications. Rows 2-4 show the results are roughly comparable regardless of whether one
measures absences using sick days, personal days or other absences. Row 5 shows that the
results fall but are still significant if one excludes observations with more than 40 absences,
under the assumption that these are cases of non-discretionary leaves for illness or other reasons.
Row 6 shows nearly identical results using only absences between September and March, prior
to the time when teachers may have heard they had been non-renewed. Row 7 shows that the
results are robust to limiting the control group to include only young (i.e., teachers with 5-10
years of experience) tenured teachers.
Rows 8-9 present results separately using pre-policy assigned and unassigned
probationary teachers respectively. In doing so, we limit the analysis to probationary teachers
who were in the CPS in 2004 since teachers hired after this year were automatically assigned.
When we limit the comparison group to the roughly 23 percent of pre-policy PATs who were not
assigned to positions, the dismissal policy does not appear to impact teacher effort. It turns out

26

that this is driven by the fact that these unassigned probationary teachers were more productive
(i.e., had fewer absences, conditional on all other observables) than the assigned probationary
teachers prior to the policy. This is consistent with fact that unassigned teachers had less job
security than assigned teachers prior to the policy, and may have been exerting greater effort in
the absence of the policy.
Rows 10-13 show that the results are not particularly sensitive to the inclusion of school
fixed effects, school-year characteristics or teacher demographics. Finally, in results not
reported here but available upon request, I demonstrate that alternative estimates of the standard
errors do not have an important effect on the inferences one would draw from the results,
including clustering on teacher or experience instead of school as well as a two-way clustering of
school and experience or teacher and school.

6.2 Treatment effect heterogeneity
Table 6 shows how the effect of the policy varies by school characteristics. The first
thing to see is that the impact was roughly 2.5 times larger in elementary schools than in high
schools. Moreover, there was significantly more variation in the policy effect across high
schools than across elementary schools. In elementary schools, for example, the impacts were
roughly equivalent in higher- and lower-performing schools (columns 2-3) and across
predominantly Hispanic, predominantly African-American and racially mixed elementary
schools (columns 4-6). In high schools, by contrast, the effects were concentrated in lowachieving and predominantly African-American schools. In results not reported here, I find that
the policy effects in high schools (but not elementary schools) were concentrated in schools with
younger principals (i.e., under the age of 50).

27

It is also possible that the policy effect may have varied with the fraction of teachers in
the school who were probationary, and thus subject to the new policy. For example, the policy
may have been more salient in schools with a large fraction of probationary teachers. To
examine this, columns 7-9 show results separately for schools by fraction probationary terciles.
For elementary schools, we find no significant differences across subgroup. In high schools, we
find the largest effects in the top and bottom terciles, although the differences are not statistically
significant.
Table 7 shows results separately for various teacher subgroups. Interestingly, the policy
seems to have had a significantly higher impact on younger and female teachers relative to older
and male teachers. Given that females had higher rates of absenteeism prior to the introduction
of the policy, it may be the case that the policy reduced absences among those at highest risk of
absenteeism. To explore this more formally, I predict absence rates based on observable teacher,
principal and school characteristics using the pre-reform data, and then estimate the policy
effects separately for the top, middle and bottom third of the predicted teacher absence
distribution. As expected, the policy had a significantly larger impact on teachers with
moderate- and high-predicted absences relative to those with low predicted absences. In high
schools, it appears that the impacts were concentrated primarily among Black teachers. In results
not reported here, I confirm that this is not simply because Black teachers disproportionately
work in low-achieving high schools that experienced the largest policy effects.
Table 8 examines whether the policy effect varies with the likelihood of dismissal. Given
that only 10-12 percent of probationary teachers were dismissed under this policy and that 30-40
percent of schools did not dismiss any teachers, many teachers may have perceived little risk of
dismissal. For these teachers, one would not expect the policy to have had any substantial

28

impact. To explore this potential heterogeneity, I calculate the predicted probability of dismissal
for each teacher using a rich set of observable teacher, school and principal characteristics.31
Because actual dismissal is potentially endogenous with respect to teacher behavior, it is
important that the characteristics one uses in the prediction equation include only pre-determined
characteristics and not, for example, teacher absences in the year of dismissal.
Columns 1-4 present the policy effects separately by quartile of this predicted
probability.32 Elementary teachers in the top quartile (i.e., those most likely to be dismissed)
appear to have responded somewhat more than other elementary teachers, although the point
estimates are not statistically different across quartiles. The estimates for high school teachers are
even less precise, with no significant differences.33

31

To do so, I estimate a Conditional Logit model including all probationary teachers in 2005-2007 where the
outcome is a binary indicator for whether the teacher was dismissed. In addition to a full set of school x year
effects, predictors all include a rich set of teacher, school and principal characteristics (including all of those shown
in Table 3). While the school and principal characteristics are not identified in light of the inclusion of school x year
fixed effects, I include a number of interactions between teacher characteristics and school/principal characteristics
that are identified and were found to be predictive of dismissal in previous work (Jacob 2007). I use the coefficients
from this model to calculate a predicted probability of dismissal for all teachers in both pre- and post-policy years.
The fixed effects are not included in the prediction since these would capture the unobserved, ex-post propensities to
dismiss teachers at the school, which may be endogenous to teacher behavior as discussed above. These predictions
capture the within-school probability of dismissal, which is consistent with the school fixed effect approach used in
identifying the policy effect. Finally, it is worth noting that ideally one would use pre-policy data to calculate
dismissal probabilities. Unfortunately, virtually no teachers were dismissed prior to this policy (as least as shown in
the formal administrative data), which makes this approach infeasible.
32
When one examines policy effects by predicted probability of dismissal, one must assume that the predicted
probability of dismissal corresponds with a teacher’s perception of the likely risk of dismissal.
33
In results not reported here, I examine whether the policy effects differed by the aggregate school dismissal rates.
While ex-post dismissal is clearly endogenous to teacher behavior (as discussed above), school-level splits by broad
categories could be interesting if, for example, schools in which no teachers were dismissed were not sufficiently
aware of the policy or had other circumstances that might have obviated the need for the policy. For elementary
schools, I found only modest size and statistically insignificant differences across groups. In high schools, by
contrast, the policy effects seem to be concentrated in schools the 15% of schools that did not dismiss any teachers.
The results here are consistent with a scenario in which teachers respond to the incentives provided by the policy,
adjust their behavior accordingly, and thereby avoid dismissal. This dynamic would introduce a negative correlation
between changes in teacher effort and ex-post dismissal rates.

29

Table 9 presents specifications that allow the policy effect to differ by calendar and risk
year, as both the incentive and composition components of the policy might vary along these
dimensions. Incentive effects may vary with calendar year as teachers and principals become
more familiar with the policy. The compositional effects of the policy will obviously differ by
calendar year. Probationary teachers in 2004-05, for example, will not have been hired under the
new regime, and could not have been dismissed yet, so there should be no compositional effect.
Risk year is defined as the number of years a probationary/temporary teacher has worked
in a particular school under the new regime. Prior to the policy, all teachers have a value of zero.
In 2005, all PATs and TATs are coded as risk year equals one. In 2006, newly hired teachers
will have a value of 1 and teachers who “survived” dismissal in 2005 and remained at the same
school are coded as having risk year equal to two. PATs/TATs who switched schools within the
district between 2005 and 2006 are coded as risk year one again in 2006 because of prior
literature suggesting that firm-specific tenure (as opposed to simply experience) is critical aspect
of job security.
A variety of models of employer learning imply that the incentives might diminish with
time spent at a particular school under the new regime (e.g., Jovanovic 1978). Intuitively, having
“survived” one or more years without being dismissed, a teacher may feel reassured that the
principal thinks highly of her. However, risk year will also incorporate compositional effects
since, by definition, teachers with higher values will have “survived” dismissal in the past, and
might therefore be positively selected.
Because risk year and calendar year are highly correlated, I estimate a parsimonious
specification that simply adds two interaction terms to the baseline specification. The key
independent variable in the baseline specification is Post Policy x Untenured Teacher. Here I

30

include a variable allowing the policy to have a separate effect on teachers in their second or
third year under the policy (i.e., Post Policy x Untenured Teacher x Risk year 2 or 3) and
allowing the policy to have a separate effect in the second and third years of the policy (i.e., Post
Policy x Untenured Teacher x School year 2006 or 2007).
To begin, consider column 1 in panel A. The estimate of -0.713 reflects the impact of the
policy in calendar year 2005 (which incorporates, by construction, only teachers with risk year
1). The estimate in the second row of 0.24 indicates that the policy effect was somewhat smaller
for teachers who had survived their first year of the policy (i.e., these teachers reduced absences
by .71 - .24 = .47 per year as a result of the policy). The estimates in the third row indicate that
the effect of the policy was substantially larger in the later years of the policy. Untenured
teachers in 2006 and 2007 realized a reduction in absences of roughly 1.2 per year (.713 + .489)
– an effect 70 percent larger than teachers in 2005. It is important to recognize, however, that
the differential effects for 2006 and 2007 reflect not only any change in incentives, but also
compositional changes due to dismissals and new hiring. The remaining columns show results
from the same specification estimated on different subsamples of schools.

6.3 Impacts on Student Achievement
As noted earlier, the CPS data does not have the information necessary to link individual
teachers to students over the analysis period, which precludes examining the impact of the policy
on student achievement using the strategy described above. Instead, I estimate a difference-indifference model at the school-year level, comparing within-school changes in student
achievement over time between schools with higher versus lower fractions of probationary
teachers at the time the policy was implemented. The intuition behind this approach is that

31

schools with a higher fraction of probationary teachers in 2005 experienced a larger “dose” of
the treatment. For example, if the policy induces effort among teachers at risk of dismissal, then
these schools should experience greater increases in effort, ceteris paribus. Similarly, these
schools have the potential to undergo greater turnover, thus realizing greater compositional
changes.
To illustrate the intuition behind this strategy, Figures 7 and 8 plot the standardized math
and reading scores 2003 through 2007 separately for elementary schools with the highest and
lowest fractions of probationary teachers in 2005. Looking first at all elementary schools in panel
A, we see little evidence of differential achievement trends across the schools. When we focus
on low-achieving schools in Panel B, however, there is some evidence that schools with a high
fraction of probationary teachers experienced more rapid growth in student achievement
following the introduction of the dismissal policy, relative to schools with a lower share of
probationary teachers.
The trends in Figures 7 and 8 do not control for any student or teacher characteristics.
One obvious concern with this strategy is that the fraction of probationary teachers in a school in
2005 is likely correlated with other factors (both observable and unobservable) that might
influence subsequent achievement. To account for this, I estimate the following model:
(2)
where Yst is a measure of student achievement in school s in year t.34 The model includes (a)
school fixed effects

(which control for any such time-invariant school characteristics that

34

The achievement measures used in this analysis come from the Illinois Standards Achievement Test (ISAT),
which was the primary standardized exam given to students in Illinois. Because in the earlier years of the period the
exam was only administered to students in grades 3, 5 and 8, we limit the analysis to these grades. Specifically, we
take the school-grade-year average scale scores, standardize these to have mean zero and standard deviation one,

32

might be associated with initial teacher experience levels and subsequent student achievement
such as a particularly dangerous neighborhood or aging school facilities), (b) time-varying
student characteristics Zst and (c) time-varying measures of teacher experience, also included in
Zst.35 The teacher experience measures are important because of the well-established experienceeffectiveness gradient in teaching, coupled with the fact that schools with more probationary
teachers in 2005 will, by definition, have more teachers progressing through their early teaching
years over the period. In addition, I control for an interaction between the fraction low-income
in 2005 and a post-policy indicator to account for the fact that schools with a disproportionate
number of probationary teachers also have a more disadvantaged student population, and
achievement may have changed in low-income schools for reasons unrelated to the dismissal
policy. The coefficient on the interaction between post and %PAT05,

, measures the

achievement effect of the policy.36
Table 10 shows estimates corresponding to equation (2). Columns 1-3 present the
coefficients on the interaction between a post-policy indicator and the fraction of teachers in the
school in 2004-05 that was probationary. The regressions are weighted by student enrollment,
and standard errors are clustered by school. The top panel shows results using the school
average scale score in math as the outcome, standardized using the standard deviation in school
and then create an average standardized measure for each school-year weighting by the number of students tested in
a particular school-grade-year. For the proficiency outcomes, we simply use the weighted average of the fraction
proficient (or higher) in the school-year, again weighting by the number of tested students in each school-gradeyear.
35
Time-varying covariates include fraction Black, fraction Hispanic, fraction eligible for free lunch, teacher
experience and its square and the fraction of teachers with less than 3 years of experience.
36
In order for this strategy to provide reliable results, there must be substantial variation in the school fraction of
probationary teachers across schools that have similar poverty and/or achievement levels. Fortunately, this appears
to be the case. For elementary schools, the mean within school percent probationary (untenured) teachers in 2005
was 33% (43%), the 90th percentile was 50% (65%) and the 10th percentile was 19% (26%). Importantly, the
fraction untenured in a school in 2005 was only modestly correlated with student demographics (correlation of .2
with fraction eligible for free-lunch) and student achievement (correlation of -.29 with fraction meeting proficiency
standard). This suggests that there will be substantial variation in probationary status that is not correlated with
other observable school characteristics to allow independent identification of
and
above.

33

mean scores (as opposed to the student-level standard deviation). The point estimate of .127
(column 1) is not statistically significant. However, it is worth noting that the implied effect is
quite large. Given that the student standard deviations are roughly double the standard deviation
in school means, if we assume zero spillovers from probationary to tenured teachers, these
results suggest an effect size of roughly .25 student standard deviations among “treated” (i.e.,
probationary) teachers. Equivalently, the point estimates suggest that a 30-percentage point
increase in the fraction of probationary teachers at the school would be associated with an
increase in student achievement of .3 x .25 ~ .08 standard deviations.
Looking at low- and high-achieving elementary schools in columns 2 and 3 respectively,
we see that the point estimates for low-achieving schools are roughly double those in highachieving schools. None of the estimates, however, is statistically different than zero. The
pattern of results for fraction of students scoring at or above the proficient level, shown in the
second panel, is roughly comparable as are the findings for reading, shown in panels 3 and 4.
As discussed earlier, it appears that the policy increased effort among temporary teachers
as well as probationary teachers, in which case one might want to use the fraction of teachers in a
school who were untenured (i.e., probationary or temporary) as the measure of treatment. The
specifications shown in columns 4-6 do exactly this, estimating equation (2) where fraction
untenured is substituted for fraction probationary. The results are qualitatively similar to those in
columns 1-3, but somewhat larger and a bit more precisely estimated such that some of the
estimates for low-achieving schools are significantly different than zero at conventional levels.37
Overall, these results provide only tentative evidence that the policy increased student
achievement scores in elementary schools. However, as noted earlier, the point estimates

37

None of the estimates presented here is sensitive to the student enrollment weighting or to the use of the natural
logarithm of achievement (or the log odds of fraction proficient) as the outcome.

34

suggest potentially large effects. Moreover, based on prior estimates of the relationship between
teacher absences and student achievement, it appears that the observed decline in teacher
absences can only explain a tiny fraction of the teacher effort response.38 In high schools, by
contrast, I find no evidence that the policy influenced student achievement, consistent with the
much smaller effects on teacher absences in this level (results available upon request).

7. Conclusions
In this paper, I take advantage of a unique policy change in the Chicago Public Schools
(CPS) to estimate the effect of employment protection on worker effort. My results suggest that
the reduction of job security for probationary teachers in Chicago led to a 10-20 percent
reduction in teacher absenteeism. The effects were strongest among teachers in elementary
schools and in low-achieving, predominantly African-American high schools, and among
teachers with high-predicted absences.
This study makes several important contributions. First, it informs the economic
literatures on employment protection policies and teacher incentives. To the best of my
knowledge, it is one of the few empirical studies of the impact of employment protection on
worker effort, and the only study to directly examine this issue in the public sector (let alone in
education). Second, the findings presented here have important implications for current
38

If one estimates equation (2) using teacher absences at the outcome, one finds that a 30-percentage point increase
in fraction untenured is associated with 0.7 x 0.3 = 0.21 fewer absences. Prior research suggests that a reduction of
1 teacher absence increases student achievement by about 0.002 student standard deviations (Clotfelter et al. 2007,
Miller et al. 2007). Hence if achievement were operating solely through reduced teacher absence, then one would
expect a 30-percentage point increase in the fraction untenured to result in a 0.21 x 0.002 = 0.00042 student
standard deviation gain in achievement. The estimates in Table 10 are measured in terms of school-level standard
deviations, which are roughly half the size of the student-level standard deviation in Chicago elementary schools
during this period. For example, in 2006, the student s.d. of reading scores in grades 3, 5 and 8 was roughly 29, 28
and 23 compared with the school s.d. of 13, 13 and 10. In math, the corresponding figures are 29, 27 and 26
compared with 15, 14 and 13. Hence, the point estimate of 0.195 school-level s.d. in column 4 of the top panel
corresponds to an effect of 0.195 x 2 = 0.39. A 30 pp effect would be 0.3 x 0.39 = 0.117. Hence, teacher absences
can only explain roughly 0.00042 / 0.117 = 0.004, less than 1 percent, of the effect of the policy.

35

education policy debates. Specifically, the decline in teacher absenteeism following the
introduction of the policy provides the most compelling evidence to date that changes in teacher
contract provisions can improve student.
At the same time, the apparent reluctance of many principals to utilize the additional
flexibility granted under the new contract in Chicago speaks to the potential importance of
teacher supply and/or social norms governing employment relations in schools. This suggests
that contractual changes alone will not be sufficient to change the practice of promotion and
tenure in teaching.

36

References
Autor, David H., John Donohue III, and Stewart J. Schwab, “The Employment Consequences of
Wrongful-Discharge Laws: Large, Small, or None at All?” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings 93:2 (2004), 440–446.
Autor, David, William Kerr and Adriana Kugler (2007). “Do Employment Protections Reduce
Productivity? Evidence from U.S. States”, 2007, The Economic Journal, 117 (June), F189–F217.
Autor, David H., John J. Donohue III and Stewart J. Schwab (2006). “The Costs of WrongfulDischarge Laws.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(2): 211-231.
Ballou, D. (2000). Teacher Contracts in Massachusetts. Boston, MA: Pioneer Institute for Public
Policy.
Bertola, Giuseppe. 1990. Job security, employment, and wages. European Economic Review 34,
no. 4:851–79.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. 2004. Can labor regulation hinder economic performance?
Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 1:91–134.
Bird, R. and Knopf, J. (2009). _”Do wrongful discharge laws impair firm performance?” The
Journal of Law and Economics, 52(May): XXX.
Bradley, Steve, Colin Green, and Gareth Leeves. 2007. "Worker Absence and Shirking:
Evidence from Matched Teacher-School Data." Labour Economics, 14(3), 319-34.
Bauer, Thomas, Stefan Bender and Holger Bonin. 2007. Dismissal Protection and Worker Flows
in Small Establishments. Economica 74: 804–821.
Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2007). Are Teacher Absences Worth Worrying
About in the U.S.?” NBER Working Paper #13648.
Duflo, E., & Hanna, R. (2006). Monitoring Works: Getting Teachers to Come to School:
C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers CEPR Discussion Papers: 5426.
Educational Research Service. 1980. "Employee Absenteeism: A Summary of Research,"
Arlington, VA: Educational Research Service.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Randy A. Ehrenberg, Daniel I. Rees, and Eric L. Ehrenberg. 1991.
"School District Leave Policies, Teacher Absenteeism, and Student Achievement." Journal of
Human Resources, 26(1), 72-105.
Fama, Eugene. 1980. "Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm." The Journal of Political
Economy, 88(2), 288-307.

37

Figlio, D. and with Lawrence Getzler. 2006. Accountability, ability and disability: Gaming the
system? In Advances in Microeconomics, Vol. 14: Improving School Accountability - Checkups or Choice?, ed. T. Gronberg and D. Jansen, 35-49. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Figlio, D., with J. Winicki. 2005. Food for thought? The effects of school accountability plans on
school nutrition. Journal of Public Economics 89(2-3): 381-94.
Friesen, Jane. 2005. “Statutory firing costs and lay-offs in Canada”, Labour Economics, 12(2):
147-168.
Hansen, Michael. 2009a. Career concerns incentives and teacher effort. University of
Washington Working Paper.
Hanushek, Eric A. (1994). Making Schools Work: Improving Performance and Controlling
Costs. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Daniel M. O’Brien and Steven G. Rivkin, “The Market for
Teacher Quality,” NBER Working Paper No. 11252 (2005).
Eric A. Hanushek, “Assessing the Effects of School Resources on Student Performance: An
Update,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 19(1997): 141-164.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Margaret E. Raymond (2005) “Does School Accountability Lead to
Improved Student Performance?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(2): 297–327.
Haynes, V. D. (2008, July 3, 2008). Rhee Seeks Tenure-Pay Swap for Teachers. The Washington
Post.
Hess, F. M., & Loup, C. (2008). The Leadership Limbo: Teacher Labor Agreements in America's
Fifty Largest School Districts. Washington, D.C.: Thomas B. Fordham Institute.
Holmström, Bengt. 1982. "Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective," Essays in
Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck. Helsinki: Swedish School of
Economics. Reprinted in Review of Economic Studies (1999), 66(1): 169-182.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, and Richard Rogerson. 1993. Job turnover and policy evaluation: A general
equilibrium analysis. Journal of Political Economy 101, no. 5:915–38
Hoxby, Caroline M. , Editor, (2003). The Economics of School Choice. University of Chicago
Press. Chicago.
Hunt, Jennifer. 2000. “Firing Costs, Employment Fluctuations, and Average Employment: An
Examination of Germany”, Economica, 67(266):177-202.

38

Ichino A., Riphahn R., “The Effect of Employment Protection on Worker Effort. A Comparison
of Absenteeism During and After Probation.”, Journal of the European Economic Association,
March 2005, 3(1): 120-143.
Jackson, Kirabo C. and Elias Bruegmann (2009). “Teaching Students and Teaching Each Other:
The Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 1(4): 1-27.
Jacob, Brian (2005) “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: the Impact of High-Stakes
Testing in the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public Economics 89(5–6): 761–796.
Jacob, Brian A. (2007). “Do Principals Fwere the Worst Teachers?” Working paper.
Jacob, Brian A. and Walsh, Elias (2009). “What’s in a Rating? The Relationship between
Principal Ratings and Teacher Productivity.” Working Paper.
Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren and David Sims (Forthcoming). “The Persistence of Teacher
Effects.” Journal of Human Resources.
Jovanovic, Boyan (1979). “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover.” Journal of Political
Economy, 87(5): 972-990.
Kugler, Adriana D. (1999). “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Unemployment:
Evidence from the Colombian Labour Market Reform.” International Tax and Public Finance,
6, 389–410.
Kugler, Adriana, Giovanni Pica. 2008. Effects of Employment Protection on Job and Worker
Flows: Evidence from the 1990 Italian Reform, Labour Economics 15(1): 78-95.
Lavy, Victor (2007). “Using Performance-Based Pay to Improve the Quality of Teachers”, The
Future of Children, Spring 2007, 87–110.
Lazear, Edward P. 1990. Job security provisions and employment. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105, no. 3:699–726.
Marinescu, Ioana (2009). “Job Security Legislation and Job Duration: Evidence from the United
Kingdom.” Journal of Labor Economics, 27(3): 465.
Martins, Pedro S. (2009). “Dismissals for Cause: The Difference that Just Eight Paragraphs Can
Make.” Journal of Labor Economics 27(2): 257-279.
Miller, Reagen T., Murnane, Richard J. and John B. Willet (Forthcoming). “Do Worker
Absences Affect Productivity? The Case of Teachers.” International Labor Review.
Neal, Derek A. and Diane Schanzenbach (Forthcoming). “Left Behind by Design: Proficiency
Counts and Test-Based Accountability.” Review of Economics and Statisics.

39

Petrin, A. and Sivadasan, J. (2006). “Job security does affect economic efficiency: theory, a new
statistic, and evidence from Chile”, NBER Working Paper 12757.
Podgursky, M. and Springer, M.G. (2007). “Teacher Performance Pay: A Review.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 26(4).
Prendergast, Canice (1999). “The Provision of Incentives in Firms.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 37(1): 7-63.
Price, M. (2009). Teacher Union Contracts and High School Reform. Seattle, WA: Center on
Reinventing Public Education.
Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. "The Impact of Individual Teachers on Students' Achievement:
Evidence from Panel Data." American Economic Review, 94(2), 247-52.
Thomas J. Kane, Jonah E. Rockoff and Douglas O. Staiger (2009), “What Does Certification
Tell Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City,” Economics of Education
Review, 27(6): 615-631.

40

Absences per Teacher
5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10

Figure 1: Time Trend of Teacher Absences by Status, All Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

2006

2007

Probationary teachers
Tenured Teachers

15 or More Absences
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2

(a) Absences per Teacher

2003

2004

2005
Year
Probationary teachers
Tenured Teachers

(b) Fraction of Teachers with 15 or More Absences

Absences per Teacher
5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10

Figure 2: Time Trend of Teacher Absences by Status, Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

2006

2007

Probationary teachers
Tenured Teachers

15 or More Absences
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2

(a) Absences per Teacher

2003

2004

2005
Year
Probationary teachers
Tenured Teachers

(b) Fraction of Teachers with 15 or More Absences

Absences per Teacher
5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10

Figure 3: Time Trend of Teacher Absences by Status, High Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

2006

2007

Probationary teachers
Tenured Teachers

15 or More Absences
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2

(a) Absences per Teacher

2003

2004

2005
Year
Probationary teachers
Tenured Teachers

(b) Fraction of Teachers with 15 or More Absences

Absences per Teacher
5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10

Figure 4: Time Trend of Teacher Absences by Experience, All Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

1−4 years experience
5 or more years experience

15 or More Absences
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2

(a) Absences per Teacher

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

1−4 years experience
5 or more years experience
(b) Fraction of Teachers with 15 or More Absences

2007

Absences per Teacher
5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10

Figure 5: Time Trend of Teacher Absences by Experience, Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

1−4 years experience
5 or more years experience

15 or More Absences
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2

(a) Absences per Teacher

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

1−4 years experience
5 or more years experience
(b) Fraction of Teachers with 15 or More Absences

2007

Absences per Teacher
5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10

Figure 6: Time Trend of Teacher Absences by Experience, High Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

1−4 years experience
5 or more years experience

15 or More Absences
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2

(a) Absences per Teacher

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

1−4 years experience
5 or more years experience
(b) Fraction of Teachers with 15 or More Absences

2007

−.3

−.2

Math Scaled Score
−.1
0
.1

.2

Figure 7: Time Trend of School-Level Math Achievement by Fraction Probationary in School in 2005,
Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

Top Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005
Bottom Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005

−.8

Math Scaled Score
−.75
−.7
−.65

−.6

(a) Scaled Scores, All Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

Top Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005
Bottom Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005

.4

.5

Math Scaled Score
.6
.7
.8

.9

(b) Scaled Scores, Low Achieving Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

Top Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005
Bottom Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005

(c) Scaled Scores, High Achieving Elementary Schools

2007

−.3

Reading Scaled Score
−.2
−.1
0
.1

.2

Figure 8: Time Trend of School-Level Reading Achievement by Fraction Probationary in School in 2005,
Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

Top Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005
Bottom Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005

−.8

Reading Scaled Score
−.75
−.7
−.65

−.6

(a) Scaled Scores, All Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

2007

Top Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005
Bottom Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005

.4

.5

Reading Scaled Score
.6
.7
.8

.9

(b) Scaled Scores, Low Achieving Elementary Schools

2003

2004

2005
Year

2006

Top Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005
Bottom Tertile Fraction Probationary in 2005

(c) Scaled Scores, High Achieving Elementary Schools

2007

12.3
0.612

11.6

0.538

10.3

0.163
0.061
0.088
0.120

0.660

26.6

0.449
0.507
0.607
0.682

0.111
0.115
0.058
0.109

0.695

25.6

High Schools
2006
65.6

0.455
0.490
0.549
0.458

0.083
0.090
0.088
0.100

0.720

23.4

2007
66.7

Table 1 – Summary Statistics on Teacher Dismissal in Chicago
Elementary Schools
2005
2006
2007
2005
35.7
34.5
33.6
68.1

Number of probationary teachers per school
0.581

0.143
0.105
0.087
0.073

0.564
0.441
0.585
0.619

Number of teachers per school
Among schools with any probationary teachers,
fraction that dismissed at least one probationary
teacher

0.163
0.137
0.089
0.100

0.547
0.518
0.561
0.561

Among probationary teachers who were dismissed,
fraction who were rehired as a teacher in the district

1 year experience
2 years experience
3 years experience
4 years experience

Fraction of probationary teachers who were dismissed
0.161
0.082
0.090
0.074

0.507
0.521
0.573
0.674

1 year experience
0.506
2 years experience
0.513
3 years experience
0.640
4 years experience
0.622
Notes: Based on author's calculations using CPS administrative data.

Table 2 – Teacher Separations over Time

0.140

2002

0.015

0.035

2003

0.100

0.053

0.101

2004

0.063

0.091

0.109

0.186

2005

0.064

0.092

0.100

0.185

2006

0.073

0.120

0.111

0.170

2007

Post-Policy

Fraction who left the district next year
0.040

0.065

0.049

Pre-Policy

Fraction who switched to another school
within the district next year

0.072

0.042

Teachers hired one year earlier (excluding
temporary teachers)

Fraction who left the district next year
0.057

Teachers hired 6-15 years earlier (excluding
temporary teachers)
Fraction who switched to another school
within the district next year

Notes: Based on author's calculations using CPS administrative data.

Table 3 - Summary Statistics for Analysis Sample
Pre-Policy (2003-2004)
All
TAT
PAT Tenured
Teachers
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Teacher Productivity
Number of absences
At least 15 absences
Number of Friday absences
At least 3 Friday absences
Teacher Characteristics
Male
Black
Hispanic
White
Age
Years of experience
Teaching in the same school last year
MA+
Education Major
College quality (1=lowest to
5=highest)
Failed at least one test
Has not passed any tests
School Characteristics
Percent of students meeting national
norms or achieving proficiency
Percent of students eligible for free
lunch
Percent of students who are Black
Percent of students who are Hispanic
Principal male
Principal Black
Principal White
Principal Hispanic
Principal age
Principal B.A. in Education
Principal college quality (1=lowest to
5=highest)
Number of teachers
Number of teacher-year observations

Post-Policy (2005-2007)
TAT

PAT

Tenured

(5)

(6)

(7)

8.386
0.123
2.179
0.215

8.707
0.159
2.197
0.228

8.83
0.139
2.27
0.225

8.84
0.135
2.297
0.231

7.282
0.092
1.932
0.176

7.758
0.102
2.029
0.195

8.417
0.12
2.192
0.216

0.226
0.346
0.14
0.475
43.939
12.546
0.187
0.504
0.513

0.283
0.294
0.235
0.426
37.247
4.718
0.44
0.229
0.308

0.234
0.327
0.137
0.493
39.301
8.341
0.274
0.324
0.41

0.207
0.401
0.11
0.462
48.779
17.283
0.069
0.572
0.59

0.312
0.216
0.225
0.503
35.702
4.278
0.48
0.341
0.309

0.239
0.275
0.158
0.51
35.963
5.178
0.301
0.45
0.444

0.204
0.387
0.121
0.461
49.458
17.795
0.081
0.623
0.604

2.011

1.758

1.909

1.948

2.198

2.181

1.997

0.156
0.281

0.294
0.164

0.189
0.184

0.085
0.456

0.256
0.153

0.226
0.052

0.111
0.374

0.462

0.374

0.4

0.423

0.452

0.478

0.516

0.848

0.877

0.85

0.837

0.867

0.856

0.842

0.49
0.375
0.377
0.473
0.349
0.166
54.282
0.593

0.548
0.36
0.353
0.539
0.261
0.188
54.133
0.563

0.512
0.364
0.376
0.488
0.337
0.166
54.435
0.571

0.484
0.372
0.38
0.461
0.384
0.146
54.685
0.575

0.508
0.381
0.386
0.495
0.285
0.201
53.711
0.591

0.503
0.369
0.375
0.489
0.32
0.177
53.837
0.598

0.467
0.385
0.379
0.453
0.372
0.164
54.347
0.614

2.025

1.913

1.944

1.943

2.093

2.063

2.09

33,600
117,420

4,636
6,357

8,534
14,065

14,238
27,102

3,876
6,178

12,670
24,010

16,666
39,708

Post Policy x Probationary
Teacher
Post Policy x Temporary
Teacher
Post Policy x Untenured
Teacher
Post Policy x Less than Five
Years Experience

Table 4 – The Impact of the Dismissal Policy on Teacher Absences

(0.113)

-0.709**

(1)

-0.049**

(0.005)

-0.022**

(2)

(0.043)

-0.157**

(0.029)

-0.164**

(3)

(0.008)

-0.035**

(0.006)

-0.021**

(4)

-0.806**

(5)

(0.005)

-0.031**

(6)

(0.027)

-0.170**

(7)

(0.005)

-0.027**

(8)

(9)

Number of At least 3
Number of At least 3
Number of At least 15
Number of
Friday
Friday
Friday
Friday
absences absences
absences
absences absences
absences absences

-0.945**
(0.007)

Number of At least 15
absences absences

(0.157)

(0.103)

-0.022

(0.105)

Mean of Dependent Variable
8.386
0.123
2.179
0.215
8.386
0.123
2.179
0.215
8.386
Standard Deviation of
7.788
0.328
2.045
0.411
7.788
0.328
2.045
0.411
7.788
Dependent Variable
Number of Observations
116,970
116,970
116,970
116,970
116,970
116,970
116,970
116,970
116,970
Number of Schools
607
607
607
607
607
607
607
607
607
Notes: Each column represents a different regression. All regressions include a full set of fixed effects for school and academic year.
Columns (1)-(8) include a full set of fixed effects for years of teaching experience, and column (9) includes a cubic in experience.
Standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.

Table 5 – Robustness
Dependent Variable: Number of Absences
Mean (s.d.) of
Number of
Post Policy x
Untenured
Dependent
Observations
Untenured
Variable
(1) Baseline

116970

(2) Dependent variable = sick days only

116970

(3) Dependent variable = personal days only

116970

(4) Dependent variable = other absences only

116970

(5)

Dependent variable = total number of absences,
excluding outliers (>40)

115826

(6) Dependent variable = September-March absences

116970

(7) Only young tenured teachers in control group

66018

(8)

Only non-temporary teachers observed in 2004, only
assigned probationary teachers in treatment group

85185

Only non-temporary teachers observed in 2004, only
(9)
unassigned probationary teachers in treatment group

70176

(10) No school fixed effects

116970

(11) Teacher demographics and no school fixed effects

116970

(12)

Teacher and school demographics and no school fixed
effects

116970

8.386
(7.788)
6.479
(6.572)
1.262
(1.236)
0.645
(2.931)

-0.806**
(0.103)
-0.435**
(0.084)
-0.075**
(0.015)
-0.297**
(0.045)

1.224**
(0.124)
0.743**
(0.105)
0.047**
(0.016)
0.434**
(0.052)

7.921

-0.464**

0.728**

(6.023)
5.582
(6.139)
8.302
(7.743)

(0.078)
-0.717**
(0.078)
-0.551**
(0.157)

(0.084)
0.863**
(0.096)
0.541**
(0.160)

8.636

-0.962**

1.413**

(8.041)

(0.147)

(0.165)

8.541

0.251

0.039

(7.724)
8.386
(7.788)
8.386
(7.788)

(0.257)
-0.763**
(0.102)
-0.651**
(0.105)

(0.280)
1.389**
(0.125)
1.138**
(0.127)

8.386

-0.695**

1.052**

(7.788)
(0.105)
(0.127)
(13) Teacher demographics with school fixed effects
116970
8.386
-0.713**
1.041**
(7.788)
(0.106)
(0.126)
Notes: Each row represents a different regression. Regressions include school fixed effects, except where indicated
otherwise. All regressions include a full set of fixed effects for academic year and years of teaching experience.
Regressions with teacher demographics include race and gender dummies, race x gender interactions, teacher educational
background controls, instructional program indicators, a cubic in age, and gender x age interactions. Regressions with
school demographics include student race proportion variables, a cubic in school achievement, a cubic in school
enrollment, an indicator for magnet schools, and an indicator for having multiple schools housed in the same building.
Standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.

82957
488

8.067

8.446

-1.006**
(0.124)

(1)

-0.619**

37686
239

8.209

9.004

-0.842**
(0.182)

(2)

(0.189)

-0.201

44743
240

7.922

7.990

-1.184**
(0.172)

(3)

(0.248)

0.007

21585
130

8.013

7.823

-1.234**
(0.253)

(4)

(0.597)

0.840

18109
93

7.789

7.999

-0.778**
(0.290)

(5)

(0.222)

-0.691**

43263
312

8.175

8.944

-1.037**
(0.164)

(0.220)

-0.712**

26867
159

8.259

8.504

-1.306**
(0.233)

(0.260)

-0.069

29131
158

8.075

8.509

-0.909**
(0.224)

(0.486)

-0.532

26603
160

7.799

8.323

-0.800**
(0.202)

Table 6 – Impact of the Dismissal Policy on Teacher Absences by School Characteristics
PredomPredomMedium
High
Low
High
Mixed/
inantly Low Fraction
All
inantly
Fraction
Fraction
Achieving Achieving Integrated
Black or Probationary
Schools
Hispanic
Probationary Probationary
Schools
Schools
Schools
Minority
in 2005
Schools
in 2005
in 2005
Schools
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

Mean of Dependent Variable
Standard Deviation of Dependent
Variable
Number of Observations
Number of Schools

-0.349**

(0.303)

Panel A: Elementary Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher

Panel B: High Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher
(0.172)

Mean of Dependent Variable
8.237
8.995
7.916
7.670
7.790
8.594
8.218
8.075
8.698
Standard Deviation of Dependent
7.059
7.637
6.768
6.582
7.062
7.284
7.127
6.951
7.117
Variable
Number of Observations
34013
11011
22330
11264
2137
20612
13511
14116
5892
Number of Schools
119
50
53
23
7
95
34
34
35
Notes: Each column represents a different regression. All regressions include a full set of fixed effects for school, academic year, and years of
teaching experience. The "never fired" sample in column (2) includes only schools that never dismissed any probationary teachers in any year.
Low (high) achieving schools are schools with below (above) mean fraction of students proficient on the ISAT in elementary schools and the PSAE
in high schools over the three pre-policy years (2002-2004). Columns (4)-(6) cut the sample by terciles of the fraction of probationary teachers in
the school in 2005. Standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.

Panel A: Elementary Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher

Mean of Dependent Variable
Standard Deviation of Dependent
Variable
Number of Observations
Panel B: High Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher

Mean of Dependent Variable
Standard Deviation of Dependent
Variable
Number of Observations
7.059

8.237

(0.172)

-0.349**

82957

8.067

8.446

(0.124)

-1.006**

(1)

13762

6.990

7.604

(0.269)

-0.042

12615

7.669

7.806

(0.298)

-0.551*

(2)

20251

7.073

8.668

(0.204)

-0.576**

70342

8.131

8.561

(0.136)

-1.081**

(3)

17344

6.812

7.744

(0.224)

-0.157

38217

7.807

8.053

(0.183)

-1.224**

(4)

11918

7.503

9.094

(0.335)

-0.592*

28607

8.424

9.202

(0.196)

-0.859**

(5)

3153

6.796

8.595

(0.589)

-0.210

13201

7.850

8.231

(0.322)

-0.746**

(6)

10481

6.313

7.971

(0.350)

-0.016

25577

7.885

8.225

(0.282)

-0.676**

(7)

23532

7.363

8.356

(0.211)

-0.255

57380

8.145

8.545

(0.176)

-1.210**

(8)

11352

6.670

7.185

(0.270)

0.433

27698

7.163

7.517

(0.240)

-0.332

11340

7.015

8.367

(0.267)

-0.308

27683

8.163

8.459

(0.214)

-0.785**

11321

7.336

9.162

(0.269)

-0.499*

27576

8.697

9.367

(0.213)

-0.504**

Table 7 – Impact of the Dismissal Policy on Teacher Absences by Teacher Characteristics
Low
Moderate
High
All
Male
Female
White
Black
Hispanic Over 35 Under 35 Predicted Predicted Predicted
Teachers
Absences Absences Absences
(9)
(10)
(11)

34013

Notes: Each column represents a different regression. All regressions include a full set of fixed effects for school, academic year, and years of teaching experience.
Predicted absences in columns (9)-(11) are estimated from a regression using only pre-policy observations including teacher, school, and principal demographics.
Standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.

Table 8 – Impact of the Dismissal Policy by Predicted Probability of Dismissal
Dependent Variable: Number of Absences
Quartile of Predicted Probability of Dismissal:
Bottom
Second
Third
Top
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Elementary Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher
-0.693**
-0.879**
-0.557**
-1.089**
(0.282)
(0.257)
(0.253)
(0.305)
Mean of Dependent Variable
Standard Deviation of Dependent Variable
Number of Observations
Panel B: High Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher

8.904
8.237
18562

8.490
7.783
18562

8.254
7.627
18559

8.311
8.689
18566

-0.429
(0.330)

-0.498
(0.358)

-0.513
(0.360)

0.191
(0.412)

Mean of Dependent Variable
8.065
8.508
8.308
8.210
Standard Deviation of Dependent Variable
6.319
7.031
6.963
7.986
Number of Observations
7556
7556
7556
7556
Notes: Each column represents a different regression. All regressions include a full set of fixed
effects for school, academic year, and years of teaching experience. Standard errors clustered by
school in parentheses. Predicted probability of dismissal is estimated from a conditional logit of
dismissal on teacher demographics and teacher-school interactions conditional on school-year fixed
effects (the fixed effects are not included in the prediction). All probationary teachers in 2005-2007
in school-years that dismissed at least one teacher are included in the conditional logit regression and
probabilities of dismissal are predicted in and out of sample for all teachers. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%.

Table 9 – Effects by Calendar Year and Risk Year
Dependent Variable = Number of Absences
Low
High
Achieving
Achieving
Full sample
Schools
Schools
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Elementary Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher
-0.713**
-0.550**
-0.863**
(0.151)
(0.216)
(0.214)
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher x
0.238*
0.347*
0.177
(Risk year 2 or 3)
(0.124)
(0.181)
(0.173)
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher x
-0.489**
-0.486**
-0.548**
(School year 2006 or 2007)
(0.148)
(0.201)
(0.215)
Mean of Dependent Variable
Standard Deviation of Dependent
Variable
Number of Observations
Number of Schools
Panel B: High Schools
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher x
(Risk year 2 or 3)
Post Policy x Untenured Teacher x
(School year 2006 or 2007)

8.446

9.004

7.990

8.067

8.209

7.922

82957
488

37686
239

44743
240

-0.169
(0.209)

-0.583
(0.350)

0.066
(0.237)

0.004

-0.236

0.175

(0.182)

(0.315)

(0.227)

-0.321

0.087

-0.579**

(0.210)

(0.386)

(0.253)

Mean of Dependent Variable
8.237
8.995
7.916
Standard Deviation of Dependent
7.059
7.637
6.768
Variable
Number of Observations
34013
11011
22330
Number of Schools
119
50
53
Notes: Each column represents a different regression. All regressions include a full
set of fixed effects for school, academic year, and years of teaching experience.
Low (high) achieving schools are schools with below (above) mean fraction of
students proficient on the ISAT in elementary schools and the PSAE in high schools
over the three pre-policy years (2002-2004). Standard errors clustered by school in
parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.

Table 10 – Impact of the Dismissal Policy on School Level Student Achievement in Elementary Schools
At Risk of Dismissal =
At Risk of Dismissal =
Probationary Teachers
Untenured Teachers
Low
High
Low
High
Achieving Achieving
Achieving Achieving
All
All
Schools
Schools
Schools
Schools
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable = Math Scaled Scores
Post Policy x Fraction Teachers at
0.127
0.160
0.081
0.195
0.241*
0.121
Risk of Dismissal in 2005
(0.132)
(0.157)
(0.210)
(0.119)
(0.140)
(0.192)
Mean of Dependent Variable

-0.666

0.719

0.042

-0.666

0.719

Dependent Variable = Math Fraction Proficient
Post Policy x Fraction Teachers at
0.022
0.041
Risk of Dismissal in 2005
(0.034)
(0.041)

-0.007

0.051*

0.080**

0.009

(0.049)

(0.030)

(0.037)

(0.044)

0.680

0.540

0.394

0.680

-0.064

0.181

0.316**

0.020

(0.165)

(0.111)

(0.143)

(0.151)

-0.669

0.730

0.046

-0.669

0.730

Dependent Variable = Reading Fraction Proficient
Post Policy x Fraction Teachers at
0.037
0.046
Risk of Dismissal in 2005
(0.028)
(0.038)

0.019

0.052**

0.066**

0.028

(0.036)

(0.024)

(0.033)

(0.032)

0.635

0.514

0.388

0.635

Mean of Dependent Variable

0.042

0.540

0.394

Dependent Variable = Reading Scaled Scores
Post Policy x Fraction Teachers at
0.119
0.277*
Risk of Dismissal in 2005
(0.124)
(0.166)
Mean of Dependent Variable

Mean of Dependent Variable

0.046

0.514

0.388

Notes: Each cell represents a different school-year level regression with the indicated dependent variable.
Standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. The elementary school assessment is the math and
reading ISAT taken in grades 3, 5, and 8. Scaled scores are standardized at the school level within gradesubject-year to a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. All assessment outcomes represent an enrollment
weighted average across grades within school-year. All regressions include controls for the fraction of low
income students in the school year, fraction of low income students x post policy, mean level of teaching
experience in the school-year, mean experience squared, the fraction of first or second year teachers in the
school-year, other school demographics, indicators for whether the assessment is observed in each grade, the
fraction of enrolled students in the grade taking the exam, and a full set of fixed effects for school and
academic year. Low (high) achieving schools are schools with below (above) mean fraction of students
proficient on the ISAT over the three pre-policy years (2002-2004). For elementary schools, the mean within
school percent probationary (untenured) teachers in 2005 was 33% (43%), the 90th percentile was 50% (65%)
and the 10th percentile was 19% (26%). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.

