                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             OVERCONFIDENCE AND EARLY-LIFE EXPERIENCES:
   THE IMPACT OF MANAGERIAL TRAITS ON CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICIES

                                         Ulrike Malmendier
                                           Geoffrey Tate
                                           Jonathan Yan

                                        Working Paper 15659
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15659


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




We are indebted to Brian Hall, David Yermack and John Graham for providing us with the data. We
thank Malcolm Baker, Rudi Fahlenbrach, Michael Faulkender, Murray Frank, Dirk Hackbarth, Dirk
Jenter, Jeremy Stein, Ilya Strebulaev, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, Jeffrey Wurgler and seminar participants
at the Berkeley, Calgary, Columbia, Helsinki School of Economics, Insead, MIT, Rotterdam, Stanford,
UCLA, USC, Wharton (Applied Economics), Zurich and at the AEA, AFA, FEA, Frontiers in Finance
(Banff), IZA Behavioral Economics of Organizations, and Olin Corporate Governance conferences
for helpful comments. Nishanth Rajan provided excellent research assistance. Ulrike Malmendier would
like to thank the Coleman Fung Risk Management Research Center for financial support. An earlier
version of this paper was titled “Corporate Financial Policies With Overconfident Managers.” The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Ulrike Malmendier, Geoffrey Tate, and Jonathan Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Overconfidence and Early-life Experiences: The Impact of Managerial Traits on Corporate
Financial Policies
Ulrike Malmendier, Geoffrey Tate, and Jonathan Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 15659
January 2010, Revised December 2010
JEL No. D03,D21,D23,D53,D82,G14,G3,G31,G32,H2,H32

                                              ABSTRACT

We show that measurable managerial characteristics have significant explanatory power for corporate
financing decisions beyond traditional capital-structure determinants. First, managers who believe
that their firm is undervalued view external financing as overpriced, especially equity. Such overconfident
managers use less external finance and, conditional on accessing risky capital, issue less equity than
their peers. Second, CEOs with Depression experience are averse to debt and lean excessively on internal
finance. Third, CEOs with military experience pursue more aggressive policies, including heightened
leverage. Complementary measures of CEO traits based on press portrayals confirm the results.


Ulrike Malmendier                                    Jonathan Yan
Department of Economics                              Graduate School of Business
549 Evans Hall # 3880                                518 Memorial Way
University of California, Berkeley                   Stanford University
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                             jonathan.yan@stanford.edu
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu

Geoffrey Tate
Finance Department - Rm C420
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
geoff.tate@anderson.ucla.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15659
    What are the primary determinants of firms’ financing decisions? Traditional theories
emphasize firm-, industry-, and market-level explanations, such as the trade-oﬀ between tax
deductibility of interest payments and bankruptcy costs, or asymmetric information between
firms and the capital market (Miller (1977); Myers (1984); Myers and Majluf (1984)). These
theories explain a significant portion of the observed variation in capital structure. Yet, recent
research identifies firm-specific stickiness in capital structure that is not a clear prediction
of the traditional theories (Lemmon et al. (2008)). Moreover, modern dynamic theories of
optimal capital structure allow room for firms with similar fundamentals to operate away from
a common target capital structure, but the factors which predict these diﬀerences are less clear.
    In this paper, we study the role of managerial traits in explaining the remaining variation.
We measure capital-structure relevant beliefs revealed by CEOs’ personal portfolio choices
(overconfidence) and identify formative personal experiences early in life (Great Depression,
military). Our approach builds on a growing literature showing that individual top-level
managers significantly aﬀect corporate decisions and performance, above and beyond firm-,
industry-, and market-specific determinants (Weisbach (1995); Chevalier and Ellison (1999);
Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). However, this literature says little about the specific managerial
characteristics that matter and why. The lack of specific predictions, in turn, makes it hard to
establish a causal impact on corporate decisions. In this paper, we derive specific implications
for financial decision-making and confirm the importance of managerial traits in explaining
observed variation in corporate capital structure.
    First, we consider managers who overestimate their firms’ future cash flows and, hence,
believe that their firms are undervalued by the market. We show that overconfident managers
view external financing to be unduly costly and prefer to use cash or riskless debt. Conditional
on having to raise risky capital, they prefer debt to equity, since equity prices are more sensitive
to diﬀerences of opinions about future cash flows. Unconditionally, they may choose low levels
of risky debt relative to available interest tax deductions (and even lower levels of equity).
    Second, we consider variation in managers’ personal histories that is likely to generate
diﬀerences in their financial decision-making. Existing evidence suggests that individuals are
most aﬀected by seismic events early in life (see, e.g., Elder (1998)). We identify the two biggest
shocks that are likely to be formative experiences and that aﬀect a significant portion of our
sample CEOs early in life: growing up during the Great Depression and serving in the military.
Depression CEOs have less faith in external capital markets (Graham and Narasimhan (2004);
Schoar (2007); Malmendier and Nagel (2009)). They therefore lean excessively on internal
financing. Military service during early adulthood and, particularly, combat exposure have a
lasting impact on veterans’ life-choices and decision making (Elder (1986); Elder and Clipp
(1989); Elder, Gimbel, and Ivie (1991)) and induce agressiveness or risk-taking. These traits
may later manifest themselves in more aggressive capital structure choices.
   We measure overconfidence using data on CEO option-holdings. First, we use detailed


                                                 1
data from large U.S. companies between 1980 and 1994 to identify CEOs who systematically
maintain high personal exposure to company-specific risk. The CEOs in our data have a
strong incentive to diversify their personal portfolios since they receive substantial equity-
based compensation and since the value of their human capital depends on firm performance.
Yet, some CEOs hold non-tradeable, in-the-money executive stock options until expiration
rather than exercising them after the vesting period. This delay in exercise, captured by
the “Longholder” measure from Malmendier and Tate (2008) and (2005), is not explained by
insider knowledge, as it does not yield abnormal returns over a simple strategy of exercising
and diversifying. A plausible interpretation is that these CEOs overestimate the means of their
firms’ future cash-flows.1 We address several alternative interpretations, including signaling
and risk tolerance, and we separate years before and after a CEO first displays Longholder
behavior (“Pre-” and “Post-Longholder”). As an alternative measure, we identify CEOs who
do not exercise options that are highly in the money (67%) five years prior to expiration
(“Holder 67”).2 As a robustness check, we also construct analogous portfolio measures using
CEO compensation and insider trading data from Execucomp and Thomson Financial from
1992 to 2007. Though data limitations preclude us from classifying CEOs with the same
precision as in the earlier sample, these measures allow us to conduct “out-of-sample” tests
confirming the generalizability of our key results to more recent data. Finally, we consider an
alternative to our portfolio-based measures, instead identifying CEOs’ beliefs based on their
portrayal as “confident” or “optimistic” in the business press.
   We measure Depression experience using birth years in the decade leading up to the Great
Depression. And we measure military experience based on hand-collected information from
Dun and Bradstreet and Who’s Who in Finance and Industry. We use information on service
years to identify veterans of World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War. As
with overconfidence, we use press coverage to sharpen the interpretation of our measures:
Press coverage as “cautious,” “conservative,” or in similar terms is positively correlated with
membership in the Depression cohort, but negatively with military experience.
    We then relate our measures of overconfidence and formative experiences to corporate
financial policies. Using SDC data on security issuance, we find that overconfident CEOs are
   1
      A diﬀerent behavioral bias sometimes referred to as ‘overconfidence’ is the underestimation of variance
(e.g., in Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2007)). This bias does not have a clear implication for the timing of
option exercise. It implies an underestimation rather than overestimation of option value, predicting expedited
option exercise. But, assuming that CEOs exercise executive options for the purpose of selling the stock
(consistent, e.g., with the evidence in Ofek and Yermack (2000)), it also implies lower perceived benefits of
diversification and, hence, delayed exercise. Delayed option exercise is unambiguously predicted only by the
type of overconfidence analyzed in this paper, i.e., the overestimation of mean future cash flows. Moreover, the
capital-structure implications of underestimation of the variance are reverse (Hackbarth, forthcoming), which
allows us to empirically distinguish which bias dominates.
    2
      The 67% threshold comes from the rational option exercise model of Hall and Liebman (2002) with constant
relative risk aversion of 3 and 67% of wealth in company stock.


                                                       2
significantly less likely to issue equity conditional on accessing public markets. For example,
Longholder CEOs issue equity in only 31% of years in which they access public markets,
compared to 42% among their peers. We find the same pattern using accounting data from
Compustat, which includes private financing, and the methodology of Shyam-Sunder and Myers
(1999): Longholder CEOs raise roughly 35 cents more debt than rational predecessors or
successors in the same firm to meet an additional dollar of external financing needs. The
aversion to equity is strong enough to have a cumulative eﬀect on firm leverage: Firms have
significantly higher leverage ratios in years in which they employ overconfident CEOs.
    We also test whether overconfident CEOs are generally more reluctant to access external
capital markets, preferring instead to rely on internal sources of finance. While not a necessary
implication, overconfidence oﬀers a possible explanation for the evidence in prior papers that
firms in general do not issue enough debt. Using the ‘kink’ methodology from Graham (2000),
we find that overconfident CEOs are significantly more likely to under-utilize debt relative to
available tax benefits. At the same time, they do not abstain from issuing riskless debt, i.e.,
debt with high S&P long term credit ratings, for which there is no disagreement about the
appropriate interest rate. Moreover, the most debt-conservative overconfident CEOs are also
equity-conservative: they are least likely to issue equity.
    We find that Depression CEOs are more prone to under-utilize debt relative to its tax ben-
efits than the average CEO. And they do not substitute equity issuance for debt, confirming
their aversion to risky capital markets. On the other hand, CEOs with prior military ser-
vice, particularly those who served in World War II, choose more aggressive capital structures.
Under their leadership, market leverage ratios are significantly higher than under their prede-
cessors or successors. The results on Word War II veterans are particularly important since,
due to the draft, they alleviate concerns about self-selection into service.
    Our findings demonstrate the importance of managerial traits for financing decisions, both
within and between firms. The predictive power of CEO traits for financing decisions also im-
plies limitations in the ability of existing compensation contracts and governance mechanisms
to perfectly align managerial preferences with those of diversified shareholders.
    Our analysis uses identifiable traits of CEOs, but not of CFOs, for whom we do not have
data on personal characteristics and portfolio choices.3 As a result, our findings allow for
two interpretations: (1) CEOs directly determine financing, or (2) CFOs determine financing,
but their decisions are positively correlated with CEO traits (assortative matching). For the
decisions considered in our analysis, it is likely that CEOs have the ultimate say. While CFOs
first design financing decisions, the CEO alone can withdraw (or approve of) a stock oﬀering
at the last moment (Hechinger (1998)) or overrule the CFO and treasurer (Whitford (1999)).4
  3
    The ExecuComp data on the top five executives in S&P 1500 firms is not as detailed, often missing for
CFOs, and available for a shorter time frame. It overlaps with our main sample period for only two years.
  4
    It is not unusual for CEOs to reject the CFO’s financing plan, especially when asset sales are involved



                                                    3
    Our findings relate to several strands of literature. Our analysis of overconfidence con-
tributes to the literature linking biased managerial beliefs to corporate decisions, initiated by
Roll (1986). In the context of financing, Heaton (2002) models a bias in the perceived proba-
bility of high cash flow, which aﬀects both the first and the second moments of the perceived
cash flow distribution. Similarly, Hackbarth (forthcoming) models distortions to both the mean
and the variance. Our approach diﬀers by focusing on the overestimation of mean future cash
flows. Malmendier and Tate (2005) consider a similar model and show that investment by
overconfident CEOs is more sensitive to cash flow, particularly in firms with low debt capacity.
    Empirically, Graham and Harvey’s (2001) CFO Outlook Survey suggests a direct role for
biased managerial beliefs in financing choices. For example, in the second quarter of 1999, prior
to the end of the technology bubble, roughly 70% of respondents state that their company stock
is undervalued, and 67% say that misvaluation is an important factor in the decision to issue
stock. Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2007) relate the mis-calibration bias of CFOs revealed
in such surveys to a wide range of corporate decisions, including corporate financing.
    The psychology literature suggests that executives are particularly prone to exhibit overcon-
fidence.5 Possible reasons include sorting of high-confidence individuals into top positions
(Goel and Thakor (forthcoming)); self-attribution bias induced by past successes, such as those
necessary to become CEO, (Miller and Ross (1975), Billett and Qian(2007)); and illusion of
control.6
    Our results fill a critical gap in the literature by directly linking CEO overconfidence to
financing choices in large U.S. firms. Though preferences among diﬀerent financing instruments
are an implicit prediction in much of the literature,7 to our knowledge, this prediction remains
untested using field data from corporations.
    Our results on past experiences of CEOs (Great Depression, military service) build on re-
search exploring the eﬀects of prior life experiences on economic decision-making. Donaldson
(1990) argues that corporate leaders who were young adults in the 1930s were “profoundly
aﬀected by the collapse of the capital markets during the Great Depression,” leading them to
be “deeply skeptical of the public capital markets as a reliable source of personal or corpo-
rate funding,” and “to have an instinctive aﬃnity for a strategy of self-suﬃciency” (p. 125).
Consistent with this view, Graham and Narasimhan (2004) find that Depression-era CEOs
chose lower leverage in the 1940s than other CEOs. More broadly, Schoar (2007) shows that
CEOs who start their career in a recession make more conservative capital-structure choices,
e.g., choose lower leverage and internal over external growth. Malmendier and Nagel (2008)
(Millman (2001)). Recent jury verdicts against CEOs of firms with financial scandals imply the same view.
   5
     Larwood and Whittaker (1977); Kidd (1970); Moore (1977).
   6
     Langer (1975), Weinstein (1980), Alicke et al. (1995), and March and Shapira (1987) argue, more generally,
that individuals overestimate their ability to control outcomes and underestimate the likelihood of failure.
   7
     See the survey by Baker, Ruback, and Wurgler (2006). Recent work also includes Hietala, Kaplan, and
Robinson (2003); Landier and Thesmar (forthcoming); and Lowe and Ziedonis (2006).


                                                      4
find related evidence that past economic shocks have a long-lasting eﬀect on individual risk
aversion and deter risky financial investment decisions such as stock-market participation.
Similarly, Oyer (2008) finds that stock market shocks while MBA students are in school have
long-lasting career impacts. A large medical and psychology literature examines the impact of
military exposure on post-war behavior. Berkowitz and Lepage (1967) find that weapons are
“aggression-eliciting stimuli,” and Killgore et al. (2008) show that combat exposure increases
risky behavior upon returning from deployment. Wansink et al. (2008) provide evidence of
higher risk-taking propensity among World War II veterans. Elder (1986); Elder and Clipp
(1989); and Elder, Gimbel, and Ivie (1991) argue that the skills learned from combat make
individuals more convinced that they can handle stressful and risky situations, resulting in less
risk aversion and higher assertiveness.
   Our findings also contribute to the broader empirical literature identifying fixed managerial
eﬀects on corporate policies (Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Frank and Goyal (2007b)). We go
beyond prior studies by identifying specific managerial beliefs (overconfidence) and experiences
early in life (Depression, military) that aﬀect financing choices and that can be formalized in
a predictive economic model. To the extent that managerial beliefs and the impact of past
experiences are sticky they can also help to explain the strong firm fixed-eﬀects identified in
the recent capital-structure literature (Lemmon et al. (2008)).
     We also provide a new angle on the older literature testing pecking-order and trade-oﬀ
theories. Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999), for example, argue that the tendency of firms to
fill financing deficits with new debt rather than equity issues supports the pecking-order theory
over a static trade-oﬀ model. Frank and Goyal (2003) use the same empirical methodology on
an extended sample to argue in favor of the trade-oﬀ model. The analysis of managerial beliefs
helps explain residual variation that is diﬃcult to reconcile with either theory. For example,
one important puzzle pointed out by Frank and Goyal (2003) is that “pecking-order behavior”
best describes the capital-structure choices of large firms. However, standard pecking-order
theory relates such behavior to information asymmetries, from which large firms should suﬀer
the least. Our analysis oﬀers one explanation: biased beliefs of managers in large firms, whose
past successes make them prone to overconfidence. Instead of attempting to reconcile the
Frank and Goyal (2003) findings with actual informational asymmetry (as in Lemmon and
Zender (forthcoming)), we argue that perceived asymmetry drives such behavior in the subset
of firms in which we observe it.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we derive empirical
predictions linking managerial beliefs and past experiences to capital structure choices. Section
II describes the data and the construction of our key variables. Section III describes our
measures of overconfidence and early-life experiences. Section IV relates our measures to
financing choices. Section V discusses alternative interpretations of our evidence and Section
VI tests the robustness of our main results out-of-sample. Finally, Section VII concludes.


                                               5
I       Testable Hypotheses
In this section, we derive the capital-structure implications of a specific set of empirically
identifiable beliefs (overconfidence) and formative past experiences (Great Depression; military
service). A formal model, which focuses on overconfidence, is presented in the Online Appendix.
To simplify the analysis, we allow for only two market imperfections: tax-deductibility of
interest payments and financial distress costs. In allowing for these two frictions, we do not
take a stand on the relative merits of pecking-order versus trade-oﬀ theories, which are both
complementary to the managerial eﬀects studied here. The assumed frictions simply serve the
purpose of fixing a single optimal capital structure for a rational, value-maximizing CEO: the
debt level which exactly trades oﬀ the marginal tax benefit of an additional dollar of debt
against the marginal cost of financial distress (Miller (1977)). We then compare the decisions
of CEOs with biased beliefs to this rational benchmark.
    Though we abstract from other market frictions, including agency costs and asymmetric
information, we consider how these imperfections change our predictions. Generally, our pre-
dictions are robust as long as the baseline financing model does not create boundary solutions
such as full debt financing for a rational CEO. In our empirical work, we use a variety of con-
trols and identification strategies to control for such imperfections and, hence, identify residual
CEO-level variation which is unexplained by traditional theories.
    We define overconfidence as the overestimation of mean returns to investment. This over-
estimation implies that overconfident CEOs overinvest if they have suﬃcient internal funds or
access to riskless debt financing. However, an overconfident CEO does not necessarily overin-
vest, and may even underinvest, if internal or riskless financing is insuﬃcient for the desired
investment. The reason is that overconfidence also implies a (mis-)perception of the cost of
external financing: Rational shareholders demand higher compensation for providing equity fi-
nancing than the CEO deems appropriate. Likewise, rational creditors demand higher interest
rates than the CEO believes are warranted as long as the CEO overestimates the cash flows
available to creditors in default states. Thus, overconfident CEOs tap risky external finance
only if the over-estimated investment returns are larger than the perceived financing costs.
    When they do access external financing, overconfident CEOs generally perceive equity
financing to be more mis-priced than risky debt. In the case of equity financing, the diﬀerence
of opinions between shareholders and the CEO about future cash flows matters for all states
of the world. However, in the case of risky debt, the diﬀerence of opinions matters only
for default states; the extent to which the CEO overestimates cash flows in the good states,
in which he is able to repay the debt obligations, is irrelevant to the interest rate.8 Thus,
    8
   Note that the CEO may perceive debt to be more costly than equity if the probability of default is large
and overconfidence is small, reversing the preference for risky debt over equity. (See the Online Appendix for
more details.) Intuitively, creditors seize all of the overestimated cash flows in the event of default, but equity



                                                        6
the equilibrium financing plan of a overconfident CEO will contain more risky debt than the
trade-oﬀ equilibrium of a rational CEO with equal financing needs.
Hypothesis 1. Conditional on accessing external financing and on given financing needs
(financing deficit), overconfident CEOs issue a higher portion of debt, relative to equity, than
rational CEOs.
    If, however, the (over-estimated) cost of external finance exceeds (over-estimated) invest-
ment returns, overconfident CEOs do not access external financing and invest only up to the
limit of riskless debt finance, potentially underinvesting relative to the first best. In a dynamic
setting, an overconfident manager may maintain spare riskless debt capacity in anticipation of
future investments. Absent other frictions, a rational CEO, instead, always invests optimally
and does not retain cash inside the firm since external finance is fairly priced and cash hold-
ings carry a tax disadvantage.9 Thus, overconfidence can lead to debt levels which are too low
relative to available tax benefits.
Hypothesis 2. Overconfident CEOs are more likely than other CEOs to issue debt conserv-
atively relative to available tax benefits.
    While the preference for debt over equity is a necessary implication of overconfidence under
our baseline assumptions, debt conservatism is only a possible implication of overconfidence.
However, Graham (2000), among others, finds that CEOs in large profitable firms appear to
leave money on the table by choosing low debt levels. Thus, the range of parameters leading to
debt conservatism may be empirically relevant, and overconfidence oﬀers a possible explanation
for an important existing empirical puzzle.
    Moreover, overconfidence can potentially reconcile two seemingly contradictory empirical
phenomena: the pecking order and debt conservatism. Figure 1 provides an example of an
overconfident CEO having lower debt but higher leverage than under a (hypothetical) rational
benchmark of financing choices. In the example, the rational and the overconfident CEO have
the same investment opportunities and the same gross financing needs, but the rational CEO
uses less cash financing. In the context of our reduced-form model, this is consistent with
the case of both a rational and an overconfident CEO accepting an investment project with
fixed scale I but the overconfident CEO depleting more of his (higher) initial cash holdings.
More generally, an overconfident CEO who chooses low absolute debt levels is also likely to
underinvest relative to a rational CEO, given equal initial cash holdings. This eﬀect arises
in our model because debt conservatism requires perceived costs of external finance to exceed
over-estimated investment returns. Even in this case, leverage, i.e., debt relative to total
external capital, can be higher since equity financing is less frequent.10
holders receive only a fraction. This case is unlikely to be empirically relevant for our sample of large US firms.
   9
     Other frictions that cause capital rationing (asymmetric information, agency costs) may distort even rational
CEOs towards retaining cash. In these settings, overconfidence pushes a CEO even further toward self-suﬃciency.
  10
     Leverage can also be lower for the overconfident CEO, even if initial leverage of the two CEOs is the same


                                                        7
    We also consider predictable variation in CEOs’ financing choices due to variation in in-
dividual traits arising from formative past experiences. Past experiences may aﬀect behavior
via two channels: changing beliefs or changing preferences. We do not formally model these
eﬀects and, hence, allow for both possibilities. Moreover, we do not distinguish between beliefs
specific to the context of financing choices and more general beliefs about the self or world.
To narrow the scope of our analysis and generate clear testable predictions, we require past
experiences to satisfy three criteria: (1) They must be major events, (2) They must aﬀect a
significant fraction of our sample CEOs, and (3) There must be clear existing evidence linking
them to later-life preferences or beliefs. We focus on two such experiences which are relevant
for our sample: the Great Depression and military service, particularly during World War II.
Existing evidence suggests that Depression experience discourages individuals from participat-
ing in capital markets. Hence, we would expect to observe more debt conservatism (and equity
conservatism) among Depression CEOs than among their peers. Unlike overconfident CEOs,
who might also display debt conservatism, Depression CEOs do not overestimate the returns
arising from hand-picked investment projects; they simply have a preference for self-suﬃciency.
Thus, while both Depression CEOs and overconfident CEOs may display debt conservatism,
the mechanism is diﬀerent. Depression CEOs under-invest to avoid risky capital, but do not
overinvest in bad projects when cash rich.
Hypothesis 3. CEOs who experienced the Great Depression in early adulthood access risky
capital markets more conservatively than other CEOs.
    Evidence from the psychology literature suggests that CEOs with a military background
— and especially those with battlefield experience — are likely to have a preference for more
aggressive policies, or less risk aversion. Service in the U.S. armed forces during World War II,
in particular, is likely to reinforce the connection between aggressiveness and success. Unlike
overconfident CEOs, military CEOs do not necessarily overestimate returns from investment.
They may invest and access external capital markets optimally, but choose to lever up their
companies more aggressively than other CEOs.
Hypothesis 4. CEOs with a military background maintain higher leverage than other CEOs.
    In Table I, we summarize the empirical predictions of our analysis for four key capital
structure outcomes: (1) the choice between public debt and equity issuance, (2) the choice to
cover financing deficits using debt or equity, (3) outstanding debt relative to available interest
tax deductions, and (4) market leverage.
and only the rational CEO issues any equity, if the rational CEO issues substantially more debt in absolute
terms (to finance higher investment) and the optimal financing plan is leverage-increasing.




                                                    8
II    Data
To measure CEO beliefs about future stock performance, we use several data sets, with diﬀerent
sample periods. Our primary sample is the data on CEOs’ personal investments from Hall and
Liebman (1998) and Yermack (1995). The data details the stock ownership and set of option
packages — including exercise price, remaining duration, and number of underlying shares —
for the CEOs of 477 publicly-traded U.S. firms between 1980 and 1994, year by year. To be
included in the sample, firms must appear at least four times on one of the Forbes magazine
lists of largest US companies between 1984 and 1994. The sample selection is important since
Frank and Goyal (2003) find systematic diﬀerences between the financing choices of small and
large companies. In Section VI, we extend our analysis to smaller firms and to more recent
years using data from Execucomp and Thomson Financial.
    We use data on CEO age to identify birth cohort; in particular, CEOs born between 1920
and 1929 (“Depression Babies”). We also supplement the portfolio data with hand-collected
information on CEO military service from Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) and Who’s Who in
Finance and Industry. We classify CEOs as World War II veterans if the Who’s Who or
D&B entry specifically references World War II or if the term of service includes any years
between 1941 and 1945. Similarly, we identify veterans of the Korean (1950-1953) and Vietnam
(1965-1973) Wars.
    As an alternative way to measure CEO characteristics, we use portrayals in the busi-
ness press. We hand-collect annual data on the press coverage of sample CEOs in The Wall
Street Journal, The New York Times, Business Week, Financial Times, and The Economist.
We count the total number of articles referring to the CEOs using the words “confident” or
“confidence;” “optimistic” or “optimism;” and “reliable,” “cautious,” “practical,” “frugal,”
“conservative,” or “steady.” We hand-check each article to ensure that the adjectives are used
to describe the CEO and to determine whether they are negated. We also collect detailed
information on the context of each reference. For example, we record whether the article is
about the CEO, the firm, or the market or industry as a whole and, if the article is about the
firm, the specific policies it references (earnings, products, mergers, culture).
   We merge this CEO-level data with Thomson’s SDC Platinum data on U.S. new issues of
common stock and convertible and non-convertible debt and preferred stock, including U.S.
Rule 144A issues. Alternatively, we use COMPUSTAT cash-flow statement data to measure
debt and equity issuance, including loans and other forms of private debt. Net debt issuance is
the diﬀerence between long-term debt issuance (dltis) and long-term debt reduction (dltr). Net
equity issuance is the diﬀerence between sales of common stock (sstk) and stock repurchases
(prstkc). Long-term debt reduction and stock repurchases are set to zero if they are missing or
combined with other data items. We exclude financial firms and regulated utilities (SIC codes
6000 - 6999 and 4900 - 4999).


                                              9
  To measure financing needs, we construct the net financing deficit, i.e., the amount the
CEO has to raise through debt or equity issues in a given firm-year to cover expenditures:
                                      F Dt = DIVt + It + ∆Wt − Ct
    DIV is cash dividends; I net investment (capital expenditures + increase in investments
+ acquisitions + other uses of funds - sale of PPE - sale of investment);11 ∆W the change in
working capital (change in operating working capital + change in cash and cash equivalents +
change in current debt);12 and C cash flow after interest and taxes (income before extraordinary
items + depreciation and amortization + extraordinary items and discontinued operations +
deferred taxes + equity in net loss (earnings) + other funds from operations + gain (loss) from
sales of PPE and other investments).13 All definitions follow Frank and Goyal (2003). We use
the value of book assets (at) taken at the beginning of the fiscal year to normalize debt and
equity issuance and the financing deficit.
    We also use COMPUSTAT to construct several firm-level control variables. We measure Q
as the ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets. Market value of assets is defined as
book value of total assets (at) plus market equity minus book equity. Market equity is defined
as common shares outstanding (csho) times fiscal year closing price (prcc f). Book equity
is calculated as stockholders’ equity (seq) [or the first available of common equity (ceq) plus
preferred stock par value (pstk) or total assets (at) minus total liabilities (lt)] minus preferred
stock liquidating value (pstkl) [or the first available of redemption value (pstkrv) or par value
(pstk)] plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (txditc) when available
minus post retirement assets (prba) when available. Book value of assets is total assets (at).14
We measure profitability as operating income before depreciation (oibdp) and asset tangibility
as property, plants and equipment (ppent). We normalize both variables using the book value
of assets at the beginning of the fiscal year. Book leverage is the quantity debt in current
liabilities (dlc) plus long term debt (dltt) divided by the quantity debt in current liabilities
(dlc) plus long term debt (dltt) plus common equity (ceq). We measure market leverage by
replacing common equity with market equity in the definition of book leverage.
   Finally, we use the “kink” variable, provided by John Graham. The construction of this
variable and the associated control variables are described in Graham (2000).15 Kink is defined
  11
      For firms reporting format codes 1 to 3, net investment is capx + ivch + aqc + fuseo - sppe - siv; for firms
reporting format code 7, it is capx + ivch + aqc - sppe - siv - ivstch - ivaco. When items are missing or combined
with other items, we code them as 0.
   12
      For format code 1, this is wcapc + chech + dlcch; for codes 2 and 3, - wcapc + chech - dlcch; for code 7,
- recch - invch - apalch - txach - aoloch + chech - fiao - dlcch. All items, excluding chech, are replaced with 0
when missing or combined with other items.
   13
      For codes 1 to 3, this is ibc + xidoc + dpc + txdc + esubc + sppiv + fopo + fsrco. For code 7, this is items
ibc + xidoc + dpc + txdc + esubc + sppiv + fopo + exre. Items are coded as 0 when missing or combined
with other items.
   14
      Definitions of Q and its components as in Fama and French (2002).
   15
      See Table 1 for more detail. Following Graham (2000), all continuous controls in the kink regressions are


                                                       10
as the ratio of the hypothetical level of interest at which the expected marginal tax-shield
benefits of debt start to fall (numerator) to the actual amount of interest paid by the firm
(denominator). It captures the amount of additional debt firms could issue before the marginal
benefit of interest deductions begins to decline: When a firm is committed to low future interest
payments, all of the interest payments are likely to be deducted from future profits, and the tax
benefits are equal to the interest payment times the marginal corporate tax rate. As debt levels
and future interest payments increase, it becomes increasingly likely that the company cannot
generate enough profits to fully realize the interest tax shield. Consequently, the expected
marginal tax benefit is decreasing when an additional dollar of interest payment is committed.
Assuming the marginal cost of debt intersects the downward-sloping portion of the marginal
benefit curve, a kink greater than 1 indicates that the firm has “left money on the table.” The
potential gain from adding debt increases with the kink. In this sense, high-kink firms use
debt more conservatively. The kink provides a measure of the aggressiveness with which firms
access debt markets which is comparable across firms and over time.
    The left columns of Table II present the summary statistics for sample firms after excluding
financial firms and utilities (263 firms). Panel A shows the COMPUSTAT data and the distri-
bution across the 12 Fama and French industries.16 Panel B summarizes the variable kink and
the control variables used in the kink regressions. In the latter analysis, the sample is reduced
to 189 firms due to missing values of the controls required in the kink analysis. Panel C sum-
marizes CEO characteristics. CEOs’ age, tenure and ownership of stock and options generally
serve as control variables; Depression Baby and Military Experience are our proxies for past
formative experiences. In the baseline sample, the Depression indicator is equal to one for
40% of the firm-year observations. The subsample we use for our analysis of Depression eﬀects
requires the kink controls and consists of 343 CEOs, 132 of whom are Depression Babies. In
the baseline sample, CEOs are coded as having military experience in 22% of firm-years. Note
that we limit the sample to CEOs for whom we were able to locate a Who’s Who or D&B entry,
resulting in a lower number of observations (1617). The subsample consists of 285 CEOs, 64 of
whom have served in the armed forces. This restriction should minimize measurement error,
though selective reporting remains a possible source of bias.


III     Measuring Overconfidence and Formative Experiences
Our main approach to identify CEO overconfidence is to infer CEOs’ beliefs about future stock
performance from their decisions to hold non-tradeable company stock options. This approach
exploits CEOs’ high exposure to the idiosyncratic risk of their companies: CEO compensation
typically includes large grants of company stock and options. In addition, CEOs’ human capital
winsorized at the 1% level.
  16
     For definitions see http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data library.html.


                                                     11
is invested in their firms, so that bad firm performance also reduces their outside options. In
order to diversify, optimizing CEOs exercise their executive options early. The exact threshold
for rational exercise depends on individual wealth, risk-aversion and diversification (Hall and
Murphy (2002)). CEOs who overestimate future returns of their firms, however, may hold in-
the-money options beyond the rational threshold in order to personally benefit from expected
stock price appreciation. Malmendier and Tate (2008) translate this logic into three measures
of overconfidence using the Hall-Liebman-Yermack portfolio data. To begin, we construct the
same measures, which allows us to interpret our results within the context of previous findings.
    Longholder. Longholder is an indicator for all CEOs who, at any point during the sample
period, hold an option until the year of expiration even though the option is at least 40% in the
money entering its final year. The exercise threshold of 40% corresponds to constant relative
risk aversion of 3 and 67% of wealth in company stock in the rational option exercise model
of Hall and Murphy (2002). Longholder is a managerial fixed eﬀect. The remaining measures
allow for within-CEO variation.
    Pre- and Post-Longholder. Post-Longholder is an indicator equal to 1 only after the CEO
for the first time holds an option until expiration, provided it exceeds the 40% threshold.
It allows us to isolate financing decisions after the CEO has revealed his confidence level.
Pre-Longholder is equal to 1 for the other years in which Longholder is equal to 1.
   Holder 67. We consider option holdings with five years remaining duration. Maintaining
our prior assumptions on risk aversion and diversification, the new exercise threshold in the
Hall-Murphy framework is 67% in the money. Holder 67 is binary and becomes equal to 1
once a CEO fails to exercise options with 5 years remaining duration despite a stock price
increase of at least 67% since the grant date. We restrict the comparison group to CEOs who
were faced with this exercise decision, but chose to exercise rather than hold. A CEO enters
the sample once he has an option with 5 years remaining duration that is at least 67% in the
money.
    Our second approach to measure CEO overconfidence uses the perception of outsiders, as
captured by CEO characterizations in the business press, instead of beliefs revealed by direct
CEO choices. Our press data, described in Section II, provides the year-by-year number of
articles that refer to each sample CEO. We construct an indicator of CEO confidence that
compares the number of past articles using the terms (a) “confident” or “confidence” or (b)
“optimistic” or “optimism” to the number of past articles that portray the CEO as (c) not
“confident,” (d) not “optimistic,” or (e) “reliable,” “cautious,” “conservative,” “practical,”
“frugal,” or “steady” (i denotes the CEO):
                                     (       P                   Pt−1
                                         1 if t−1
                                               s=1 ais + bis >    s=1 cis   + dis + eis ;
             T OT ALconf identit =
                                         0 otherwise.
We only use past media portrayal to ensure that financing policies do not aﬀect the indicator

                                                 12
directly. We also hand-check the context of the individual articles and find that few focus
on financial policies: Among the 960 articles that are primarily about the firm, 53% focus on
company earnings, 17% on mergers, and fewer than 5% on financial policy. We also address
possible bias due to diﬀerential coverage. If, for example, there were a press bias towards
positive news stories, CEOs who are often in the press would be more likely to have TOTAL-
confident equal to 1. To address this possibility, we control for the total number of articles in
the selected publications, aggregated over the same period as the TOTALconfident measure.
    In the right half of Table II, we show firm and CEO summary statistics for the subsample
of Longholder firm years. The firm characteristics are quite similar to those of the overall
sample. The diﬀerences in means between firm-years with and without Longholder CEOs are
typically statistically insignificant, adjusting errors for firm-level clustering. The lone excep-
tion is profitability (0.18 versus 0.21), for which we control in our regressions. In the lower
part of Panel A, we see that overconfident CEOs are distributed more or less proportionally
across industries, though they are overrepresented in the Chemicals and Allied Products and
the Business Equipment industries, and somewhat underrepresented in Energy and Telecom-
munication. Panel B reveals that overconfident CEOs have higher kinks and, using the Graham
(2000) industry indicators, appear to be somewhat overrepresented in the Computer Industry.
In Panel C, we see that overconfident CEOs have significantly longer tenures, with a mean of
11 years compared to 9 years in the full sample. They hold significantly less company stock,
but more options than other CEOs. They are also more likely both to have served in the
military and to be members of the Great Depression cohort. The sample characteristics are
similar using the other measures of overconfidence. Moreover, the overconfidence measures are
all positively and significantly correlated with each other: The pairwise correlations between
Longholder and Holder 67, pre-Longholder, post-Longholder, and TOTALconfident, respec-
tively, are 0.42, 0.76, 0.58, and 0.09. In our regression analyses, we focus on the Longholder
measure. However, we report diﬀerences in our results across measures in the text.
    In Table III, we report the pairwise correlations between several firm and CEO charac-
teristics and our two measures of formative past experiences, Depression Baby and Military
Service. Depression Baby CEOs have significantly higher levels of Graham’s “kink,” indicating
that they access debt markets conservatively. They are also significantly less likely than other
CEOs to issue equity, conditional on accessing public securities markets. Military CEOs, on
the other hand, do not show any aversion to debt markets and are significantly more likely
to issue equity, conditional on accessing public markets. And, they appear to have higher
leverage, though the correlation is not statistically significant. The directions of the eﬀects are
consistent with military experience as a proxy for (overly-) aggressive beliefs and early life ex-
perience during the Great Depression as a proxy for conservatism. It is also interesting, in light
of our hypotheses, that military CEOs are significantly more likely to make acquisitions (and



                                                13
have worse operating performance).17 However, there is no correlation between the Depression
cohort and merger frequency and a positive relation with ROA.
    As a final step, we check whether our findings on Depression and military CEOs are consis-
tent with outsiders’ perceptions of these CEOs. Mirroring our analysis of overconfidence, we
use CEOs’ portrayal in the business press and the press data described in Section II. Individ-
uals who experienced the Great Depression early in life have a preference for self-suﬃciency
and conservative financing choices. These preferences are likely to manifest themselves more
generally in a conservative leadership style. Consistent with this story, we find a positive and
significant correlation between coverage in the business press as “cautious,” “practical,” “reli-
able,”“conservative,” “frugal,” or “steady” (variable PRESS “Cautious”) and membership in
the Depression cohort. Military exposure, instead, induces aggressiveness and risk-tolerance.
And, indeed, we find that, military service has a significant negative correlation with PRESS
“Cautious.” We also test these correlations in a regression framework, controlling for diﬀer-
ential press coverage and CEO age. Despite the imprecision of the measures, the direction of
the eﬀects remains the same, though only the negative correlation between PRESS “Cautious”
and military service remains statistically significant.


IV      Managerial Traits and Capital Structure Choices
IV.A      Debt vs. Equity
Next, we test the capital structure predictions of diﬀerences in CEO traits. We begin with
the choice between debt and equity. Here, only the overconfidence model makes a prediction
(see Table I). Overconfident managers are reluctant to issue equity because they believe that it
dilutes the claims of existing shareholders. They are also reluctant to issue risky debt because
they believe that the interest rate creditors demand is too high given the distribution of future
returns. On the other hand, they overestimate their financing needs because they overestimate
returns to investment. Thus, overconfident CEOs may access public markets with higher or
lower baseline frequencies. Conditional on accessing external financing, however, overconfident
CEOs generally prefer debt to equity since debt allows current shareholders to remain the
residual claimant on the firm’s future cash flows. Thus, we test whether, conditional on
accessing public securities markets, overconfident CEOs are less likely to issue equity.

Specification 1: Public Issues Panel A of Table IV presents the frequencies of equity and
debt issues, conditional on conducting a public issue.18 Equity issues are issues of common
  17
     The merger eﬀect is robust to controlling for standard merger determinants like Q and cash flow in a logit
regression.
  18
     An alternative to conditioning on issuance is to explicitly model both the decision to issue and the choice
between debt and equity. We do such an analysis using a Heckman probit selection model (and the net financing


                                                      14
or preferred stock, and debt issues are issues of non-convertible debt. Years with both a debt
and an equity issue count in both categories. We find that equity issues are less frequent
for overconfident CEOs under all measures. For Longholder CEOs, 31% of firm years with
public issues contain at least one equity issue. This percentage is virtually constant across
Pre- and Post-Longholder years. When Longholder is 0, instead, 42% of issue years contain an
equity issue. The diﬀerence is statistically significant at the 5% level, where standard errors
are adjusted for firm-level clustering. The results are stronger economically and statistically
using the Holder 67 and TOTALconfident measures. Holder 67 CEOs issue equity 23% of the
time, but CEOs in the comparison group issue equity 39% of the time. TOTALconfident CEOs
issue equity 25% of the time, but CEOs for whom TOTALconfident is 0 issue equity 48% of
the time. For both measures, the diﬀerences are significant at the 1% level, again adjusted
for firm-level clustering. Overconfident CEOs also issue debt at a higher frequency than other
CEOs under all measures. However, the diﬀerence is statistically significant only using the
TOTALconfident measure. There are no significant diﬀerences for hybrid securities.
    We test whether these cross-sectional patterns are robust to the inclusion of CEO- and
firm-level controls. Panel B of Table IV presents a logit model, which uses an indicator for
‘at least one equity issue during the fiscal year’ as the dependent variable. We first run a
baseline logit with Longholder as the only explanatory variable (Column 1). We then add
portfolio controls for the incentive eﬀects of performance-based compensation: the percentage
of company stock and the number of vested options held by the CEO (Column 2). Options
are scaled by shares outstanding and multiplied by 10 so that the mean is comparable to
the mean of stock holdings. In Column 3, we add the standard firm controls from the capital
structure literature — the natural logarithm of sales, profitability, tangibility, and Q — to capture
the eﬀects of known cross-sectional determinants of changes in leverage (Rajan and Zingales
(1995)). In Column 4, we add book leverage to capture systematic diﬀerences in the ability to
access debt markets.19 We then add year eﬀects to control for the possibility that overconfident
CEO-years are disproportionately clustered in cold markets for equity issuance (Column 5).
Finally, in Column 6, we include the full set of firm-level controls and industry dummies from
Graham (2000) as an alternative way to capture traditional capital-structure determinants.
These controls (described in Panel B of Table I) include binary indicators for No Dividend,
Negative Owners’ Equity, Net-Operating-Loss Carryforwards, and five industry groupings, as
well as continuous measures of firm size, the expected cost of financial distress (ECOST), the
cyclicality of operating earnings, return on assets, the z-score, the current and quick ratios,
R&D and advertising expenditures, and Q. All controls are measured at the beginning of the
fiscal year. All standard errors are adjusted for firm-level clustering.
    The results confirm the pattern in the raw data. Across all specifications, Longholder CEOs
deficit and cash stock as identifying variables for the public issuance choice). Our conclusions are unaﬀected.
  19
     When controlling for book leverage, we drop the few cases with book leverage greater than 1.


                                                      15
are 37 − 49% less likely than their peers to issue equity. The estimated eﬀects are significant
at the 5% or 10% levels. Among the CEO controls, vested option holdings increase the odds
of issuing equity, though the large coeﬃcient estimate is driven by 5 outlier observations in
the upper tail of the distribution. Eliminating those observations substantially decreases the
coeﬃcient without aﬀecting the Longholder coeﬃcient. Among the standard firm controls, only
sales are consistently significant. Smaller firms are more likely to issue equity. Surprisingly, Q
does not seem to positively predict equity issues. As a robustness check, we control for stock
returns over the prior year. We verify that past returns predict significantly higher equity
issuance without materially aﬀecting the Longholder estimate. In the specification with kink
controls, firms that do not pay dividends and have more cyclical earnings appear to issue more
equity, while firms with higher R&D expenditures issue less.
    We also consider the robustness of the results to alternative sets of controls. For example,
we re-estimate the regression using the available controls from Gomes and Phillips (2007).20
Missing IBES data requires us to drop observations prior to 1984. However, even in the
roughly 40% smaller sample, we find qualitatively similar, though statistically insignificant,
results (Longholder coeﬃcient = -0.395; p-value = 0.188). Likewise, including changes in sales,
Q, profitability, or tangibility either in addition to or in lieu of the levels has little impact on
the results. We also find similar results using the Holder 67 and TOTALconfident measures.
The measured impact on equity issuance is statistically and economically stronger than the
Longholder results in all cases but one. The one exception is the estimation including all
controls and year eﬀects with TOTALconfident as the overconfidence measure (odds ratio
= 72%; p-value = 0.18). There are also no significant diﬀerences between the Pre- and Post-
Longholder portions of the Longholder eﬀect. Finally, as in Panel A, we do not find consistently
significant results when we use either debt or hybrid issuance as the dependent variable.
   Overall, CEOs we classify as overconfident are less likely to issue equity conditional on
accessing public securities markets, controlling for standard determinants of issuance decisions.

Specification 2: Financing Deficit We repeat the test in the standard ‘financing deficit
framework’ of Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999). The financing deficit measures the amount
of expenditures requiring external finance. We test whether overconfident CEOs cover more
of their financing deficits using debt than other CEOs. This approach is analogous to testing
for fewer equity issues conditional on issuing any public security in Specification 1 above, but
adds bank loans and other private sources of financing to the analysis. This approach uses
data from cash flow statements and, hence, allows us to use the full sample of firm years rather
than only years with a public security issuance. One immediate advantage of the larger sample
is that we can include firm fixed eﬀects, i.e., identify the impact of overconfidence separately
  20
    Since IRRC data is unavailable for our sample period, we use the natural log of board size as an alternative
governance measure. We also do not have the marginal tax rate control.


                                                      16
from time-invariant firm eﬀects.
    Note that overconfident CEOs may raise more funds than rational CEOs (since they over-
estimate the returns to investment) or fewer funds (since they perceive external financing to
be overpriced). Thus, rather than asking whether overconfident CEOs raise more dollars of
debt or fewer dollars of equity than their peers, the appropriate test is whether the mix of
external finance depends on overconfidence: Whatever the determinants of the baseline rela-
tion between debt financing and the financing deficit, do overconfident CEOs demonstrate a
heightened preference for debt? Thus, our findings are unaﬀected by controversy over trade-oﬀ
versus pecking order explanations of financing deficit regressions.
   We estimate the following regression specification:

           Debtit = β1 + β2 F Dit + Xit0 B3 + β4 ∆it + F Dit · Xit0 B5 + β6 F Dit · ∆it +        it        (1)

Debt is long-term debt issues minus long-term debt reduction (Net Debt Issues), normalized
by beginning-of-the-year assets. F D denotes the financing deficit, as defined in Section II, and
∆ is the overconfidence proxy. X includes CEO- and firm-level controls. At the CEO level,
we control for stock ownership and vested options. At the firm level, we use the controls from
Frank and Goyal (2003): book leverage and changes in profitability, tangibility, the natural
logarithm of sales, and Q. All controls are included both as level eﬀects and interacted with
F D. We also include firm fixed eﬀects and their interactions with F D. The fixed eﬀects allow
us to separate eﬀects we attribute to the CEO from time-invariant firm eﬀects. In the case of
Holder 67 and TOTALconfident, we also exploit variation between a CEO’s overconfident and
non-overconfident years. Finally, we include year eﬀects to control for the eﬀects of hot equity
issuance markets. All standard errors account for firm-level clustering.
    Table V presents the results using Longholder as the overconfidence proxy. For comparison
to prior literature, Column 1 presents a baseline regression without fixed eﬀects or controls.
The coeﬃcient of 0.729 on the financing deficit is very close to the eﬀect estimated in Shyam-
Sunder and Myers (1999), reflecting that our sample of large firms is more similar to their
sample than to the Frank and Goyal (2003) sample.21 In Column 2, we add Longholder,
its interaction with the financing deficit, firm fixed eﬀects, and the interactions of firm fixed
eﬀects with the financing deficit. We drop the level eﬀect of the financing deficit when including
interactions of the financing deficit with firm fixed eﬀects to avoid collinearity. Including fixed
eﬀects and their interactions with the financing deficit means we estimate separate intercepts
and slopes for each individual firm. Our test identifies the impact of overconfidence on the
proportion of the financing deficit covered with debt using only variation that is not confounded
  21
    Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999) analyze large firms, with mean assets of $953m for the period 1971-1989.
(Our firms are even larger, with mean assets of $5477m for the period 1980-1994.) When Frank and Goyal
(2003) analyze, separately, the quartile of largest firms, they find similar coeﬃcients of 0.753 for the period
1971-1989 and of 0.675 for the period 1990-1998.


                                                      17
by firm-specific eﬀects. In our data, there are 35 firms in which we observe a change from an
overconfident to a rational CEO, accounting for 371 of the 2, 385 sample years. While a small
portion of the overall variation in the data (consistent with the high value of R2 in these
regressions), this variation is also the cleanest to interpret. In Column 3, we add controls for
CEO stock and option ownership, and in Column 4 year fixed eﬀects. Finally, in Column 5,
we add controls for changes in sales, in Q, in profitability, and in tangibility and, in Column
6, the lag of book leverage.22
    Among the controls, deviations from (within-firm) average book leverage are negatively
related to debt issues, consistent with leverage targeting. Above-average changes in Q predict
less financing deficit covered with debt, consistent, for example, with market timing. More debt
is used when CEOs have above average stock holdings, consistent with either incentive eﬀects
in the presence of positive information or overconfidence. Surprisingly, CEOs use significantly
less debt when their option holdings are above average, though the economic magnitude is
small (1-2c/ less debt per $1 of financing deficit for a one-standard deviation increase in option
holdings). In all specifications, Longholders use more debt than non-Longholder successors or
predecessors in the same firm. The eﬀect is significant at the 10% level and economically large,
ranging from 32c/ to 35c/ more debt per $1 of financing deficit. At the mean of the annual
financing deficit ($43m), the estimates imply $15m more in debt issuance.
    The results using the TOTALconfident proxy are qualitatively similar, though weaker
economically and statistically. We find no significant diﬀerence between the Pre- and Post-
Longholder portions of the Longholder estimate and very little impact of Holder 67, perhaps
due to reduced sample size. Overall, we confirm the findings from Specification 1 using the
financing-deficit framework with firm fixed eﬀects.

IV.B      Internal vs. External Finance
Overconfidence predicts not only a preference for debt over equity, but also for internal over
external finance. A possible consequence is debt conservatism: Even though overconfident
CEOs choose debt over equity when they access external capital markets, their preference is
to forgo external markets altogether. If perceived financing costs dominate over-estimated
investment returns or cash is abundant, they may not access those markets frequently enough
to take full advantage of the tax benefits of debt. In other words, even if overconfident CEOs
maintain higher leverage than rational CEOs, the level of debt chosen may still be conservative.
   Early-life experience during the Great Depression predicts an aversion to external capital.
However, unlike overconfidence, it does not predict misassessment of investment returns. Thus,
debt conservatism is a necessary, not just possible consequence.
  22
    The results are nearly identical using lagged levels of the sales, tangibility, profitability, and Q controls (as
in Specification 1) rather than changes.



                                                         18
   To test these hypotheses, we use the “kink” variable of Graham (2000) to measure debt
conservatism. It captures how much a firm could increase debt before the expected tax benefit
begins to decline. Graham shows that firms, on average, leave money on the table by following
excessively conservative debt policies. We test whether managerial traits explain a portion of
the eﬀect. We use the following regression specification:

                                  Kinkit = β1 + β2 ∆it + Xit0 B3 +      it ,                             (2)

where ∆ is the managerial trait of interest and X are firm- and CEO-level controls. We
include the firm controls from Graham’s original analysis, to ease comparison. We estimate
tobit regressions because the kink is artificially bounded between 0 and 8. All standard errors
are clustered at the firm level. The null hypothesis is that β2 is zero; overconfidence and
Depression experience predict β2 > 0. Though these hypotheses are one-tailed, we report the
results of two-tailed tests, resulting in a higher threshold for rejecting the null of no eﬀect.
We also test whether CEOs with high “kinks” simultaneously raise equity as a substitute for
debt, which would falsify the overconfidence and Depression Baby hypotheses: CEOs should
be both debt- and equity-conservative.
   In Table VI, Panel A, we present tobit estimates of model (2). Column 1 shows a baseline
regression of kink on Longholder without controls. Column 2 adds CEO-level controls and
Column 3 adds the full set of firm-level controls and industry dummies from Graham (2000).23
The large number of kink controls reduces the sample to only 189 firms. Among the controls,
we find some evidence that more vested option holdings are associated with lower kinks. Of
Graham’s 19 firm-level and industry controls, 16 have qualitatively similar eﬀects in his and
our estimations. The exceptions are negative owners’ equity, the natural log of sales and
advertising expense over sales, which have opposite signs.24
   Longholder CEOs have higher kinks across all three specifications. The coeﬃcient estimates
are significant at the 10% level and range from 0.647 to 1.256, representing a 16% to 32%
increase in kink from its mean and an increase of 0.24 to 0.46 standard deviations.
   In Columns 4 and 5, we provide parallel estimates substituting Depression Baby for Long-
holder. Column 4 presents the baseline regression without controls. Column 5 adds CEO age,
CEO tenure, and the Graham (2000) controls. The CEO age control is particularly impor-
tant in separating the eﬀect of the Depression cohort from the eﬀect of higher age.25 We find
that Depression Babies have significantly higher levels of the kink variable. Economically, the
0.5053 increase in kink in Column 5 represents a 13% increase from the sample mean. Hence,
the Depression eﬀect is similar in magnitude to the overconfidence eﬀect.
  23
     Graham also includes squares of all continuous controls. Including the squares has little impact on the
results: The estimated Longholder coeﬃcient in Column 3 changes from 0.605 to 0.611 (p = 0.051).
  24
     The (untabulated) control variables are statistically significant with the exception of Negative Owners’
Equity, CYCLICAL, Quick Ratio, and PPE-to-Assets.
  25
     The results are robust to adding a quadratic term in age.


                                                     19
   Finally, Column 6 shows a specification that includes both the Longholder overconfidence
measure (and portfolio controls) and Depression Baby. This specification is important given the
evidence in Table II that Longholder CEOs are more often Depression Babies. We find nearly
identical point estimates on both Depression Baby and Longholder, though the Longholder
coeﬃcient becomes marginally insignificant. Thus, Depression experience appears to induce a
preference for self-suﬃciency that is distinct from the impact of overconfidence.26
    In Panel B, we test whether debt-conservative Longholder and Depression Baby CEOs are
also equity-conservative — i.e., issue less equity as their firms’ kinks increase — consistent with
a general aversion to external finance. We tabulate the distribution of net equity issues among
Longholder and among Depression Baby CEOs, separately for four diﬀerent levels of kink: (i)
kink ≤ 1, (ii) 1 < kink ≤ 3, (iii) 3 < kink ≤ 7, and (iv) kink > 7. We find that higher levels
of kink are associated with less equity issuance. Both the mean and median of net equity
issuance decline monotonically in kink. For Longholder CEOs, the diﬀerences in mean equity
issues between groups (i) and (ii) and groups (i) and (iii) have p-values of 0.016 and 0.052,
respectively, with errors clustered at the firm level. The remaining cross-group diﬀerences are
not statistically significant. For Depression CEOs, those with the highest values of the kink
variable are actually net repurchasers of company equity, on average.27 Thus, both Longholder
and Depression CEOs who display debt conservatism also issue equity more conservatively,
implying that they rely more on internal finance.28
    We perform a number of robustness checks on this evidence. One shortcoming of the tobit
analysis is that we cannot include firm fixed eﬀects without biasing the coeﬃcient estimates
due to the incidental parameters problem. To address (uncontrolled) cross-sectional diﬀerences
between firms with and without Longholder (or Depression Baby) CEOs, we replicate our find-
ings in a conditional logit framework that uses only within-firm variation for identification and
an indicator for kink > 1 as the dependent variable. Though we lose much of the information
in the kink variable, our results are qualitatively similar. In the specification mirroring Column
3, we find an odds ratio of 2.23, meaning that Longholder CEOs have more than double the
odds of having kinks exceeding 1, though the estimate is not statistically significant. The De-
pression Baby estimate is less robust to the fixed eﬀects specification. A possible explanation
is a greater ease in matching CEO to firm preferences based on observable cohort eﬀects than
(ex ante) unobservable cognitive biases.
  26
     We also re-run the specification in Column 6 including military service as an independent variable. Though
the estimates are less powerful due to the smaller sample size, our conclusions are qualitatively unchanged.
There is no significant relation between military service and kink.
  27
     Here the cross-group diﬀerence between (i) and (iv) is significant (p =0.051); however, the diﬀerences
between groups (i) and (ii) and groups (i) and (iii) are not (p =0.122 and p =0.194, respectively).
  28
     It is possible that Longholder CEOs store debt capacity in anticipation of large investments or acquisitions
(thereby inducing high kinks). This explanation would be consistent with the evidence in Malmendier and Tate
(2008) that overconfident CEOs do more acquisitions and prefer to finance them with cash and debt.



                                                       20
    Unlike Depression Babies, overconfident CEOs over-estimate investment returns. They
do not have a general aversion to external capital, but avoid risky capital only if (1) cash
is abundant or (2) perceived costs exceed (over-estimated) returns to investment. We take
two additional steps to ensure that the measured aversion to debt among Longholder CEOs
conforms to the full overconfidence hypothesis. First, we explore the impact of cash holdings
on our estimates of the Longholder eﬀect. We add an indicator for “Low Cash Status” and
its interaction with Longholder to the regression specification in Panel A, Column 3. Low
Cash Status is equal to 1 if the firm’s cash stock at the beginning of the year, divided by
mean industry investment, is at or below the 40th percentile in our sample.29 Mean industry
investment is calculated separately for each year and each Fama-French industry shown in
Panel A of Table I. We find no evidence of higher kinks among Longholder CEOs with low
internal funds. Only Longholder CEOs with abundant cash have significantly higher kinks than
rational CEOs. The statistical significance of the eﬀect increases (p-value = 0.025). While the
diﬀerence in kinks between Longholders with and without low cash is insignificant (p-value =
0.214), the result confirms that high kinks are not driven by CEOs who cannot use internal
funds. Second, we analyze the relation between kink and credit-worthiness. The overconfidence
hypothesis implies that debt aversion should not be found among firms with access to riskless
debt financing, for which there is no disagreement about the appropriate interest rate. We use
the S&P Long-Term Domestic Issuer Credit Rating to split the sample into thirds: firm-years
with A+ ratings or better are in the highest third, and firm-years with BBB ratings or worse
are in the lowest third. We drop firms with missing credit ratings. Repeating the tobit analysis
of Table VI, Panel A, on each subsample, we find that the eﬀect is concentrated in the middle
third: the coeﬃcients and p-values for Longholder in the Column 3 specification are 0.489
(0.32), 0.823 (0.018), and 0.412 (0.178) for low, middle, and high credit ratings. The lack of an
eﬀect among the highest-rated firms confirms that Longholder CEOs are not reluctant to raise
(nearly) riskless debt. Moreover, the weak eﬀect among the lowest-rated firms suggests that
high kinks among Longholder CEOs are not an artifact of systematically worse credit ratings.
    Finally, we re-estimate our regressions using the alternative proxies for overconfidence. We
find similar results using Holder 67 and little diﬀerence across the Pre- and Post-Longholder
portions of the Longholder measure. TOTALconfident CEOs, however, have lower kinks than
other CEOs, though the result is not robust to the fixed eﬀects logit specification. Given our
earlier finding in Table III that only TOTALconfident CEOs are associated with a significantly
higher probability of public debt issuance, one possible interpretation for the diﬀerence in
results is that, among overconfident CEOs, the press is most likely to identify the ones who
demonstrate their beliefs by over-investing, thereby requiring higher external finance.
  29
     The results are robust to using other cutoﬀs, such as the 25th or the 30th percentile, and alternative proxies
for “expected volume of investment,” such as prior-year averages.




                                                        21
IV.C       Leverage
Recent research argues that there are large unexplained time-invariant eﬀects in leverage (Lem-
mon et al. (2008)). One interesting question is whether managerial traits, such as overcon-
fidence, can explain these diﬀerences across firms: Do diﬀerences in financing (or changes in
leverage) accumulate into diﬀerences in capital structures (levels of leverage)? In the context
of overconfidence, this is an empirical question since the theoretical prediction could go either
way, depending on the relation between over-estimated investment returns, cash holdings, and
perceived financing costs. In the context of military experience, however, we have a clear
prediction of higher leverage.
    Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to assess causality in cross-sectional leverage regressions and,
specifically, to determine whether the eﬀect is due to the manager or to the firm. For example,
firms that leverage more aggressively may also be attractive places for overconfident CEOs
to work. Alternatively, overconfident CEOs may be attracted by the spare debt capacity in
low-leverage firms. In other words, selection eﬀects might obscure the true impact of individual
CEOs. In order to obtain identification, we follow an approach similar to Bertrand and Schoar
(2003) and compare leverage under diﬀerent CEOs operating the same firm:

                                  Leverageit = β1 + Xit0 B2 + β3 ∆it +          it                               (3)

 where Leverage is end-of-fiscal-year market leverage, X is a vector of firm and CEO control
variables, and ∆ is the managerial trait of interest.
    We begin by estimating two baseline regressions for comparison with existing literature. In
Column 1 of Table VII, we estimate a pooled regression, including our standard set of firm-
level controls: profitability, tangibility, size, Q, and the financing deficit. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. The controls explain 34% of the variation in leverage and have the
typical directional eﬀects: size (+), profitability (-), tangibility (+), Q (-), and financing deficit
(+).30 In Column 2, we add firm fixed eﬀects. Consistent with Lemmon et al. (2008), we find
that adding firm eﬀects more than doubles the R2 of the regression. Among the controls, only
tangibility loses explanatory power when estimated using within-firm variation.
   Next, we test whether diﬀerences in managerial confidence levels can explain remaining
within-firm variation in leverage. Adding Longholder (Column 3), we find that overconfident
CEOs maintain significantly higher leverage than their predecessors or successors. The per-
centage of explained within-firm variation increases from 11% to 12%. The eﬀect is robust to
the inclusion of several important controls: In Column 4, we add five lags of stock returns to
capture the impact of stock prices changes on leverage ratios (Welch (2004))31 and on option
  30
     We include financing deficit for consistency with our earlier specifications. It is indeed significant. However,
the Longholder eﬀect does not depend upon its inclusion.
  31
     We do not include contemporaneous returns due to endogeneity concerns. However, the results are robust
to this additional control.


                                                         22
exercise. As expected, stock returns have a significantly negative impact on leverage. The
eﬀect decays in the length of the lag, with the fifth lag being insignificant. Including stock
returns also eliminates the predictive power of Q while improving the R2 of the regression. In
Column 5, we add our standard CEO controls for stock and option holdings. If CEOs have
private information then these controls capture variation in CEOs’ concern over diluting their
personal equity stakes through new issues. We also add year eﬀects and CEO tenure and its
interaction with Longholder to the regression. We find a negative coeﬃcient on the interaction
of tenure with Longholder, which may reflect learning — Longholder CEOs learn to issue risky
capital more appropriately as their tenures increase — but may also reflect a tendency of Long-
holder CEOs to exhaust their firms’ debt capacities early in their tenures and subsequently
finance desired (over-)investment using equity.
    The eﬀect of Longholder on leverage is large. In the Column 4 specification, for example,
replacing a rational CEO with an overconfident one increases firm leverage by 20% of a standard
deviation or, alternatively, by 15% from its mean level. The true CEO eﬀect may be even larger
since we are conservative in separating out time-invariant firm eﬀects: some of the eﬀects we
attribute to the firm may actually reflect the influence of past and current CEOs. In particular,
our estimates of β3 do not exploit any information from firms with only a single (overconfident)
CEO during our sample period; however, such long-tenured CEOs may have the largest impacts
on their firms’ capital structures.
    Next, we test whether CEOs with a military background pursue more aggressive financial
policies. In Column 6, we find that military CEOs choose higher leverage than their prede-
cessors or successors. Economically, the eﬀect is smaller than the impact of overconfidence,
increasing leverage by 17% of a standard deviation or, alternatively, by 13% from its mean. Sta-
tistically, the baseline eﬀect of military experience is significant at the 10% level after clustering
at the firm level. In Column 7, we add our standard set of firm-level controls — profitability,
tangibility, firm size, Q, and the financing deficit — and the relevant CEO-level controls, age
and tenure. The coeﬃcient of past military service is virtually unaﬀected. In Column 8, we
refine our measure of military experience by separating World War II veterans, who are more
likely to have had combat exposure, from other military CEOs.32 We find that, indeed, the
impact of military service on leverage choices comes primarily from World War II veterans.
Among this group, the chosen leverage is 25% higher than the sample mean, and the diﬀerence
to other military experience is significant at the 5% level. This result also helps to address the
self-selection explanation, under which aggressive or risk-tolerant individuals choose to serve
in the military (and later take more aggressive managerial decisions), as involuntary service
  32
   Alternatively, we code “combat exposure”as including World War II, the Korean, and the Vietnam Wars.
The results are the same: we find a positive and significant eﬀect on leverage, controlling for Military Experience.
However, the coeﬃcient appears to be driven by World War II. If we include separate dummies for the 12 Korean
War veterans and 8 Vietnam War veterans in our sample, we find insignificant coeﬃcients.



                                                        23
was common during World War II.
    Finally, in Column 9, we include Military Experience and World War II Veteran with the
Longholder overconfidence measure and the union of relevant controls. Despite the reduced
sample size, both the Longholder and World War II Veteran variables remain positive and
significant, suggesting that they capture diﬀerent subsets of CEOs or traits.33
    We perform a number of additional robustness checks, using alternative variable defini-
tions, regression specifications, and methodology. First, we consider book rather than market
leverage as the dependent variable. The results are qualitatively similar though statistically
weaker. For example, the coeﬃcient estimate on Longholder is 0.042 with a t-statistic of 1.51
in the Column 5 specification. One potential reason for the discrepancy is that book equity
— as a historical accounting measure — has only a noisy relation to the economic quantity of
interest, the value of shareholders’ cash flow claims. We also find similar results using an
alternative methodology inspired by Baker and Wurgler (2003), i .e., measuring the relation
between the change in leverage and the number of overconfident sample CEO years (or, alter-
natively, “external finance weighted” overconfidence). Finally, we find similar results using the
TOTALconfident proxy, with a few notable diﬀerences. First, the relation with the overconfi-
dence proxy is stronger in the cross-section than within firms. Second, the relation is stronger
when we remove within-CEO variation. Finally, the eﬀect is typically strongest using book,
rather than market, leverage as the dependent variable.
    Overall, our results support the hypothesis that managerial traits help to explain variation
in capital structure that cannot be explained by time-invariant firm diﬀerences or variation in
traditional capital-structure determinants. Though we cannot identify the eﬀect econometri-
cally (due to joint determination), the evidence suggests that managerial factors account at
least partially for the time-invariant, firm-specific component of leverage uncovered in recent
empirical studies. The results are also consistent with predictions of the overconfidence hy-
pothesis: overconfident CEOs view equity financing as a last resort, resulting in measurable
diﬀerences in firm leverage ratios compared to their rational predecessors or successors.


V      Alternative Interpretations
We consider several alternative interpretations of our main measure of overconfidence, late
option exercise. We exclude several explanations that have no link to capital-structure decisions
or have little or no bearing on the press measure. For example, personal taxes, board pressure
and procrastination are potential explanations for late option exercise, but have no plausible
eﬀect on CEOs’ portrayal in the business press.
  33
    For completeness, we also re-run the Column 9 specification including Depression Baby, even though we do
not have a theoretical prediction. There is no significant relation with leverage.



                                                    24
    Dilution. CEOs with extensive holdings of company stock and options may want to avoid
diluting those holdings with additional equity issues. Graham and Harvey (2001), for example,
report that earnings-per-share dilution is a primary consideration in stock issuance decisions.
While this interpretation is unlikely to aﬀect our press measure, we address the concern by
controlling directly for the level of CEO stock and option holdings in all of our estimations.
These controls capture CEO incentives to avoid dilutionary equity issuance based on their
own portfolio compositions. Our measures capture, instead, the timing of option exercise, not
the level of holdings. We also control for leverage and credit rating since CEOs of firms near
financial distress may rationally worry more about dilution due to debt overhang. In addition,
note that perceived dilution is exactly the mechanism that causes overconfident CEOs to avoid
issuing equity. Thus, it is important to distinguish overconfidence from real information.
    Inside Information. A CEO may choose not to exercise in-the-money options because of
positive private information about future earnings. In this case, holding company stock options
is a profitable investment until outsiders learn the information. Moreover, CEOs with such
information may justifiably exude “confidence” and “optimism” to the business press. In this
case, our results would support the traditional information-based pecking-order theory. The
key diﬀerence from overconfidence is whether CEOs’ beliefs are correct.
   We check whether CEOs earn positive abnormal returns from holding options. We find that
Longholder CEOs would earn greater profits on average by exercising 1, 2, 3, or 4 years earlier
and investing in the S&P 500 for the remainder of the options’ durations.34 We find similar
evidence for the Holder 67 measure. This evidence suggests that the average Longholder or
Holder 67 CEO does not have positive inside information.
    Signalling. The apparent absence of inside information casts doubt on rational signalling
as an interpretation of our measures. If late option exercise and bold statements to the press
are meant to signal strong future stock price performance, those signals seem ineﬀective: CEOs
who send them are the least likely to issue equity and their stock does not display positive
abnormal performance. It is possible, though, that investors would expect even worse future
performance in the absence of option-holding and strong statements in the press, leading to
even less equity issuance. Our findings using the Post-Longholder measure cast doubt on
this interpretation. If private information drives managerial financing preferences for debt
over equity and delayed option exercise (and press coverage) signals that information to the
market, we would expect a weaker impact of past ‘signals.’ Instead, we find little diﬀerence
between the relation of past and contemporaneous late exercise to financing choices.
   Risk Tolerance. CEOs may hold options longer due to a higher willingness to take risk.
Risk-tolerant CEOs may also appear more “confident” and “optimistic” and less “cautious,”
“conservative,” “practical,” “reliable,” or “steady” to business reporters. In addition, bank-
ruptcy is less of a deterrent to debt issuance for risk-seeking CEOs. However, risk tolerance
 34
      See Malmendier and Tate (2004) for detailed tables.


                                                      25
does not predict aversion to external financing. Thus, our debt conservatism results in Section
IV.B are diﬃcult to reconcile with this story.
    Thus, each of these interpretations is diﬃcult to reconcile with some of the evidence. Over-
estimation of future performance, instead, is consistent with all of our findings. The main
insight of the paper, however, is independent of this interpretation: systematic and measur-
able diﬀerences in CEO beliefs and traits predict systematic diﬀerences in financial policies.


VI      Robustness: Extension to 2007
As a final step, we extend our analysis beyond the 1980-1994 Hall-Liebman data. We gather
insider trading data from Thomson Financial and personal portfolio data from Compustat’s
Execucomp database. The Thomson data contain detailed information on CEO option exercise.
Execucomp includes annual snapshots of aggregate CEO stock and option holdings, which are
needed as controls in the overconfidence analysis. The merged data covers S&P 1500 firms
from 1992-2007 and includes smaller firms than our main sample. As shown in the summary
statistics in Appendix Table A1, the median firm is roughly half as large. Generally, the sample
characteristics diﬀer in the expected direction: asset tangibility is smaller, Q is higher, and the
fraction of non-dividend payers is higher.
    One immediate observation is that the extended data is not suitable to analyze early life
shocks from the Great Depression or service in World War II. Due to age and retirement,
the fraction of Depression CEOs declines precipitously after 1995. Overall, only 3% of firm-
years have a Depression CEO. The fraction of World War II veterans declines similarly. After
supplementing the data with hand-collected information on military service through 2003, we
find that less than 1% of firm-years have a World War II veteran as CEO.35
   We use the data to construct several alternative overconfidence measures which correspond
as closely as possible to our core measures based on late option exercise (Section III). Below
we describe the measures and their limitations relative to our original measures:
    Longholder Exec. Our core measure of overconfidence exploits package-level information
about strike prices and remaining duration to identify late option exercise. Execucomp con-
tains such information for all CEO option packages outstanding at the end of each fiscal year,
beginning in 2006. Using this data, we exactly replicate the Longholder measure. The draw-
back of this measure is the limited availability. In particular, the short time series includes
  35
    We re-analyze the link between military experience and leverage in the later sample for veterans of the
Korean or Vietnam Wars and for all veterans. The results confirm our earlier finding that the link between
military experience and leverage is specific to WWII veterans. One interpretation is that success or failure of
the military experience matter for later-life attitudes. Though these experiences vary at the individual level,
World War II veterans are more likely to have had a victorious personal experience and may be more likely to
interpret individual failures as nevertheless contributing to a major collective victory.



                                                      26
very few CEO changes in a given firm, precluding fixed-eﬀects analyses, and shows the exercise
decisions of newly hired CEOs for at most 2 years.
    Longholder CJRS. For years prior to 2006, Execucomp contains fewer details about the
new options granted (total number and value) and only aggregated information on the number
and value of exercised as well as outstanding options. Package-level strike prices and remaining
duration, are not available.36 Thus, the data does not allow us to determine whether a CEO
held an option to expiration as required by the Longholder measure and how much it was in
the money. The closest approximation feasible with the older Execucomp data is the approach
proposed by Campbell et al. (2009) and Hirshleifer et al. (2010): They use the aggregate
data to calculate average strike prices and, therefore, the average moneyness of the options,
assuming the options are not underwater. A CEO is then classified as overconfident for all
sample years after he first holds exercisable options that are, on average, at least 67% in the
money at the end of a fiscal year, mirroring our Holder 67 measure. In addition, the CEO must
fail to exercise such options at least one additional time during the sample period. Under this
approach, it is not possible to impose a restriction on remaining option duration (though such
a restriction is theoretically required) since the data does not allow inferences about remaining
duration, even on average.
    Longholder Thomson ( Fill). Thomson Financial contains transaction-level data, including
the expiration date and strike price of each exercised CEO option from 1996 to the present.
Thus, it should be possible to replicate the original Longholder measure constructed from
annual snapshots of CEO option-holdings. To do so, we follow a procedure similar to Otto
(2009) and classify a CEO as overconfident if the CEO exercises an option in the final year
of its duration and the option is at least 40% in-the-money one year prior to its expiration
date. However, we find that the insider filings, particularly for derivative transactions, are
noisy. We must drop more than 25% of CEO option exercises due to cleanse codes which
indicate poor data quality, absence of required data items (strike prices or expiration dates),
and obvious reporting mistakes (e.g. transaction date after the expiration date). These issues
also raise doubts about how to classify CEOs for whom we do not observe (usable) exercise
information, particularly since we know from the Execucomp snapshots that most of these
CEOs have options. We consider two possibilities: (1) we include only CEOs for whom we
observe at least one Thomson option exercise (Longholder Thomson) and (2) we include all
Execucomp CEOs (Longholder Thomson Fill). The two variables diﬀer only in the comparison
group; the set of CEOs classified as overconfident is identical. We provide additional details
on constructing the Longholder Thomson measures in the Appendix.
  36
     In principle, the data allows one to track new grants over time and attempt to match changes in aggregate
option holdings back to their original annual grant “package” using, e.g., a first-in first-out allocation rule. This
approach is noisy and reduces the usable sample period to a few years. Instead, we construct an alternative
measure using Thomson transaction-level data which contains explicit information on the expiration dates and
strike prices of exercised (and expiring) options.


                                                         27
   In Appendix Table A1, under the columns denoted with (II), (III), and (IV) we present
summary statistics of overconfident CEO-years under each of the measures. The most pro-
nounced diﬀerences are in firm size: Longholder Exec CEOs operate firms with more assets,
though the diﬀerence also reflects the later sample years. They also have the highest kinks.
    In Table A2, we present additional statistics and correlations of the new measures to assess
how well they replicate our main portfolio-based overconfidence measures. Panel A shows the
% of CEOs classified as overconfident. As anticipated, Longholder Exec, which is identical in
definition to the original Longholder measure, provides the best match to Longholder, with
both classifying roughly 20% of CEOs as overconfident. For the other measures, we see wide
variation, ranging from 32% to 54%. Panel B shows the pairwise correlations between the diﬀer-
ent measures. In all cases, we find positive and significant correlations. Longholder Thomson
( Fill) should exactly match Longholder Exec in CEO-years for which both are defined; how-
ever, we find a correlation of only 0.44 (0.48). The correlation of Longholder CJRS with
Longholder Exec is even lower (0.22). The latter is less surprising since Longholder CJRS dif-
fers from the other measures in relying on option moneyness to determine CEO beliefs, rather
than remaining option duration at exercise.
    The lower correlation and diﬀerence in definition raise the concern that Longholder CJRS
may mix information about CEO beliefs with information about firm performance: Rather than
capturing a CEO’s overestimation of future performance it might (also) capture good past per-
formance. Avoiding such a confound is crucially important in our context since overconfidence
makes opposite predictions for financing choices to strong stock performance. To quantify this
concern, we calculate the pairwise correlations of Longholder CJRS with five lags of annual
stock returns (excluding dividends). We find that Longholder CJRS is indeed significantly
positively correlated with each lag of returns. The correlations between Longholder Exec and
lags of returns, instead, are smaller by an order of magnitude and insignificant for three of the
five horizons.
    Overall, our analysis suggests (1) Longholder Exec is the best candidate to replicate the
Malmendier and Tate (2008) overconfident measures (though its implementability suﬀers from
the very short sample period) and (2) the other measures capture information about CEO
beliefs, but are noisier and influenced by other systematic factors (performance).
   The key (unambiguous) prediction of the overconfidence theory is that overconfident CEOs
prefer risky debt to equity, conditional on accessing external capital (Hypothesis 1). Our
analysis of public security issuance tests this prediction using (in part) cross-sectional variation
across CEOs. Since such variation is required to employ the Longholder Exec measure, we focus
on this test to determine the robustness of our key results in later firm years and among the
broader cross-section of firms.
   We report the results in Table A3. In a univariate specification (Panel A, Column 1),
Longholder Exec CEOs are roughly 45% less likely to issue equity, significant at the 10% level.

                                                28
The result is stronger both economically and statistically using the various sets of controls
from Section IV.A.
    We also re-estimate our regressions using the Longholder CJRS and Longholder Thomson
( Fill) measures. Using either Thomson-based measure, we confirm our basic results (though
the estimates are typically smaller economically). Using the Longholder CJRS measure, the
results depend crucially on the set of controls. In the univariate setting, the estimate is positive
and significant. However, once we add the controls for past stock performance, the estimate
becomes negative and significant. Strong past stock performance predicts heightened equity
issuance. Since Longholder CJRS is positively correlated with past performance, it picks up
this eﬀect. The negative overconfidence eﬀect emerges only with careful performance controls.
    Our results suggest that the impact of overconfidence on financing choices is likely to
generalize over time and across firms. The results demonstrate both the promise and potential
pitfalls of using common data sources to measure late option exercise over the 1995-2005 time
period.


VII      Conclusion
We provide evidence that managers’ beliefs and early-life experiences significantly aﬀect finan-
cial policies, above and beyond traditional market-, industry-, and firm-level determinants of
capital structure. We begin by using personal portfolio choices of CEOs to measure their beliefs
about the future performance of their own companies. We focus on CEOs who persistently
exercise their executive stock options late relative to a rational diversification benchmark.
We consider several interpretations of such behavior — including positive inside information
— and show that it is most consistent with CEO overconfidence. We also verify our measure
of revealed beliefs by confirming that such CEOs are disproportionately characterized by the
business press as “confident” or “optimistic,” rather than “reliable,” “cautious,” “practical,”
“conservative,” “frugal,” or “steady.”
    This form of belief makes specific capital structure predictions: Overconfident CEOs over-
estimate future cash flows and, therefore, perceive external financing — and particularly equity
— to be unduly costly. Thus, they prefer internal financing over external capital markets and,
conditional on raising risky capital, debt over equity. We find strong evidence that, conditional
on accessing public securities markets, overconfident CEOs are less likely to issue equity than
other CEOs. We also find that, to cover an additional dollar of external financing deficit, over-
confident CEOs issue about 33 cents more debt than their peers. Managerial overconfidence
is also positively related to debt conservatism, measured using the “kink” variable from Gra-
ham (2000). This debt conservatism is not driven by an increased propensity to issue equity.
Instead, overconfident CEOs who are debt-conservative are also equity conservative and rely
excessively on internal funds. Finally, overconfident managers choose higher leverage ratios


                                                29
than predecessors or successors in their firms.
    Second, we consider early-life experiences which are likely to shape beliefs and choices
later in life. Guided by prior psychology and management literature, we focus on two major
formative experiences which aﬀect our sample CEOs: growing up during the Great Depression
and serving in the military. We find that CEOs who experience the Great Depression early in
life display a heightened reluctance to access external capital markets. World War II CEOs,
on the other hand, choose more aggressive corporate policies, including higher leverage ratios.
The eﬀects are distinct from the impact of overconfidence on financial decisions. Though
the specific shocks which guide belief formation may diﬀer in other samples of CEOs, our
methodology for identifying those shocks is easily generalized.
     Our results have several implications. First, our findings help to explain the strong time-
invariant component of firm capital structure identified in recent studies. Though our iden-
tification strategy requires us to establish the impact of managerial beliefs using within-firm
variation, the significance of our measures suggests that variation in managerial beliefs may
account for a significant portion of the (co-determined) between-firm variation. Managerial
beliefs may be particularly important in firms with long-serving managers, family ownership,
or a preference for hiring managers with a particular “style.”
    Second, our results have distinct implications for contracting practices and organizational
design. To the degree that boards do not anticipate or desire bias-driven policies, standard
incentives, such as stock- and option-based compensation, are unlikely to oﬀset fully the eﬀects
of managerial overconfidence on investment and financing decisions. Biased managers believe
they are choosing value-maximizing policies, and boards may need to use diﬀerent tools, such
as cash dividend payment and debt overhang, to constrain overconfident CEOs. Similarly,
financial incentives will be miscalibrated if they do not account for financial conservatism or
financial aggressiveness arising from the CEO’s past experiences.
    Third, our findings on the financial decision-making of Depression and military CEOs pro-
vide evidence that major personal events can have a life-long impact on risk attitudes and
choices. Macroeconomic shocks, such as the current financial crisis, are likely to have not only
an immediate impact on corporate financial policies (e.g. through de-leveraging and a shift
toward self-suﬃciency), but also an impact on future policies as today’s young investors, who
are being introduced to financial markets during a time of crisis, become the next generation of
corporate leaders. Thus, the Depression Baby results not only document a pattern of historical
interest, but also suggest how financial choices may play out over the coming decades.
   Finally, exposure to a military environment may aﬀect corporate decision-making more
broadly than just financial policy. For example, military CEOs may implement a more
command-based corporate culture. An interesting topic for future research is to test whether
CEOs with military experience create a more hierarchical structure in their firms.



                                                  30
References
 [1] Alicke, Mark D., M.L. Klotz, David L. Breitenbecher, Tricia J. Yurak et al., 1995, Personal
     contact, individuation, and the better-than-average eﬀect, Journal of Personality and
     Social Psychology 68, 804-825.

 [2] Baker, Malcolm, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Journal
     of Finance 57, 1-32.
 [3] Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2007. Behavioral Corporate Fi-
     nance, in Espen Eckbo, ed.: Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance
     (Elsevier/North-Holland).
 [4] Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2003, When does the market
     matter? Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 118, 969-1005.
 [5] Ben-David, Itzak, John Graham, and Campbell Harvey, 2007, Managerial Overconfidence
     and Corporate Policies, Working Paper.
 [6] Berkowitz, Leonard and Anthony Lepage, 1967, Weapons as aggression-eliciting stimuli,
     Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 7, 202-207.
 [7] Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The eﬀect of
     managers on firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.
 [8] Billett, Matthew T., and Yiming Qian, 2008, Evidence of self-attribution bias from fre-
     quent acquirers, Management Science 54, 1037-1051.

 [9] Camerer, C., and D. Lovallo, 1999, Overconfidence and excess entry: an experimental
     approach, American Economic Review 89, 306-318.
[10] Campbell, T. Colin, Shane. A. Johnson, Jessica Rutherhford, and Brooke Stanley, 2009,
     CEO confidence and forced turnover, Working Paper.
[11] Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are some mutual fund managers better than
     others? Cross-sectional patterns in behavior and performance, Journal of Finance 54,
     875-899.
[12] Donaldson, Gordon, 1990, Voluntary restructuring: The case of General Mills, Journal of
     Financial Economics 27, 117-141.
[13] Elder, Glen, 1986, Military times and turning points in men’s lives, Developmental Psy-
     chology 22, 233-45.

[14] Elder, Glen, 1998, Children of the Great Depression, 25th Anniversary Edition, Westview
     Press, Boulder, CO.
[15] Elder, Glen, and Elisabeth Clipp, 1989, Combat experience and emotional health: Im-
     pairment and resilience in later life, Journal of Personality 57, 311-341.


                                              31
[16] Elder, Glen, C. Gimbel, and R. Ivie, 1991, Turning points in life: The case of military
     service and war, Military Psychology 3, 215-231.
[17] Frank, Murray Z., and Vidham K. Goyal, 2003, Testing the pecking order theory of capital
     structure, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 217-248.

[18] Frank, Murray Z., and Vidham K. Goyal, 2007a, Trade-oﬀ and pecking order theories of
     debt, in Espen Eckbo, ed.: Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance
     (Elsevier/North-Holland).
[19] Frank, Murray Z., and Vidham K. Goyal, 2007b, Corporate leverage: How much do
     managers really matter? Working Paper.
[20] Goel, Anand, and Anjan V. Thakor, forthcoming, Overconfidence, CEO selection, and
     corporate governance, Journal of Finance.

[21] Gomes, Armando, and Gordon Phillips, 2007, Why do public firms issue private and
     public securities? Working Paper.
[22] Graham, John R., 2000, How big are the tax benefits of debt? Journal of Finance 5,
     1901-1942.
[23] Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate
     finance: evidence from the field, Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 187-243.
[24] Graham, John, and Krishna Narasimhan, 2004, Corporate survival and managerial expe-
     riences during the Great Depression, Working Paper.

[25] Hackbarth, Dirk, forthcoming, Managerial traits and capital structure decisions, Journal
     of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
[26] Hall, Brian J., and Jeﬀrey B. Liebman, 1998, Are CEOs really paid like bureaucrats?
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 653-691.
[27] Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy, 2002, Stock options for undiversified executives,
     Journal of Accounting and Economics 33, 3-42.
[28] Heaton, J.B., 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate finance, Financial Management
     31, 33-45.
[29] Hechinger, J., 1998, Heard in New England: SLI’s chief blasts analyst as firm puts oﬀ a
     big stock oﬀering, Wall Street Journal, Jun 3, p. NE2.

[30] Hietala, Pekka, Steven Kaplan, and David Robinson, 2003. What is the price of hubris?
     Using takeover battles to infer overpayments and synergies, Financial Management 32,
     1-32.
[31] Hirshleifer, David, Siew Hong Teoh, and Angie Low, 2010, Are overconfident CEOs better
     innovators? Working Paper.



                                             32
[32] Holderness, Cliﬀord G., Randall S. Kroszner, and Dennis P. Sheehan, 1999, Were the good
     old days that good? changes in managerial stock ownership since the Great Depression,
     Journal of Finance 54, 435-69.
[33] Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, The theory of the firm: managerial
     behavior, agency costs, and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-
     360.
[34] Kidd, John B., 1970, The utilization of subjective probabilities in production planning,
     Acta Psychologica 34, 338-347.
[35] Killgore, William D.S., Dave I. Cotting, Jeﬀrey L. Thomas, Anthony L. Cox, Dennis
     McGurk, Alexander H. Vo, Carl A. Castro, and Charles W. Hoge, 2008, Combat invin-
     cibility: Violent combat experiences are associated with increased risk-taking propensity
     following deployment, Journal of Psychiatric Research 42, 1112-1121.
[36] Lambert, Richard A., David F. Larcker, and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1991, Portfolio con-
     siderations in valuing executive compensation, Journal of Accounting Research 29 (1),
     129-149.
[37] Landier, Augustin, and David Thesmar, forthcoming, Contracting with optimistic entre-
     preneurs: Theory and evidence, Review of Financial Studies.
[38] Langer, Ellen J., 1975, The illusion of control, Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
     ogy 32, 311-328.

[39] Larwood, L., and W. Whittaker, 1977, Managerial myopia: self-serving biases in organi-
     zational planning, Journal of Applied Psychology 62, 94-198.
[40] Lemmon, Michael and Jaime Zender, forthcoming, Debt capacity and tests of capital
     structure, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
[41] Lemmon, Michael, Michael Roberts, and Jaime Zender, 2008, Back to the beginning:
     Persistence and the cross-sectional distribution of capital structure, Journal of Finance
     63, 1575-1608.
[42] Lowe, Robert A., and Arvids A. Ziedonis, 2006, Overoptimism and the performance of
     entrepreneurial firms, Management Science 52, 173-186.
[43] Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, 2008, Depression babies: Do macroeconomic ex-
     periences aﬀect risk-taking? Working Paper.

[44] Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoﬀrey A. Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate in-
     vestment, Journal of Finance 60, 2660-2700.
[45] Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoﬀrey A. Tate, 2004, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overcon-
     fidence and the market’s reaction, NBER Working Paper 10813.
[46] Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoﬀrey A. Tate, 2008, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overcon-
     fidence and the market’s reaction, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 20-43.


                                              33
[47] March, J.G., and Z. Shapira, 1987, Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking, Man-
     agement Science 33, 1404-1418.
[48] Miller, Merton H., 1977, Debt and taxes, Journal of Finance 32, 261-275.

[49] Miller, Dale T., and M. Ross, 1975, Self-serving biases in the attribution of causality: fact
     or fiction? Psychological Bulletin 82, 213-225.
[50] Millman, Gregory J., 2001, Managing up the CFO and the board, Financial Executive 17,
     24-26.
[51] Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporate finance,
     and the theory of investment, American Economic Review 48, 655-669.
[52] Moore, P.G., 1977, The manager’s struggle with uncertainty, Journal of The Royal Sta-
     tistical Society Series A 149, 129-165.
[53] Myers, Stewart C., 1984, The capital structure puzzle, Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
[54] Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment
     decisions when firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial
     Economics 13, 187-221.
[55] Ofek, Eli, and David Yermack, 2000, Taking stock: equity-based compensation and the
     evolution of managerial ownership, Journal of Finance 55, 1367-1384.

[56] Otto, Clemens A., 2009, CEO optimism and incentive compensation, Working Paper.
[57] Oyer, Paul, 2008, The making of an investment banker: Stock market shocks, career
     choice, and lifetime income, Journal of Finance 63, 2601-2628.
[58] Rajan, R.G., and L. Zingales, 1995, What do we know about capital structure? Some
     evidence from international data, Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.
[59] Roll, R., 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, Journal of Business 59,
     197-216.
[60] Schoar, A., 2007, CEO careers and style, Working Paper.

[61] Shyam-Sunder, L., and S.C. Myers, 1999, Testing static trade-oﬀ against pecking order
     models of capital structure, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 219-244.
[62] Wansink, Brian, Collin R. Payne, and Koert van Ittersum, 2008, Profiling the heroic
     leader: Empirical lessons from combat-decorated veterans of World War II, Leadership
     Quarterly 19, 547-555.
[63] Weisbach, M., 1995, CEO Turnover and the firm’s investment decisions, Journal of Fi-
     nancial Economics, 37, 159-188.
[64] Weinstein, N., 1980, Unrealistic optimism about future life events, Journal of Personality
     and Social Psychology 39, 806-820.


                                               34
[65] Welch, Ivo, 2004, Capital structure and stock returns, Journal of Political Economy 112,
     106-131.
[66] Whitford, D., 1999, Jesse shakes the money tree, Fortune 139, Iss. 12, 102-108.

[67] Yermack, D., 1995, Do corporations award CEO stock options eﬀectively? Journal of
     Financial Economics 39, 237-269.




                                             35
                                       Appendix A —
       Construction of Longholder Thomson from Thomson Financial data


   To begin, we download all Table 2 transactions for firms in our Execucomp sample, requiring
the role code to equal “CEO.” We then filter the results as follows:

  1. We keep only observations for which Thomson cleanse codes indicate a reasonable degree
     of data accuracy (“R,” “H,” “C,” “L,” or “I”).

  2. We drop observations which are amendments of prior records to avoid double-counting
     transactions (amend = “A”).
  3. We require the acquisition/disposition flag to indicate that the record represents disposal
     of securities (acqdisp = “D”).
  4. We keep only derivative codes which indicate the securities in question are call op-
     tions (“OPTNS,” “ISO,” “CALL,” “NONQ,” “EMPO,” “DIRO,” “DIREO,” “EMPLO,”
     “NON Q,” “NONQU,” “SAR,” “OPTIO,” “EMP.”, “EMPL”).

  5. We drop observations with missing strike prices or exercise dates.
  6. We drop observations with implausible values of the strike price (xprice < 0.1 or xprice
     > 2000).

  7. We keep only records with transaction codes indicating option exercises (trancode =
     “M,” “X,” “H,” or “F”)

   After applying these filters, we merge the resulting data with monthly stock price data from
CRSP. We identify all option exercises which meet two “Longholder” criteria: (1) the exercise
occurs within 365 calendar days of option expiration and (2) the option was at least 40% in
the money 12 months prior to the month of expiration (using the CRSP end-of-the-month
stock price). We then merge the Thomson data to our Execucomp sample, retaining an option
exercise observation only if the insider name in the Thomson data matches the CEO name
in Execucomp. Finally, we set the variable Longholder Thomson or Longholder Thomson fill
equal to 1 if we observe at least one option exercise meeting the two Longholder criteria during
the CEO’s tenure in our Execucomp panel. The two Longholder measures diﬀer only in the
control groups (i.e. the CEO-years for which the variable is set to 0). For Longholder Thomson,
we include a CEO in the control group only if we observe at least one option exercise by the
CEO in the Thomson data, but never an exercise that meets the two Longholder criteria.
For Longholder Thomson fill, we include all Execucomp CEOs for whom we never observe an
option exercise meeting the two Longholder criteria.




                                              36
                          Figure 1. Model Predictions (Stylized Example)
The hypothetical example illustrates how overconfident CEOs may deviate from the rational benchmark in their
average financing of investment projects holding constant investment opportunities and financing needs.
Relative to the (hypothetical) rational benchmark of 1/3 cash, 1/3 debt, and 1/3 equity financing, overconfident
CEOs choose a lower absolute amount of debt financing (2/9 <1/3), but a higher leverage (2/3 > 1/2) due to even
lower absolute amounts of equity financing (1/9 <1/3).



                100%                                       11%
                 90%
                                   33%
                 80%                                       22%

                 70%

                 60%                                                                  Equity Financing
                                   33%                                                Debt Financing
                 50%
                                                                                      Cash Financing
                 40%
                                                           67%
                 30%

                 20%               33%

                 10%

                  0%
                             Rational CEO        Overconfident CEO
                                    Table I. Empirical Predictions

                                          Preference for Debt
                                                               Debt Level Relative
                        Preference for     vs. Equity to Fill
                                                                  to Maximum
                        Public Debt vs.   External Financing                          Market Leverage
                                                              Available Tax Benefit
                         Equity Issues    Needs ("Financing
                                                                    ("Kink")
                                               Deficit")

Overconfidence               Debt                 Debt               Low*                 High*,**
Depression Baby          no prediction       no prediction            Low              no prediction
Military Service         no prediction        no prediction       no prediction            High
* For a range of parameter values; see model.
** Cumulative effect.
                                                                                              Table II. Summary Statistics
Panel A. Financing Deficit Variables
Net financing deficit is cash dividends plus net investment plus change in working capital minus cash flow after interest and taxes. Net investment is capital expenditures plus increase in investments plus acquisitions plus other uses
of funds minus sale of property, plants, and equipment minus sale of investment. Change in working capital is change in operating working capital plus change in cash and cash equivalents plus change in current debt. Cash flow after
interest and taxes is income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization plus extraordinary items and discontinued operations plus deferred taxes plus equity in net loss (earnings) plus other funds from operations
plus gain (loss) from sales of property, plants, and equipment and other investments. Net debt issues are long term debt issuance minus long term debt reduction. Net equity issues are sales of common stock minus stock repurchases.
Profitability is operating income before depreciation, normalized by assets at the beginning of the year. Tangibility is property, plants, and equipment, normalized by assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets
over the book value of assets, where market value of assets is the book value of assets plus market equity minus book equity. ∆ denotes one-year changes. Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point
during his tenure held an option package until the last year before expiration, provided that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last year.

                                                                                           Full Sample                                                                           Longholder Sample
                                                                                      Number of Firms = 263                                                                     Number of Firms = 56
                  Variable                                  Obs.        Mean         Median         SD          Min.     Max.                            Obs.        Mean         Median         SD                  Min.    Max.
Assets ($m)                                                 2385      5476.92        2111.96 13389.44          39.64 198598.70                            463      4820.30       2111.78 8763.07                    48.79 79262.00
Net Financing Deficit ($m)                                  2385        42.67           0.75     538.56     -6800.30   8845.50                            463        10.41          -1.05    287.07               -845.00 1698.00
    Cash Dividends ($m)                                     2385       109.47          35.58     239.77         0.00   2487.00                            463       126.59         40.69     252.09                  0.00 1870.00
    Net Investment ($m)                                     2385       502.28         172.70 1311.81        -2930.00 26523.00                             463       498.57        207.37 1070.84                  -577.00 9755.00
    Change in Working Capital ($m)                          2385        26.73          16.02     790.77 -21767.00 16224.00                                463        35.54         17.95     347.04              -2920.50 2675.00
    Cash Flow after Interest and Taxes ($m)                 2385       595.80         228.56 1276.57        -1678.44 20278.00                             463       650.29        254.62 1243.20                 -1678.44 11273.00
Net Financing Deficit/Assetst-1                             2385         0.03           0.00       0.16        -0.63      2.56                            463         0.02           0.00      0.14                 -0.24     1.60
Net Debt Issues/Assetst-1                                   2385         0.01           0.00       0.08        -0.62      0.92                            463         0.01           0.00      0.06                 -0.15     0.36
Net Equity Issues/Assetst-1                                 2155         0.00           0.00       0.08        -0.77      1.85                            413         0.01           0.00      0.09                 -0.30     1.18
Profitability                                               2385         0.18           0.17       0.11        -0.24      0.99                            463         0.21           0.19      0.12                 -0.03     0.88
∆ Profitability                                             2385         0.00           0.00       0.06        -0.76      0.98                            463         0.00           0.00      0.08                 -0.51     0.98
Tangibility                                                 2385         0.44           0.42       0.22         0.00      2.08                            463         0.46           0.43      0.21                  0.06     2.08
∆ Tangibility                                               2385        -0.05          -0.03       0.11        -1.47      0.54                            463        -0.05          -0.03      0.12                 -1.47     0.16
Q                                                           2385         1.61           1.30       1.01         0.59     12.26                            463         1.70           1.44      1.02                  0.77    10.71
∆Q                                                          2385         0.01           0.01       0.50        -7.18      5.04                           463          0.03           0.02      0.42                 -1.81     4.32
ln(Sales)                                                   2385         7.90           7.82       1.12         3.18     11.93                           463          7.89           7.87      1.18                  3.18    11.23
∆ ln(Sales)                                                 2385         0.08           0.07       0.19        -2.04      1.67                           463          0.09           0.08      0.17                 -0.55     1.67

Distribution across Fama French 12 Industry Groups
                                                                                        (2381 observations)                                                                       (463 observations)
                                                  Consumer Nondurables                   0.13     Telecommunication                       0.06          Consumer ND                   0.11    Telecommunication                       0.02
                                                      Consumer Durables                  0.05               Utilities                      n/a     Consumer Durables                  0.03             Utilities                       n/a
                                                          Manufacturing                  0.18                Shops                        0.14          Manufacturing                 0.16               Shops                        0.14
                                                                  Energy                 0.04                Health                       0.06                 Energy                 0.00              Health                        0.09
                                            Chemicals and Allied Products                0.08                Money                         n/a               Chemicals                0.16              Money                          n/a
                                                     Business Equipment                  0.09                 Other                       0.18     Business Equipment                 0.13               Other                        0.17
The Fama-French Industry Groups are defined on French's website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html).
                                                                                         Table II (cont.)
Panel B. Kink Variables
Kink is the amount of interest at the point where the marginal benefit function becomes downward sloping, as a proportion of actual interest expense. ECOST is the standard deviation of the first
difference in taxable earnings divided by assets, the quoteient times the sum of advertising, research, and development expenses divided by sales. CYCLICAL is the standard deviation of operating
earnings divided by mean assets first calculated for each firm, then averaged across firms within two-digit SIC codes. Return on assets is income before extraordinary items plus interest expense plus
depreciation, divided by assets. Z-score is 3.3 times the difference of operating income before depreciation and depreciation plus sales plus 1.4 times retained earnings plus 1.2 times working capital
(balance sheet), the quantity divided by assets. Quick ratio is the sum of cash and short-term investments and total receivables divided by total current liabilities. Current ratio is total current assets
divided by total current liabilities. Q-ratio is preferred stock plus market value of common equity plus net short-term liabilities, the quantity divided by assets. R&D to sales and Advertising to sales
are set to 0 when the numerator is missing. Computer Industry are all firms with SIC code 357, Semiconductor Industry all firms with SIC code 367, Chemicals and Allied Products comprises SIC
codes 280-289, Aircraft and Guided Space Vehicles SIC codes 372 and 376, and Other Sensitive Industries SIC codes 340-400, excluding 357, 367, 372, and 376. Longholder is a binary variable
where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before expiration, provided that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last
year.
                                                                                     Full Sample                                                           Longholder Sample
                                                                                 Number of Firms = 189                                                   Number of Firms = 44
                    Variable                                      Obs.       Mean Median        SD                Min.       Max.         Obs.       Mean Median         SD    Min.                 Max.
Kink                                                              1726        3.93       3     2.74                  0           8        377         4.59        4     2.75      0                     8
I(No dividend)                                                    1726        0.12       0     0.33                  0           1        377         0.17        0     0.38      0                     1
I(Negative owners' equity)                                        1726        0.01       0     0.12                  0           1        377            0        0        0      0                     0
I(NOL carryforward)                                               1726        0.15       0     0.36                  0           1        377         0.14        0     0.35      0                     1
ECOST                                                             1726        1.74    0.65     3.21                  0       18.92        377         2.36     0.79     3.92      0                 18.92
CYCLICAL                                                          1726        0.07    0.07     0.03               0.02        0.18        377         0.08     0.07     0.02   0.04                  0.18
Return on assets                                                  1726        0.13    0.14     0.05              -0.06        0.27        377         0.14     0.14     0.05  -0.06                  0.27
ln(sales)                                                         1726        7.88    7.82     1.01               5.49       10.32        377         7.93     7.87     1.07   5.49                 10.32
Z-score                                                           1726        2.51    2.34     1.17               0.38        7.07        377         2.74     2.51     1.24   0.79                  7.07
Quick ratio                                                       1726        1.08    0.89     0.74               0.16        4.92        377         1.12     0.94     0.71   0.16                  4.92
Current ratio                                                     1726        1.88    1.63     0.96               0.57        6.02        377         1.97     1.71     0.94   0.58                  6.02
PPE-to-assets                                                     1726        0.42    0.40     0.18               0.06        0.81        377         0.41     0.39     0.16   0.06                  0.81
Q-ratio                                                           1726        1.12    0.88     0.78               0.15        4.58        377         1.22     0.99     0.83   0.15                  4.58
R&D-to-sales                                                      1726        0.02    0.01     0.03                  0        0.16        377         0.03     0.02     0.04      0                  0.16
Advertising-to-sales                                              1726        0.02       0     0.03                  0        0.16        377         0.02     0.01     0.03      0                  0.16
Computer Industry                                                 1726        0.04       0     0.19                  0           1        377         0.07        0     0.25      0                     1
Semiconductor Industry                                            1726        0.02       0     0.14                  0           1        377         0.03        0     0.16      0                     1
Chemicals and Allied Products Industry                            1726        0.14       0     0.35                  0           1        377         0.21        0     0.41      0                     1
Aircraft and Guided Space Vehicles Industry                       1726        0.02       0     0.13                  0           1        377         0.02        0     0.14      0                     1
Other Sensitive Industries                                        1726        0.19       0     0.39                  0           1        377         0.15        0     0.35      0                     1

Panel C. CEO Variables
CEO Vested Options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year (as a % of shares outstanding), multiplied by 10 so that the means of vested
options and CEO Stock Ownership are the same order of magnitude. Depression Baby is an indicator variable for CEOs born in the 1920s. Military Experience indicates CEOs with prior military
service.
                                                                                    Full Sample                                                            Longholder Sample
                                                                                Number of CEOs = 498                                                     Number of CEOs = 58
                   Variable                                       Obs.       Mean Median       SD    Min.                    Max.         Obs.       Mean Median         SD  Min.                    Max.
Age                                                               2384       57.77     58    7.16     32                       84         463        58.46       59     6.30  41                       82
Tenure                                                            2364        8.83      6    7.69       1                      45         442        10.78        9     6.78    1                      36
CEO Stock Ownership                                               2385        0.03   0.00    0.08       0                    0.95         463         0.02     0.00     0.04    0                    0.49
CEO Vested Options                                                2385        0.03   0.01    0.14       0                    4.63         463         0.07     0.02     0.29    0                    4.63
Depression Baby                                                   2384        0.40      0    0.49       0                       1         463         0.49        0     0.50    0                       1
Military Experience                                               1617        0.22      0    0.41       0                       1         352         0.28        0     0.45    0                       1
                          Table III. Correlations of Depression Baby and Military Experience with Firm and CEO Characteristics
Depression Baby indicates CEOs born between 1920 and 1929. Military Experience is an indicator variable for CEOs who served in the military. PRESS "Cautious" is the number of articles from LexisNexis and Wall
Street Journal searches which describe the CEO as "reliable,” “cautious,” “practical,” “conservative,” “steady,” or “frugal.” Return on Assets is income before extraordinary items plus interest expense plus depreciation,
divided by assets. Market Leverage is debt in current liabilities plus long-term debt, divided by the sum of the numerator and market equity. Merger Activity is an indicator for at least one merger in a given firm year.
Kink is the amount of interest at which the marginal benefit function starts to slope down, as a proportion of actual interest expense. Equity Issuance indicates at least one stock issue, conditional on accessing public
securities markets.

                                     Depression  Military   PRESS                                                         Return on       CEO Stock                          Merger                            Equity
                                       Baby     Experience "Cautious"                       Age            Tenure          Assets         Ownership         Leverage         Activity           Kink          Issuance
Depression Baby                          1
                                        (- ; 3617)
Military Experience                     0.1472              1
                                      (0.00; 2320)      (- ; 3617)
PRESS "Cautious"                         0.036            -0.08              1
                                      (0.03; 3580)     (0.00; 2378)      ( - ; 3803)
Age                                     0.3766           0.1332           0.0194              1
                                      (0.00; 3617)     (0.00; 2320)     (0.25; 3580)     ( - ; 3617)
Tenure                                  0.1009           -0.056           0.154           0.3668              1
                                      (0.00; 3500)     (0.01; 2250)     (0.00; 3471)    (0.00; 3500)      ( - ; 3501)
Return on Assets                        0.0680          -0.0808          -0.0162          0.0012           0.0289              1
                                      (0.00; 3454)     (0.00; 2267)     (0.33; 3560)    (0.95; 3454)     (0.09; 3362)      ( - ; 4393)
CEO Stock Ownership                     -0.1061         -0.0941           0.1003          -0.0332          0.3084           0.0164              1
                                      (0.00; 3496)     (0.00; 2258)     (0.00; 3465)    (0.05; 3496)     (0.00; 3454)     (0.34; 3360)      ( - ; 3497)
Market Leverage                         -0.0586          0.0227          -0.0272          -0.0337         -0.0911          -0.3792          -0.0579              1
                                      (0.00; 3504)     (0.28; 2263)     (0.10; 3558)    (0.05; 3504)     (0.00; 3425)     (0.00; 4281)    (0.00; 3425)      ( - ; 4528)
Merger Acitivity                        0.0085           0.0674          -0.0199          -0.0278         -0.0300          -0.0513          -0.0105          0.0045              1
                                      (0.61; 3617)     (0.00; 2378)     (0.22; 3803)    (0.09; 3617)     (0.08; 3501)     (0.00; 4393)    (0.53: 3497)     (0.76; 4528)      ( - ; 5131)
Kink                                    0.1129           -0.022          -0.0347          0.0305           0.0598           0.4318          0.0977           -0.6468         -0.0300              1
                                      (0.00; 2846)     (0.34; 1868)     (0.06; 2917)    (0.10: 2846)     (0.00; 2764)     (0.00; 2912)    (0.00; 2770)     (0.00; 2900)     (0.10; 2978)      ( - ; 2978)
Equity Issuance                         -0.0829          0.1105          -0.0098          -0.1534         -0.0314          -0.0477          0.0458           -0.0955          0.0392          -0.0953              1
                                       (0.02; 739)     (0.01; 524)      (0.79; 756)      (0.00; 739)      (0.40; 727)     (0.19; 748)      (0.22; 718)      (0.01; 752)      (0.28; 769)     (0.01; 654)       ( - ; 769)
p-values and number of observations in parentheses
                                            Table IV. Debt vs. Equity (I): Public Issues

Panel A. Frequencies
Longholder is a binary variable, equal to 1 if the CEO, at some point during his tenure, held an option package until the last year before expiration, provided
that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last year. Post-Longholder is equal to 1 for all CEO-years after the CEO for the first time holds
options to expiration. Pre-Longholder is Longholder minus Post-Longholder. Holder 67 is a binary variable, equal to 1 for all CEO years after the CEO for
the first time fails to exercise a 67% in-the-money option with 5 years remaining duration. For Holder 67, the sample is limited to CEO-years after the CEO
for the first time had a 67% in-the-money option with 5 years remaining duration. TOTALconfident is binary and equal to 1 when the number of "confident"
and "optimistic" mentions for a CEO in the LexisNexis and Wall Street Journal searches exceeds the number of "not confident," "not optimistic," and
"reliable, cautious, practical, conservative, steady, frugal" mentions. TOTALmentions is the total number of articles mentioning the CEO in those searches.
Both TOTAL-variables include all articles over the sample period up to the previous year. Data on public issues is from SDC. There are 330 firms. Equity
issues are issues of common stock or non-convertible preferred stock. Debt issues are issues of non-convertible debt. Hybrid issues are issues of convertible
debt or convertible preferred stock. US Rule 144A issues are included. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level.
                                                                                                       % of Issue Years with
                                                                    Number of Years with Any
                                                                        Security Issues      Equity Issues Debt Issues Hybrid Issues
Longholder = 0                                                                621                42%            57%          16%
Longholder = 1                                                                141                31%            63%          19%
      Pre-Longholder = 1                                                       91                31%            63%          23%
      Post-Longholder = 1                                                      50                32%            64%          12%
Difference t (Longholder = 0 - Longholder = 1)                                                 2.03**          0.85          0.85
Holder 67 = 0                                                                     95                         39%                65%                21%
Holder 67 = 1                                                                    182                         23%                73%                16%
Difference t                                                                                               3.12***              1.18               1.04
TOTALconfident = 0                                                               452                         48%               47%                 18%
TOTALconfident = 1                                                               214                         25%               79%                 14%
Difference t                                                                                               5.37***           6.77***               1.43
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Panel B. Logit Regressions
Coefficients are reported as log odds ratios. The sample consists of all firm years in which the firm did at least one public security issue. The dependent
variable is binary and equals 1 if the firm issued equity during the fiscal year. CEO Vested Options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable
within 6 months of the beginning of the year (as a % of shares outstanding), multiplied by 10 so that the means of vested options and CEO Stock Ownership
are the same order of magnitude. The Standard firm controls are ln(Sales), Q (market value of assets over the book value of assets, where market value of
assets is the book value of total assets plus market equity minus book equity), Profitability (operating income before depreciation normalized by beginning-of-
year assets), Tangibility (property, plants, and equipment, normalized by beginning-of-year assets). Book leverage is the sum of debt in current liabilities and
long term debt, divided by the sum of the numerator and common equity. We exclude observations in which book leverage is negative or greater than 1.
CEO Stock, CEO Vested Options, ln(Sales), Q, Profitability, Tangibility, and Book Leverage are measured at the beginning of the fiscal year. Kink controls
are defined as in Graham (2002) and listed in Table 1, Panel B. Industry Fixed Effects are the kink-regression industry dummies of Graham (2000).
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level.
                                                      (1)                (2)               (3)                 (4)               (5)                (6)
Longholder                                          -0.469             -0.592            -0.534               -0.46            -0.457            -0.6695
                                                   (1.94)*            (2.34)**          (2.10)**            (1.80)*           (1.66)*            (2.22)**
CEO Stock Ownership                                                    -0.266            -0.996              -1.279            -0.655            -7.6403
                                                                       (0.16)            (0.59)              (0.72)            (0.34)            (2.35)**
CEO Vested Options                                                     6.766             4.669               4.234             7.328             10.6238
                                                                     (3.43)***          (2.21)**           (2.14)**          (3.05)***          (2.81)***
Standard firm controls                                                                      X                  X                  X
Book leverage                                                                                                  X                  X
Kink controls                                                                                                                                       X
Industry fixed effects                                                                                                                              X
Year fixed effects                                                                                                               X                  X
Observations                                         762                644                627                617               617                442
Number of Firms                                      330                174                171                171               171                135
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                 Table V. Debt vs. Equity (II): Financing Deficit

OLS regressions with Net Debt Issues normalized by beginning-of-the-year assets as the dependent variable, where Net Debt Issues are long-term debt issues minus long
term debt reduction. Net Financing Deficit is cash dividends plus net investment plus change in working capital minus cash flow after interest and taxes, normalized by
beginning-of-the-year assets. Net investment is capital expenditures plus increase in investments plus acquisitions plus other uses of funds minus sale of PPE minus sale of
investment. Change in working capital is change in operating working capital plus change in cash and cash equivalents plus change in current debt. Cash flow after interest
and taxes is income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization plus extraordinary items and discontinued operations plus deferred taxes plus equity in
net loss (earnings) plus other funds from operations plus gain (loss) from sales of PPE and other investments. Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the
CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before expiration, provided that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last
year. CEO Vested Options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year (as a % of shares outstanding), multiplied by
10 so that the means of vested options and CEO Stock Ownership are the same order of magnitude. The FD Control Variables are identical to those in Frank and Goyal
(2003): changes in profitability (operating income before depreciation normalized by beginning of the year assets), in tangibility (property, plants, and equipment,
normalized by beginning of the year assets), in the logarithm of sales and in Q (market value of assets over the book value of assets, where market value of assets is the
book value of total assets plus market equity minus book equity). Book Leverage is debt in current liabilities plus long-term debt divided by the debt in current liabilities
plus long-term debt plus common equity, measured at the beginning of the year. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level.
                                                (1)                   (2)                   (3)                    (4)                   (5)                    (6)
Net Financing Deficit (FD)                    0.729
                                            (9.90)***
Longholder                                                          -0.006                -0.005                -0.008                 -0.008                -0.005
                                                                     (1.43)                (1.37)              (1.95)*                (2.03)**                (1.43)
Longholder * FD                                                      0.350                 0.348                0.332                   0.322                 0.334
                                                                    (1.78)*               (1.77)*              (1.77)*                 (1.69)*               (1.90)*
CEO Stock Ownership                                                                        0.015                0.015                   0.014                 0.010
                                                                                           (0.87)               (0.90)                  (0.85)                (0.76)
CEO Stock * FD                                                                             0.373                0.431                   0.370                 0.348
                                                                                         (2.30)**             (2.63)***               (2.14)**              (2.17)**
CEO Vested Options                                                                        -0.025                -0.021                  0.000                 0.011
                                                                                           (1.49)               (1.15)                  (0.00)                (0.52)
CEO Vested Options * FD                                                                   -0.088                -0.098                 -0.135                -0.156
                                                                                        (3.21)***             (3.59)***              (3.06)***             (3.76)***
Book Leverage                                                                                                                                                -0.096
                                                                                                                                                           (5.98)***
Book Leverage * FD                                                                                                                                           -0.129
                                                                                                                                                              (0.54)
FD Control Variables                                                                                                                      X                     X
FD Control Variables * FD                                                                                                                 X                     X
Year Fixed Effects                                                                                                 X                      X                     X
Firm Fixed Effects                                                     X                     X                     X                      X                     X
Firm Fixed Effects * FD                                                X                     X                     X                      X                     X
Observations                                   2385                  2385                  2385                  2385                   2385                  2346
Number of Firms                                 263                   263                   263                   263                    263                   262
R-squared                                      0.75                  0.93                  0.93                  0.94                   0.94                  0.94
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                          Table VI. Internal vs. External Financing

Panel A. Debt Conservatism: Kink Tobits
The dependent variable is the kink variable of Graham (2000), i. e., the amount of hypothetical interest at which the marginal tax benefit function
starts to slope down, as a proportion of actual interest expense. The tobit regressions account for two-sided censoring of the kink variable at 0 and 8.
Longholder is a binary variable, equal to 1 if the CEO, at some point during his tenure, held an option package until the last year before expiration,
provided that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last year. Depression Baby indicates CEOs born between 1920 and 1929. CEO
Stock Ownership is the percentage of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. CEO Vested
Options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year (as a % of shares outstanding),
multiplied by 10 so that the means of vested options and CEO Stock Ownership are the same order of magnitude. Kink Controls and Industry Fixed
Effects are defined as in Graham (2002) and listed in Panel B of Table 1. Low Cash Status is an indicator, equal to 1 if the firm's cash stock at the
beginning of the year, divided by mean industry investment, is at or below the 40th percentile in our sample. Mean industry investment is calculated
separately for each year and each of 12 Fama-French industry groups. (See Table 1, Panel A.) All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the
firm level.
                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)                 (4)               (5)              (6)
Longholder                                      1.122               1.256           0.647                                                  0.618
                                                (1.75)*             (1.94)*         (1.71)*                                                 (1.61)
Depression Baby                                                                                        0.898             0.505             0.484
                                                                                                      (2.27)**          (2.07)**           (1.90)*
CEO Stock Ownership                                                 3.369           -1.145                                                 0.296
                                                                    (1.01)          (-0.48)                                                 (0.11)
CEO Vested Options                                                  -3.025          -3.193                                                 -2.752
                                                                    (-0.70)        (-2.02)**                                               (-1.84)*
Age                                                                                                                      -0.026            -0.022
                                                                                                                         (-1.38)           (-1.15)
Tenure                                                                                                                   -0.016            -0.023
                                                                                                                         (-0.88)           (-1.22)
Kink Controls                                                                          X                                   X                  X
Industry Fixed Effects                                                                 X                                   X                  X
Observations                                     1726               1726            1726               1717              1717               1705
Number of Firms                                   189                189             189                190               190                188
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Panel B. Equity Conservatism: Distribution of Longholder Net Equity Issues by Kink
Net equity issues are sales of common stock minus stock repurchases and are normalized by beginning of the
year assets.
                                              Kink ≤ 1       1 < Kink ≤ 3 3 < Kink ≤ 7               Kink > 7
Sample: Longholder = 1
10th percentile                               -0.00834          -0.02923          -0.02668           -0.05162
25th percentile                                0.00000          -0.00003          -0.01055           -0.01286
50th percentile                                0.00544          0.00180           0.00000            0.00000
75th percentile                                0.04148          0.00629           0.00348            0.00794
90th percentile                                0.09536          0.01733           0.02928            0.01685
Observations                                      37              110               111                 96
Mean                                           0.02869          0.00600           0.00497            0.00352
Standard Deviation                             0.06086          0.05291           0.08199            0.09174
Sample: Depression Baby = 1
10th percentile                               -0.00846          -0.03568          -0.04293           -0.06254
25th percentile                                0.00000          -0.00855          -0.01158           -0.02315
50th percentile                                0.00104          0.00047           0.00001            0.00000
75th percentile                                0.00800          0.00570           0.00575            0.00523
90th percentile                                0.05131          0.04080           0.01893            0.01646
Observations                                      74              270                240                175
Mean                                           0.00950          0.00277           -0.00088           -0.01053
Standard Deviation                             0.03470          0.05085           0.07096            0.06885
                                                                    Table VII. Leverage

OLS regressions with end-of-fiscal-year market leverage as dependent variable, measured as debt in current liabilities plus long-term debt divided by the sum of
the numerator and market equity. Longholder is binary and equals 1 if the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before
expiration, provided that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last year. Military Experience is an indicator variable for CEOs with prior military
service; World War II Veteran indicates service during World War II. Profitability is operating income before depreciation normalized by beginning-of-the-year
assets; Tangibility is property, plants, and equipment, normalized by beginning-of-the-year assets. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets,
where market value of assets is the book value of total assets plus market equity minus book equity. Net Financing Deficit is cash dividends plus net investment
plus change in working capital minus cash flow after interest and taxes, normalized by beginning-of-the-year assets. Net investment is capital expenditures plus
increase in investments plus acquisitions plus other uses of funds minus sale of PPE minus sale of investment. Change in working capital is change in operating
working capital plus change in cash and cash equivalents plus change in current debt. Cash flow after interest and taxes is income before extraordinary items plus
depreciation and amortization plus extraordinary items and discontinued operations plus deferred taxes plus equity in net loss (earnings) plus other funds from
operations plus gain (loss) from sales of PPE and other investments. Returnsx are the natural logarithm of 1 plus stock returns (excluding dividends) from year x-1
to x. CEO Vested Options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year (as a % of shares outstanding),
multiplied by 10 so that the means of vested options and CEO Stock Ownership are the same order of magnitude. Profitability, Tangibility, ln(Sales), Q, Net
Financing Deficit, and CEO Stock Ownership are measured at the beginning of the fiscal year. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level.

                                     (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)             (9)
Longholder                                                      0.0361        0.0410         0.0517                                                      0.0518
                                                               (1.98)**      (2.44)**       (2.28)**                                                     (1.95)*
Military Experience                                                                                        0.0353         0.0326         -0.0015          0.002
                                                                                                           (1.69)*        (1.92)*         (-0.08)        (-0.09)
World War II Veteran                                                                                                                      0.0695         0.0517
                                                                                                                                         (2.21)**        (1.71)*
Profitability                     -0.7074        -0.4600        -0.4634       -0.2774        -0.3586                      -0.3364        -0.3281         -0.274
                                (-5.18)***     (-6.79)***     (-6.88)***    (-3.78)***     (-4.64)***                   (-3.52)***     (-3.56)***     (-3.60)***
Tangibility                        0.1155         0.0248         0.0238        0.0265         0.0286                      -0.0062        -0.0035         0.0258
                                 (2.66)***        (0.58)         (0.56)         (0.63)        (0.70)                       (-0.16)        (-0.09)        (-0.75)
ln(Sales)                          0.0360         0.0476         0.0491        0.0338         0.0513                       0.0418         0.0411         0.0457
                                 (4.03)***      (4.76)***      (4.92)***     (3.32)***      (4.11)***                    (3.07)***      (3.09)***      (3.03)***
Q                                 -0.0424        -0.0126        -0.0119        0.0028         0.0089                       -0.013        -0.0132         0.0172
                                (-2.68)***       (-1.86)*       (-1.76)*        (0.40)        (1.31)                      (-1.92)*       (-1.94)*      (2.88)***
Net Financing Deficit              0.2438         0.1228         0.1227        0.1189         0.1238                       0.1427         0.1406         0.1047
                                 (4.14)***      (4.96)***      (4.95)***     (4.75)***      (5.20)***                    (4.48)***      (4.49)***      (4.55)***
Returnst-1                                                                    -0.0692        -0.0718                                                     -0.098
                                                                            (-4.21)***     (-4.05)***                                                 (-6.62)***
Returnst-2                                                                     -0.056        -0.0526                                                    -0.0835
                                                                            (-2.72)***      (-2.38)**                                                 (-6.28)***
Returnst-3                                                                    -0.0416        -0.0469                                                    -0.0604
                                                                            (-3.54)***     (-3.88)***                                                 (-6.56)***
Returnst-4                                                                    -0.0307        -0.0396                                                    -0.0546
                                                                            (-3.48)***     (-4.21)***                                                 (-5.63)***
Returnst-5                                                                    -0.0105        -0.0176                                                    -0.0153
                                                                               (-1.30)      (-2.11)**                                                   (-1.80)*
CEO Stock Ownership                                                                           0.1085                                                     0.0431
                                                                                              (1.60)                                                     (-0.94)
CEO Vested Options                                                                            0.1119                                                    -0.0001
                                                                                             (2.48)**                                                    (-0.00)
Age                                                                                                                        0.0036     0.0025             0.0024
                                                                                                                         (2.90)*** (2.08)**             (2.09)**
Tenure                                                                                      -0.0007                       -0.0054    -0.0051            -0.0044
                                                                                             (-0.81)                    (-4.60)*** (-4.75)***         (-4.19)***
(Tenure)*(Longholder)                                                                       -0.0021
                                                                                             (-1.45)
Firm Effects                                         X               X            X             X             X              X              X              X
Year Effects                                                                                    X             X              X              X              X
Observations              2,184                   2,184             2,184      2,184          2,184         1,626          1,626          1,626          1,521
Number of Firms            241                     241               241        241            241           210            210            210            194
Adjusted R-squared (Within)                        0.11              0.12       0.16           0.22          0.08           0.19           0.19           0.29
Adjusted R-squared         0.35                    0.77              0.77       0.78           0.80          0.78           0.80           0.80           0.83
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                                              Table A1. Summary Statistics (Execucomp Sample)
Panel A. Financing Deficit Variables

Net financing deficit is cash dividends plus net investment plus change in working capital minus cash flow after interest and taxes. Net investment is capital expenditures plus increase in investments plus acquisitions plus other uses of
funds minus sale of property, plants, and equipment minus sale of investment. Change in working capital is change in operating working capital plus change in cash and cash equivalents plus change in current debt. Cash flow after interest
and taxes is income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization plus extraordinary items and discontinued operations plus deferred taxes plus equity in net loss (earnings) plus other funds from operations plus gain (loss)
from sales of property, plants, and equipment and other investments. Net debt issues are long term debt issuance minus long term debt reduction. Net equity issues are sales of common stock minus stock repurchases. Profitability is
operating income before depreciation, normalized by assets at the beginning of the year. Tangibility is property, plants, and equipment, normalized by assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value
of assets, where market value of assets is the book value of assets plus market equity minus book equity.∆ denotes one-year changes.

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Longholder_Thomson(_Fill)
                                                                     Full Sample (I)                     Longholder_Exec Sample (II)                  Longholder_CJRS Sample (III)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sample (IV)
                                                 Number of Firms = 2,166         Number of Firms = 270                                                    Number of Firms = 1,359                        Number of Firms = 763
                                               Num. Firm-Years = 13,948          Num. Firm-Years = 377                                                    Num. Firm-Years = 7,151                       Num. Firm-Years = 5,097
                                            (w/ Net Equity Issues) = 13,556    (w/ Net Equity Issues) = 367                                           (w/ Net Equity Issues) = 6,952                (w/ Net Equity Issues) = 4,932
                  Variable                       Mean    Median      SD         Mean        Median      SD                                                 Mean    Median      SD                       Mean        Median    SD
Assets ($m)                                  5507.56 1112.16 22779.22 12870.27          2053.48      57899.51                                         4665.88 1108.21 15685.05                       6879       1516.50 28433.19
Net Financing Deficit ($m)                      8.44      0.01     1260.86  109.20         0.55       3162.61                                            4.69       1.72      945.82                    7         -0.24     1591.74
    Cash Dividends ($m)                        93.40      2.11      527.63  237.92        6.68        1042.14                                           77.03       0.00      414.01                  120         5.80       514.52
    Net Investment ($m)                       431.65     78.00     2038.34 1224.21       142.70       5352.03                                          428.15      93.47     1551.85                  564        114.21     2370.11
    Change in Working Capital ($m)             59.76     12.71      869.69   6.50         22.39       1092.09                                           54.89      15.90      757.65                   75         16.36      758.64
    Cash Flow after Interest and Taxes ($m) 576.36      119.00     1951.71 1359.42       258.14       4002.86                                          555.39     128.86     1806.95                  753        177.20     2201.42
Net Financing Deficit/Assetst-1                0.04       0.00       0.27    0.03         0.00          0.25                                             0.06       0.00       0.32                  0.03         0.00        0.22
Net Debt Issues/Assetst-1                      0.03       0.00       0.18    0.06         0.00          0.21                                             0.04       0.00       0.20                  0.04         0.00        0.18
Net Equity Issues/Assetst-1                    0.01       0.00       0.19    -0.03        -0.01         0.12                                             0.01       0.00       0.24                  0.00         0.00        0.12
Profitability                                   0.16      0.16       0.15    0.17         0.17          0.12                                             0.18       0.18       0.16                  0.18         0.17        0.12
∆ Profitability                                -0.01      0.00       0.15    -0.01         0.00         0.07                                            -0.01       0.00       0.13                  0.00          0.00       0.12
Tangibility                                     0.34      0.27       0.27    0.29          0.18         0.29                                             0.34       0.25       0.29                  0.35          0.27       0.28
∆ Tangibility                                  -0.01      0.00       0.16    0.00          0.00         0.13                                            -0.01       0.00       0.18                 -0.01         0.00        0.16
Q                                               2.12      1.61       1.90    2.17          1.88         1.21                                             2.43       1.85       2.24                  2.20          1.73       1.57
∆Q                                             -0.12     -0.01       2.16    -0.03        -0.03         0.64                                            -0.11       0.00       2.27                 -0.06         0.00        1.37
ln(Sales)                                       7.12      7.05       1.63    7.71          7.50         1.64                                             7.08       7.02       1.59                  7.44          7.36       1.57
∆ ln(Sales)                                     0.10      0.09       0.27    0.10          0.11         0.23                                             0.14       0.12       0.27                  0.12          0.10       0.22

Distribution across Fama French 12 Industry Groups
                                             (I)                           (II)           (III)       (IV)                                                                             (I)           (II)            (III)           (IV)
                    Consumer Nondurables    0.09                           0.06           0.07        0.09                                             Telecommunication              0.03           0.02            0.03            0.02
                       Consumer Durables    0.04                           0.02           0.03        0.04                                                      Utilities             n.a.           n.a.            n.a.            n.a.
                           Manufacturing    0.13                           0.07           0.10        0.12                                                        Shops               0.15           0.16            0.14            0.16
                                   Energy   0.05                           0.09           0.06        0.07                                                       Health               0.10           0.14            0.13            0.11
             Chemicals and Allied Products  0.05                           0.02           0.03        0.05                                                       Money                n.a.           n.a.            n.a.            n.a.
                      Business Equipment    0.20                           0.20           0.24        0.17                                                        Other               0.17           0.21            0.17            0.17
The Fama-French Industry Groups are defined on French's website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html).
                                                                                        Table A1 (cont.)
Panel B. Kink Variables

Kink is the amount of interest at the point where the marginal benefit function becomes downward sloping, as a proportion of actual interest expense. ECOST is the standard deviation of the first
difference in taxable earnings divided by assets, the quoteient times the sum of advertising, research, and development expenses divided by sales. CYCLICAL is the standard deviation of operating
earnings divided by mean assets first calculated for each firm, then averaged across firms within two-digit SIC codes. Return on assets is income before extraordinary items plus interest expense plus
depreciation, divided by assets. Z-score is 3.3 times the difference of operating income before depreciation and depreciation plus sales plus 1.4 times retained earnings plus 1.2 times working capital
(balance sheet), the quantity divided by assets. Quick ratio is the sum of cash and short-term investments and total receivables divided by total current liabilities. Current ratio is total current assets
divided by total current liabilities. Q-ratio is preferred stock plus market value of common equity plus net short-term liabilities, the quantity divided by assets. R&D to sales and Advertising to sales
are set to 0 when the numerator is missing. Computer Industry are all firms with SIC code 357, Semiconductor Industry all firms with SIC code 367, Chemicals and Allied Products comprises SIC
codes 280-289, Aircraft and Guided Space Vehicles SIC codes 372 and 376, and Other Sensitive Industries SIC codes 340-400, excluding 357, 367, 372, and 376. Vested options (as a % of shares
outstanding) are multiplied by 10 so that the means of vested options and stock ownership are the same order of magnitude.
                                                                        (I)                                 (II)                               (III)                   (IV)
                                                              Number of Firms = 1,485              Number of Firms = 194               Number of Firms = 914   Number of Firms = 613
                                                              Num. Firm-Years = 8,730              Num. Firm-Years = 278              Num. Firm-Years = 4,413 Num. Firm-Years = 3,599
                    Variable                                  Mean Median        SD                Mean Median       SD               Mean Median        SD   Mean Median        SD
Kink                                                           4.23      3      3.44               5.28      5      3.55               4.56      4      3.43   4.48      4      3.35
I(No dividend)                                                 0.37      0      0.48               0.44      0      0.50               0.45      0      0.50   0.34      0      0.47
I(Negative owners' equity)                                     0.02      0      0.15               0.01      0      0.08               0.02      0      0.13   0.01      0      0.08
I(NOL carryforward)                                            0.33      0      0.47               0.47      0      0.50               0.32      0      0.47   0.31      0      0.46
ECOST                                                          3.58    0.45    10.15               3.97    0.35    10.65               4.33    0.59    11.18   3.22    0.44     9.07
CYCLICAL                                                       0.09    0.10     0.03               0.10    0.10     0.03               0.09    0.10     0.02   0.09    0.10     0.03
Return on assets                                               0.11    0.12     0.10               0.12    0.12     0.08               0.12    0.13     0.09   0.12    0.12     0.07
ln(sales)                                                      7.39    7.32     1.50               7.77    7.55     1.53               7.36    7.30     1.48   7.66    7.56     1.44
Z-score                                                        2.09    2.13     1.39               2.14    2.09     1.19               2.15    2.21     1.37   2.27    2.22     1.14
Quick ratio                                                    1.44    1.04     1.44               1.48    1.07     1.42               1.56    1.12     1.59   1.42    1.03     1.46
Current ratio                                                  2.22    1.80     1.62               2.22    1.70     1.61               2.31    1.87     1.73   2.18    1.78     1.64
PPE-to-assets                                                  0.32    0.27     0.21               0.26    0.19     0.23               0.30    0.24     0.21   0.31    0.26     0.21
Q-ratio                                                        1.46    1.12     1.24               1.64    1.34     1.10               1.72    1.31     1.37   1.62    1.24     1.28
R&D-to-sales                                                   0.04      0      0.12               0.06      0      0.15               0.05    0.00     0.13   0.04      0      0.10
Advertising-to-sales                                           0.01      0      0.03               0.01      0      0.03               0.01      0      0.02   0.01      0      0.02
Computer Industry                                              0.02      0      0.15               0.01      0      0.12               0.03      0      0.16   0.02      0      0.13
Semiconductor Industry                                         0.04      0      0.20               0.06      0      0.23               0.06      0      0.24   0.05      0      0.21
Chemicals and Allied Products Industry                         0.10      0      0.30               0.09      0      0.29               0.10      0      0.30   0.12      0      0.32
Aircraft and Guided Space Vehicles Industry                    0.01      0      0.11               0.01      0      0.10               0.01      0      0.11   0.01      0      0.11
Other Sensitive Industries                                     0.22      0      0.41               0.21      0      0.40               0.23      0      0.42   0.21      0      0.41

Panel C. CEO Variables
CEO Vested Options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year (as a % of shares outstanding), multiplied by 10 so that the means of vested
options and CEO Stock Ownership are the same order of magnitude. Depression Baby is an indicator variable for CEOs born in the 1920s. Military Experience indicates CEOs with prior military
service.
                                                                         (I)                               (II)                                (III)                               (IV)
                                                               Number of CEOs = 3,466              Number of CEOs = 270               Number of CEOs = 1,579               Number of CEOs = 869
                   Variable                                    Mean Median      SD                 Mean Median      SD                Mean Median      SD                  Mean Median      SD
Age                                                            56.12     56     7.63               56.75    56     6.73               56.03     56     7.40                55.92    56     6.93
Tenure                                                          9.13      7     7.81               11.28     9     7.95               10.27      8     7.84                10.05     8     7.63
CEO Stock Ownership                                             0.03    0.00    0.07                0.02   0.00    0.06                0.03    0.01    0.06                 0.02   0.00    0.05
CEO Vested Options                                              0.01    0.00    0.01                0.01   0.01    0.01                0.01    0.01    0.01                 0.01   0.01    0.01
Depression Baby                                                 0.10      0     0.30                n.a.   n.a.    n.a.                0.09      0     0.29                 0.09     0     0.29
Military Experience                                             0.04      0     0.18                0.01     0     0.09                0.03      0     0.17                 0.02     0     0.14
                                        Table A2. Alternative Longholder Measures (Execucomp Sample)
The sample consists of S&P 1500 companies covered by Compustat's Execucomp database between 1992 and 2007, excluding financial companies (SIC 6000-6999) and regulated utilities
(SIC 4900-4999). Longholder_Exec is is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before expiration,
provided that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last year. Longholder_Thomson is a binary indicator defined as Longholder_Exec, but using Thomson Financial data to
identify option exercises which occur in the final year of the option's duration. Longholder_Thomson is 0 for CEOs for whom we observe at least one option exercise in the Thomson
database during the sample period. Longholder_Thomson_Fill is defined as Longholder_Thomson, but includes all CEOs who do not satisfy the Longholder criteria in the control group.
Longholder_CJRS is a binary indicator set to one if the CEO at least twice during his tenure in the sample was holding options with average moneyness greater than 67% at the end of a
fiscal year, starting in the first year the CEO displays the behavior. Returnsx are the natural logarithm of 1 plus stock returns (excluding dividends) from year x-1 to x.

Panel A. Summary Statistics
                                                         % Over-        % Not Over-
                                             N           confident       confident
Longholder_Exec                            3,566           22.18           77.82
Longholder_CJRS                           19,108           49.45           50.55
Longholder_Thomson                        12,970           53.56           46.44
Longholder_Thomson_Fill                   21,549           32.24           67.76


Panel B. Pairwise Correlations
                                                                        Longholder
                                       Longholder Longholder Longholder
                                                                        _Thomson_                        Returnst-1      Returnst-2       Returnst-3      Returnst-4      Returnst-5
                                         _Exec      _CJRS    _Thomson
                                                                           Fill
Longholder_Exec                            1

Longholder_CJRS                           0.2208              1
                                        (0.00; 3314)     (- ; 19108)
Longholder_Thomson                        0.4375          0.1671              1
                                        (0.00; 2290)    (0.00; 12398)    (- ; 12970)
Longholder_Thomson_Fill                   0.4840          0.2678              1               1
                                        (0.00; 3566)    (0.00; 19108)    (- ; 12970)      (- ; 21549)
Returnst-1                                0.0498          0.1517          0.0314           0.0723             1
                                        (0.00; 3526)    (0.00; 18980)   (0.00; 12870)   (0.00; 21298)     (- ; 28944)
Returnst-2                                0.0202          0.1684          0.0167           0.0581         -0.0227             1
                                        (0.23; 3495)    (0.00; 18706)   (0.06; 12719)   (0.00; 20939)   (0.00; 27801)     (- ; 27848)
Returnst-3                                0.0379          0.1629          0.0169           0.0523         -0.0538          -0.0498             1
                                        (0.03; 3454)    (0.00; 18285)   (0.06; 12484)   (0.00; 20429)   (0.00; 26644)    (0.00; 26691)    (- ; 26470)
Returnst-4                                0.0145          0.1303           0.021           0.0508         -0.0613          -0.0622         -0.0488             1
                                        (0.40; 3420)    (0.00; 17760)   (0.02; 12175)   (0.00; 19809)   (0.00; 25484)    (0.00; 25520)   (0.00; 25568)    (- ; 25624)
Returnst-5                                0.0103          0.0897          0.0345           0.0518           0.004          -0.0744         -0.0716         -0.0561             1
                                        (0.55; 3385)    (0.00; 17172)   (0.00; 11799)   (0.00; 19129)   (0.54; 24305)    (0.00; 24326)   (0.00; 24360)   (0.00; 24413)     (- ; 24478)
p-values and number of observations in parentheses
                            Table A3. Alternative Longholder Measures and Public Issues

Logit regressions with coefficients reported as log odds ratios. The dependent variable is binary and equals 1 if the firm issued equity during the fiscal year.
The sample consists of all firm years in which the firm did at least one public security issue for S&P 1500 firms included in Compustat's Execucomp
database between 1992 and 2007 excluding financial firms (SIC 6000-6999) and regulated utilities (SIC 4900-4999). CEO Stock Ownership is the number
of shares owned by the CEO excluding options. CEO Vested Options is the CEO's holdings of unexercised exercisable stock options, multiplied by 10 (so
that the mean is roughly comparable to CEO Stock Ownership). CEO Stock Ownership and CEO Vested Options are scaled by common shares outstanding
and are measured at the beginning of the fiscal year. Longholder_Exec is is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure
held an option package until the last year before expiration, provided that the package was at least 40% in the money entering its last year.
Longholder_Thomson is a binary indicator defined as Longholder_Exec, but using Thomson Financial data to identify option exercises which occur in the
final year of the option's duration. Longholder_Thomson is 0 for CEOs for whom we observe at least one option exercise in the Thomson database during
the sample period. Longholder_Thomson_Fill is defined as Longholder_Thomson, but includes all CEOs who do not satisfy the Longholder criteria in the
control group. Longholder_CJRS is a binary indicator set to one if the CEO at least twice during his tenure in the sample was holding options with average
moneyness greater than 67% at the end of a fiscal year, starting in the first year the CEO displays the behavior. Return Controls are the natural logarithms
of 1 plus annual stock returns (excluding dividends) over the five prior fiscal years. Standard firm controls, book leverage, kink controls, and industry fixed
effects are as defined in Table III, Panel B. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level.
                                                                     (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)                             (6)
                                                                                          Panel A. Longholder_Exec
Longholder_Exec                                                  -0.5854         -1.1084     -0.9629    -0.9203    -0.9361                        -1.2997
                                                                 (1.79)*         (2.54)**    (2.50)**   (2.34)**   (2.16)**                       (2.33)**
CEO Stock Ownership                                                              15.2343     10.2797    10.4621     7.3521                        10.3829
                                                                                (3.08)*** (2.87)*** (2.89)***       (1.47)                         (1.77)*
CEO Vested Options                                                                 5.21      1.68201    1.45963     1.6262                        0.92258
                                                                                 (2.55)**     (0.91)     (0.78)     (0.79)                          (0.36)
Observations                                                        361             297             293             282              269             226

                                                                                         Panel B. Longholder_CJRS
Longholder_CJRS                                                 0.3243            0.2057     -0.0021    0.0022    -0.3273                         -0.4304
                                                               (3.82)***         (2.00)**     (0.02)     (0.02)   (2.50)**                       (2.78)***
CEO Stock Ownership                                                               4.6172      2.2825    2.1641     1.6315                          1.6771
                                                                                (4.77)*** (2.70)*** (2.62)***      (1.52)                          (1.21)
CEO Vested Options                                                               1.45164    -0.02549   0.10186     0.0658                          0.5303
                                                                                (2.98)***     (0.06)     (0.24)    (0.15)                          (0.82)
Observations                                                        3,552         2,648            2,615           2,539            2,276           1,773

                                                                                       Panel C. Longholder_Thomson
Longholder_Thomson                                              -0.5377          -0.5083     -0.3011   -0.3036   -0.2401                          -0.2355
                                                               (4.95)***        (4.00)*** (2.30)**     (2.26)**  (1.67)*                           (1.35)
CEO Stock Ownership                                                               4.9631      2.929     2.8806    2.2132                           2.2235
                                                                                (3.64)*** (2.73)*** (2.57)**     (1.83)*                           (1.52)
CEO Vested Options                                                               2.00796    0.25694    0.38396   0.20277                          0.74639
                                                                                (3.35)***     (0.51)    (0.73)    (0.38)                           (0.83)
Observations                                                        2,568          1,991           1,970           1,921            1,776           1,373

                                                                                     Panel D. Longholder_Thomson_Fill
Longholder_Thomson_Fill                                          -0.6344         -0.5764     -0.3728    -0.3606  -0.3405                          -0.3622
                                                                (6.78)***       (5.27)*** (3.38)*** (3.17)*** (2.79)***                           (2.49)**
CEO Stock Ownership                                                               5.0850      2.7279     2.6052   1.9706                           1.5942
                                                                                (5.70)*** (3.78)*** (3.59)*** (2.21)**                             (1.35)
CEO Vested Options                                                                1.6251     0.00965   0.12202  -0.06323                          0.25244
                                                                                (3.32)***     (0.02)     (0.29)   (0.14)                           (0.39)
Observations                                                        3,960          2,822           2,788           2,705            2,393           1,840

Standard firm controls                                                                               X                X               X
Book leverage                                                                                                         X               X
Kink controls                                                                                                                                          X
Return controls                                                                                                                       X                X
Industry fixed effects                                                                                                                                 X
Year fixed effects                                                                                                    X               X                X
* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%
                 Online Appendix
                        to
Managerial Beliefs and Corporate Financial Policies

       Ulrike Malmendier                Geoﬀrey Tate
    UC Berkeley and NBER                   UCLA
    ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu     geoﬀ.tate@anderson.ucla.edu
                             Jon Yan
                             Stanford
                    jonathan.yan@stanford.edu

                        December 1, 2010
In this Online Appendix, we provide a simple theoretical framework to examine the capital
structure predictions of one specific variation in managerial beliefs: CEO (over-)confidence.
The model formalizes the hypothesis development of the main paper and helps to clarify the
more subtle predictions such as the conditions under which the preference of overconfident
CEOs for debt over equity are reversed.

We define overconfidence as the overestimation of mean future cash flows. The emphasis on
the mean distinguishes our approach from previous theoretical literature on overconfidence.
Hackbarth (forthcoming) models the underestimation of variance to generate diﬀerent capital-
structure implications. Heaton (2002) models an upward shift in the probability of the good
(high cash flow) state, which does not disentangle which theoretcial results are generated by
the implied bias in means and which by the implied bias in variance. Relatedly, one theoretical
contribution of our paper lies in showing that the overestimation of cash flows in non-default
states (i.e. overvaluation of the residual claim) generates a preference between risky debt
and equity. The modeling approach of Heaton (shift in probabilities) does not allow for this
mechanism.

We abstract from market frictions like agency costs and asymmetric information. However,
such factors do not change our predictions as long as they aﬀect managers uniformly and are
not suﬃcient to create boundary solutions (e.g. full debt financing for a rational CEO).

We consider a manager’s decision to undertake and finance a single, non-scalable investment
project with cost I and stochastic return R̃, given by RG with probability p ∈ (0; 1) and RB
with probability 1 − p, where RG > I > RB . The investment cost and the return distribution
are common knowledge. To fix the rational capital-structure choice, we allow for two frictions,
taxes and bankruptcy costs. The firm pays a marginal rate τ on the net return R̃ − I if R̃ > I
and incurs a deadweight loss L in the case of bankruptcy. We assume perfectly competitive
debt and equity markets and normalize the risk-free interest rate to zero. The firm has existing
assets A and internal funds C. The CEO maximizes the perceived value of the company to
existing shareholders. Note that a shareholder-value maximizing CEO never buys back shares
since it is a zero-sum game from the perspective of shareholders: Some current shareholders
are helped at the expense of other current shareholders. We allow for the possibility that the
CEO overestimates (after-tax) project returns R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I): Ê[·] > E[·]. He may also
                                             b > A.
overestimate the value of assets in place A, A


                                               1
We proceed in two steps. We first consider the unconditional choice between internal and
external financing. We then condition on accessing external financing and analyze the choice
between risky debt and equity.

Starting from the unconditional choice between internal and external financing, we first com-
pare using cash and riskless debt, denoted by c ≤ C, to using equity. (Later, we consider the
possibility that the CEO exhausts cash and riskless debt capacity, creating a choice between
risky debt and equity.) We assume that the firm has s > 0 shares outstanding and denote by
s0 ≥ 0 the number of new shares issued as part of the financing plan. We also assume that the
bias in the CEO’s expectation of project returns and in his valuation of existing assets does
not depend on c.1

Proposition 1 Overconfident CEOs strictly prefer internal finance to equity and use weakly
more internal financing than rational CEOs.

Proof. The participation constraint of new shareholders to provide equity financing is

                          s0 ³                                      ´
                               E[R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A + C − c  =I −c
                        s + s0

Thus, the manager’s perception of the value of current shareholders’ claims after equity financ-
ing is
           µ                   ¶³                                   ´
                        s0        b R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A
                                                              b+C −c
       G =  1−                   E[
                      s + s0
                                             b+C −c ³
                 b R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A
                 E[                                                                          ´
           =                                           E[R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A + C − I
                 E[R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A + C − c

Then
                    ³                                                      ´ ³    ´
                      b R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] − E[R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A
                      E[                                                       b−A
            ∂G
                  =              ³                                       ´2         ·
            ∂c
                                  E[R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A + C − c
                    ³                                        ´
                     E[R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A + C − I


Notice that the numerator of the fraction is zero if the CEO is rational, Ê[·] = E[·] and
b = A, and that it is positive for overconfident CEOs by the definition of overconfidence.
A
  1                         ∂                                         ∂ e
      Formally, we assume   ∂c
                               Ê[R̃   − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] = 0 and   ∂c
                                                                         A   = 0.


                                                             2
         ∂G                                   ∂G
Hence,   ∂c   = 0 for unbiased CEOs, and      ∂c   > 0 for overconfident CEOs if and only if E[R̃ −
τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I)] + A + C − I > 0. That is, as long as firm value is positive, an overconfident
CEO maximizes the perceived value on c ∈ [0, I] by setting the internal financing c as high as
possible. A rational CEO, instead, is indiﬀerent among all financing plans and, hence, uses
weakly less internal funding than overconfident CEOs. Q.E.D.


The intuition for Proposition 1 is that overconfident CEOs perceive the price investors are
willing to pay for new issues s0 to be too low since they believe markets underestimate future
returns. This logic immediately extends to the CEO’s preference between internal finance (if
available) and risky debt if the CEO overestimates cash flows in the default state (RB ): Since
he overestimates cash flows going to creditors, he perceives interest payments on debt to be
too high. Thus, overconfident CEOs have a strict preference for internal financing over any
form of external finance and exhaust cash reserves and riskless debt capacity before issuing
risky securities.

Next, we analyze the choice between the two types of risky external financing, risky debt and
equity, conditional on accessing external capital markets. From Proposition 1, overconfident
CEOs will exhaust all cash and riskless debt capacity before raising risky capital. Thus, for
                                                                                      b=A=
simplicity, we set cash and existing assets (which can be collateralized) equal to 0, A
C = 0. Conditional on implementing the project, the resulting maximization problem is:

                               s
                    maxd,s          Ê[(R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I − [w − d]) − w)+ ]                (1)
                             s + s0
                               s0
                     s.t.           E[(R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I − [w − d]) − w)+ ] = I − d         (2)
                             s + s0
                             E[min{w, R̃ − L}] = d                                              (3)

                             RB ≤ d ≤ I                                                         (4)


where w is the face value of debt, d the market value of debt, and L the deadweight loss from
bankruptcy. Interest payments w − d are tax deductible. The CEO maximizes the perceived
expected returns accruing to current shareholders after subtracting taxes and repaying debt.
Constraints (2) and (3) are the participation constraints for new shareholders and lenders,
respectively. Note that the compensation required for equity and debt financing depends on
investors’ unbiased beliefs rather than managerial perception. Condition (4) reflects that we
are considering the case of risky debt, i. e., the choice between debt and equity after exhausting

                                                    3
all riskless debt capacity created by the project.

The following Proposition characterizes the financing choice of rational CEOs (Ê[·] = E[·]):

Proposition 2 Rational CEOs finance the risky portion of investment, I − RB , using only
                                                                          τ (I−RB )
risky debt if the tax benefits are high relative to bankruptcy costs,        1−τ      > L. They use only
                                                                   τ (I−RB )
equity if the tax benefits are low relative to bankruptcy costs,      1−τ     < L.    They are indiﬀerent
     τ (I−RB )
if      1−τ      = L.

Proof. For notational simplicity, define Q ≡ E[(R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I − [w − d]) − w)+ ]. Using the
participation constraint for shareholders (2) and the fact that E[·] = Ê[·] for rational CEOs,
we can re-write the maximand as Q − (I − d). We consider separately the case in which the
CEO uses at least some risky debt (w > d > RB ) and the case in which the CEO uses no risky
debt, w = d = RB . The latter case is the lower boundary of (4).

In the first case, i.e. if w > RB , the firm defaults in the bad state and, hence Q becomes


                               Q = (1 − τ )pRG + pτ I − (1 − τ )pw − pτ d                             (5)
                 ⇐⇒ Q − (I − d) = (1 − τ )pRG − (1 − pτ )I − (1 − τ )pw + (1 − pτ )d.


Using (3) to substitute for w, the maximand Q − (I − d) becomes:


            Q − (I − d) = (1 − τ )pRG − (1 − pτ )I + (1 − τ )(1 − p)(RB − L) + τ (1 − p)d.            (6)


Since d enters positively, value is maximized by setting d as high as possible. Thus, given
boundary (4), the optimal level of debt is d∗ = I. Substituting back into the maximand yields


                           Q − (I − d∗ ) = (1 − τ )[pRG + (1 − p)(RB − L) − I].


In the second case, w = RB , the firm uses only riskless debt and equity. Thus, there is no
default, and we have:


                                      Q = (1 − τ )pRG + pτ I + (1 − p)RB − d                          (7)

                        ⇐⇒ Q − (I − d) = (1 − τ )pRG − (1 − pτ )I + (1 − p)RB                         (8)



                                                    4
Comparing the value function at the two boundaries, we find that the manager will choose full
debt financing if:


         (1 − τ )[pRG + (1 − p)(RB − L) − I] > (1 − τ )pRG − (1 − pτ )I + (1 − p)RB ,             (9)

                      τ (I−RB )
which simplifies to      1−τ      > L. For the reverse inequality, the manager will choose full equity
financing, and he is indiﬀerent in the case of equality. Q.E.D.


If a CEO chooses to raise debt, it is optimal to set the debt level as high as possible since
tax benefits are increasing in the amount of debt while bankruptcy costs are fixed. If the
CEO chooses full equity financing, he avoids bankruptcy costs, but gives up the tax benefits of
debt. The optimum, then, is either full debt or full equity financing, depending on whether the
expected tax benefits, τ p(w − d), outweigh expected bankruptcy costs, (1 − p)L. Note that, in
the simple two-state setup, the optimal capital structure never includes both risky debt and
equity. However, interior leverage choices become optimal if we add an intermediate state in
which the firm may or may not default depending on the level of debt chosen.

Now consider a CEO who overestimates the returns to investment, Ê[·] > E[·]. Specifically,
assume that the CEO overestimates returns by a fixed amount ∆ in the good state, R̂G =
RG + ∆, but correctly perceives returns in the bad state, R̂B = RB . This assumption allows
us to isolate the mechanism which generates a preference for risky debt: over-valuation of the
residual claim on cash flows in the good state.


Proposition 3 For the risky portion of investment, overconfident CEOs choose full debt fi-
nancing (rather than equity financing) more often than rational CEOs.

Proof. Let Q ≡ E[(R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I − [w − d]) − w)+ ]. Denote as Qb an overconfident
                                 b = Q + p(1 − τ )∆. Using (2), we can write the objective
manager’s perception of Q. Then, Q
                                                                                    e
function of the overconfident CEO’s maximization problem as [Q − (I − d)] Q
                                                                          Q.

Consider first the case that the CEO uses at least some risky debt (w > d > RB ). Then, using




                                                     5
equations (5) and (6) and constraint (3), the maximand becomes

                  b                    ∙               ¸
                  Q                         p(1 − τ )∆
    [Q − (I − d)]     = [Q − (I − d)] 1 +
                  Q                              Q
                      = [(1 − τ )pRG − (1 − pτ )I + (1 − τ )(1 − p)(RB − L) + τ (1 − p)d] ·
                        ∙                                                               ¸
                                                     p(1 − τ )∆
                          1+
                              (1 − τ )pRG + pτ I − (1 − τ )[d − (1 − p)(RB − L)] − pτ d

Diﬀerentiating with respect to d yields
   ∙            ¸
∂ Q − (I − d) b              τ (1 − p)p(1 − τ )∆ p(1 − τ )∆ [(1 − τ ) + pτ ]
             Q = τ (1 − p) +                    +                            [Q − (I − d)] .
∂d    Q                               Q                     Q2

The derivative is strictly positive if Q > 0 and hence s/(s + s0 )Q = Q − (I − d) > 0. We
know that Q ≥ 0 since it is defined as the expectation over values truncated at 0 (Q ≡
E[(R̃ − τ 1{R>I} (R̃ − I − [w − d]) − w)+ ]). Since Q = p[(1 − τ )(RG − w) + τ (I − d)] in the case
of risky debt by (5), and RG − w ≥ 0 (since w > RG would yield lower payoﬀs to bondholders
and stockholders than w = RG due to default costs in both states), and since I − d ≥ 0 by (4),
Q = 0 if and only if RG − w = 0 and I − d = 0. Thus, we have either Q > 0, in which case the
derivative is strictly positive and the manager sets d as high as possible, d∗ = I, or we have
Q = 0, which occurs also for d = I. In both cases, the maximand becomes:

                           b
                           Q
           [Q − (I − d)]      b = (1 − τ )[pRG + (1 − p)(RB − L) − I] + p(1 − τ )∆
                             =Q
                           Q


Now consider the case that w = d = RB . Then, the firm finances I using only riskless debt
and equity. There is no default and using (7) and (8) the maximand becomes

                               b                    ∙               ¸
                               Q                         p(1 − τ )∆
               [Q − (I − d)]       =  [Q − (I − d)] 1 +
                               Q                              Q
                                   = [(1 − τ )pRG − (1 − pτ )I + (1 − p)RB ] ·
                                     ∙                                         ¸
                                                        p(1 − τ )∆
                                       1+
                                           (1 − τ )pRG + (1 − p)RB − RB + pτ I


Comparing the values of the objective function using the optimal amount of risky debt and all




                                                6
equity, we find that the manager chooses risky debt financing if and only if


         (1 − τ )[pRG + (1 − p)(RB − L) − I] + p(1 − τ )∆
         ∙                                         ¸
                            p(1 − τ )∆
       > 1+                                          [(1 − τ )pRG − (1 − pτ )I + (1 − p)RB ]
               (1 − τ )pRG + (1 − p)RB − RB + pτ I

Or,
                    ½          ∙                                        ¸¾
                                     (1 − τ )pRG + (1 − p)RB − I + pτ I
τ (1 − p)(I − RB ) + p(1 − τ )∆ 1 −                                        > (1 − τ )(1 − p)L
                                    (1 − τ )pRG + (1 − p)RB − RB + pτ I


Comparing this condition to condition (9) in Proposition 1, we see that the overconfident CEO
will be more likely to use debt if and only if the term in { } is positive. Since I > RB by
assumption, the term in [ ] is positive, yielding the result. Q.E.D.


An overconfident CEO is more likely to choose full debt financing than a rational CEO for two
reasons. First, the CEO overestimates the tax benefits of debt since he overestimates future
returns (i.e., overestimates cash flow RG by ∆). Second, he perceives equity financing to be
more costly since new shareholders obtain a partial claim on ∆ without paying for it. In our
simple set-up, the CEO agrees with the market about the fair interest rate on risky debt since
there is no disagreement about the probability of default or the cash flow in default states.

In our simple setting, overconfidence does not aﬀect the decision to implement a project,
conditional on external financing. Since capital markets do not finance negative net present
value projects, overconfident CEOs destroy value ‘only’ by using risky debt in some cases in
which equity would be cheaper. If we re-introduce A or C, overconfident CEOs may over-
invest since they overvalue returns from investment and can finance negative net present value
                                                                                        b > A,
projects by diluting A or spending out of C. Likewise, if we allow for CEOs to perceive A
overconfident CEOs might under-invest due to concern over diluting claims on existing assets.2

Since we used R̂B > RB to argue that overconfident CEOs prefer internal finance to risky debt,
we briefly consider the choice between risky debt and equity for a CEO who overestimates not
only RG but also RB , e.g. R̂B = RB + ∆. If R̂B ≥ w ≥ RB , overconfident CEOs mistakenly
believe that they will not default in the bad state. If the probability of default is large and
   2
    Propositions 1 and 2 of Malmendier and Tate (2004) derive these results formally in a parallel setup for
external investment projects (mergers).


                                                     7
∆ is small, the CEO may misperceive debt financing to be more costly than equity financing,
reversing the preference for risky debt over equity. Hence, Proposition 3 may fail in some cases.
Intuitively, creditors seize all of ∆ in the event of default on risky debt, but equity holders
receive only a fraction of ∆ in the bad state.

Overall, our analysis demonstrates that overconfidence can generate a preference for risky debt
over equity, conditional on accessing external capital markets. This preference arises because
overconfident CEOs prefer being the residual claimant on the full cash flow in non-default states
to giving up a fraction of cash flows in all states. In addition, overconfident CEOs may exhibit
debt conservatism. They raise little external financing of any kind, in particular less risky debt
than rational CEOs. In other words, the absolute amount of debt used by overconfident CEOs
can be smaller even if leverage is higher (due to less frequent equity issuance), as illustrated
in Figure 1.




                                                 8
References

[1] Malmendier, Ulrike, and Tate, Geoﬀrey A., 2004, Who Makes Acquisitions? CEO Over-
   confidence and the Market’s Reaction, NBER Working Paper 10813.




                                          9
