                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PRIVATE INFORMATION, HUMAN CAPITAL, AND OPTIMAL “HOME BIAS”
                         IN FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                            Isaac Ehrlich
                                           Jong Kook Shin
                                              Yong Yin

                                        Working Paper 15668
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15668


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




This working paper was entitled "Human Capital, Endogenous Information Acquisition, and Home
Bias in Financial Markets" in its previous incarnation. This paper is a significantly expanded version
of an earlier draft that was presented in the conference “New Directions in the Economic Analysis
of Education” sponsored by the Milton Friedman Institute of the University of Chicago and the Center
for Human Capital at SUNY Buffalo on November 20-21 2009. It is based on joint work by Isaac
Ehrlich and Jong Kook Shin when Ehrlich was a visiting scholar at the Hong Kong Institute of Monetary
Research in spring 2009 and on Shin’s dissertation. Yong Yin is responsible for the micro-level empirical
analysis and has generally contributed to the research on this project. We are grateful to participants
at the conference, as well as to Steven Turnovsky and an anonymous referee for many helpful suggestions
on subsequent drafts.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Isaac Ehrlich, Jong Kook Shin, and Yong Yin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Private Information, Human Capital, and Optimal “Home Bias” in Financial Markets
Isaac Ehrlich, Jong Kook Shin, and Yong Yin
NBER Working Paper No. 15668
January 2010, Revised September 2011
JEL No. D82,F30,G11,G12,G15,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

By allowing for imperfectly informed markets and the role of private information, we offer new insights
about observed deviations of portfolio concentrations in domestic relative to foreign risky assets, or
“home bias”, from what standard finance models predict. Our model ascribes the “bias” to endogenous
information acquisition bolstered by investors’ human capital. We develop discriminating hypotheses
about the influence of “specific” and “general” human capital endowments and direct and opportunity
costs of managing risky assets in determining whether to hold these assets, and how the assets’ portfolio
shares vary across investors and financial markets. These hypotheses are supported by numerical and
econometric analyses of panel data from the US over 1992-2007, and 23 international financial markets
over 2001-2007. The results indicate the existence of differences across countries in the degree to
which home asset prices are “information-revealing”, which may be relevant for fully understanding
the global financial crisis of 2007-09.


Isaac Ehrlich                                       Yong Yin
415 Fronczak Hall                                   415 Fronczak Hall
State University of New York at Buffalo             State University of New York at Buffalo
and Center for Human Capital                        and Center for Human Capital
Box 601520                                          Box 601520
Buffalo, NY 14260-1520                              Buffalo, NY 14260
and NBER                                            yyin@buffalo.edu
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu

Jong Kook Shin
415 Fronczak Hall
State University of New York at Buffalo
and Center for Human Capital
Box 601520
Buffalo, NY 14260
jongshin@buffalo.edu
Introduction

        Recent literature has offered new insights concerning deviations of portfolio

compositions and related financial market characteristics from what standard finance models

predict, by allowing for imperfectly informed markets and the role of private information (see

Bacchetta and Van Wincoop 2006, Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp [VV], 2009, and Ehrlich,

Hamlen and Yin [EHY], 2008). Like EHY, we view equilibrium prices of risky assets as less than

fully information-revealing, private information production as an endogenous variable, and

heterogeneity in individual human capital endowments as a major determinant of observed

variability in risky asset holdings, portfolio returns, market risk premiums, and market volatility.

        Our paper expands the single risky asset ─ multiple investors framework of EHY (2008)

to one that includes multiple risky assets and diverse investors who differ in both “specific” and

“general” human capital. “Specific” human capital relates to endowed or predetermined

knowledge that enhances one’s efficiency in producing information about specific individual

assets, whereas “general” human capital relates to predetermined knowledge that increases one’s

efficiency in producing private information for all risky assets. Both act as complementary

efficiency parameters that enable investors to form private forecasts which increase information

precision, i.e., the posterior inverse variance of the forecasted future returns on specific risky

assets, conditional on information signals.

        We call this activity “asset management”. Its optimal allocation across specific assets,

and thus the precision of private information it produces, is determined by the individual human

capital endowments as well as the direct and opportunity costs of individual asset management.1

Higher information precision concerning an asset lowers the investor’s required rate of return on,

and thus the demand for that asset. Higher average precision concerning a specific asset –

representing the aggregate precision of private information acquired by all investors – increases

the asset price’s “informativeness”, or what we prefer to term price information content (PIC), i.e.,



                                                                                                       1
the extent to which the price reveals information. An asset’s PIC thus acts like an implicit public

information signal which is uniformly available to all investors. The demand for risky assets at

both the individual and market levels is affected by the interaction between the public and private

signals associated with each asset, as well as the signals’ relative magnitudes.

        A natural application of this approach is rationalizing evidence on apparent concentration

of portfolio holdings in specific asset categories, such as domestic vs. foreign assets, or assets of

specific domestic industries, relative to what would be expected by a conventional CAPM

framework. This “excessive concentration” has been dubbed “home bias” in international markets,

or “home bias at home” favoring specific industries or firms within a national market. In this

paper we focus on international home bias. In our approach, however, the “bias” is nothing but an

optimal concentration level – the outcome of endogenously determined private information.

        The issues tackled by our model are not new. The basic equilibrium framework we use,

of imperfectly-informed markets and heterogeneous investors possessing private information, has

been developed in Verrecchia (1982) and Admati (1985). These studies assume, however, that

information costs or private information bundles are exogenously given. The “home bias” puzzle

has also occupied the attention of a vast literature over the last four decades. Conventional

explanations tended to emphasize the influence of institutional barriers to capital mobility, or

variations in costs and benefits of diversification, across international markets on home bias (for

detailed literature reviews, see, e.g., Lewis, 1999, and Sercu and Vanpée, 2007). These

explanations have become less convincing with the development of a more integrated financial

industry which provides increasingly inexpensive vehicles to facilitate global diversification.2

        More recent studies, however, notably VV(2009) offer insights about home bias that are

more in line with the thrust of our model, using an alternative approach. They too argue that

home bias reflects endogenously determined private information differentials across investors. In

their analysis, however, investors have different initial priors about asset returns, and the




                                                                                                   2
information production function they rely on exhibits increasing returns to scale. Thus, home

investors completely specialize in acquiring private information about either domestic or foreign

assets. Also, while VV back their analysis by stylized facts, they do not offer systematic empirical

tests to explain the pattern of observed diversities in home bias at the individual or market levels.

Our model allows for interior solutions in asset management and private information precision

and offers testable propositions concerning variations in “home bias” as a function of identifiable

determinants of private information acquisition and the demand for risky assets.

        Following the noisy-prices, rational expectations literature, we develop a two-period

model with multiple risky assets traded in an integrated world financial exchange. While sharing

identical prior beliefs about the distribution of the returns on all stocks, our investors differ by

their endowments of general and specific human capital. We view specific human capital as

encompassing knowledge of country specific characteristics such as language, cultural heritage,

and the country’s political, economic, and legal systems, which generate a comparative advantage

to domestic investors in accessing private information about their home-country assets than about

other countries’ assets. Prior empirical studies confirm the role of such factors in portfolio

decisions (e.g. La Porta et al 1998; Grinblatt and Keloharju 2001; Massa and Simonov 2006).

        The novelty of our analysis, however, comes from our focus on variations in endowments

of general human capital, which are captured by individual and average schooling attainments, on

the assumption that formal schooling, producing basic knowledge and cognitive skills, is common

to all countries. General human capital augments the productivity of specific human capital in

generating information about both domestic and foreign risky assets. This allows us to develop

testable propositions concerning variations in the optimal portfolio concentrations by individual

investors in the same country, and by representative investors in different countries.

        Our key propositions relate to the determinants of the absolute levels of demand for

domestic and foreign assets, as well as their portfolio shares at both the individual and market

levels. At the individual level, we show that general human capital increases the optimal demand,


                                                                                                   3
thus absolute holding, of both domestic and foreign assets. Whether the ratio of domestic relative

to foreign assets in the individual portfolio also rises with the investor’s general human capital

depends on market-level variables, including the gap between the price-information-content (PIC)

of domestic vs. foreign assets, PICd - PICf . All other determinants of optimal asset management

held constant, if PICd greatly exceeds PICf, for example, we expect individual portfolio

concentrations in home assets to be a decreasing function of individual schooling attainments. In

other cases, however, home bias could be monotonically increasing in schooling attainments.

        At the market level, by contrast, the average information precision and PIC for domestic

and foreign assets are endogenously determined. It is natural to assume that the representative

domestic investor in all countries has a higher level of specific human capital concerning home

assets, relative to foreign assets. All other determinants of asset management held constant, our

model implies that the equilibrium portfolio concentration in domestic assets, or “home bias”

must be an inverted-U-shaped function of the average schooling attainments of domestic

investors in all countries. The rationale is that an upward shift in a country’s average general

human capital is likely to induce greater asset management and private information precision

about the home asset when the public information signal in the home country, PICd , is lower than

that in foreign countries. As average human capital and PICd increases, however, the return on

further managing domestic relative to foreign assets gets diluted. Beyond a critical level of

average schooling and PIC, optimal asset management shifts toward foreign assets and “home

bias” begins to fall systematically as average schooling continues to rise. Indeed, as PIC

approaches an infinite value, prices become fully revealing and “home bias” disappears altogether.

        Our model thus produces discriminating implications about the determinants of variations

of portfolio concentrations across both individual investors in given countries and representative

investors across countries. It also provides a uniform framework to explain corresponding

diversities in risk premiums, volatility contagion, and returns to human capital in managing assets

across international markets. We allude to these implications in the concluding section.


                                                                                                 4
        The paper is organized as follows: Section 1 introduces our analytical framework.

Section 2 develops our basic optimization and equilibrium analysis. Sections 3 and 4 offer

testable propositions at the micro- and macro- levels, respectively, and sections 4 and 5 present

empirical evidence consistent with these propositions. Section 7 discusses alternative hypotheses

and assesses the information costs bearing on Home bias. We end with concluding remarks.



                                          1. The Model

        Our model generalizes Verrecchia (1982) and EHY (2008) to a multiple-asset,

heterogeneous investors framework. Individual investors operate in m countries with competitive

exchange economies and corresponding financial markets. Each country has one distinct risky

asset or country mutual fund and includes a large number of investors who can trade in all

countries’ assets. We assume that markets are fully integrated with no capital controls, so asset

prices are equalized across all markets. Country k has N k investors so N ≡ ∑mk=1 N k denotes the

total number of world investors. Investors’ heterogeneity stems from variations in human capital

endowments, wage earnings, initial wealth, and countries of residence.

        Investors live over two periods. In the first period they search for information signals and

allocate their portfolios among competing domestic and foreign assets, and in the second they

realize portfolio returns, which are used to finance consumption. Portfolio decisions are thus

influenced by two major information channels: One is public, conveyed by assets’ market prices

as signals. The other is a private channel empowered by individually acquired information signals.

        The initial financial wealth of investor i in each country is comprised of risk-free bonds,

Bi 0 traded at a normalized price of unity, and a vector of risky assets, ~
                                                                          x i traded at world prices.

The per capita supply of the risky asset k is given by ~
                                                       xk . The country’s mutual fund k is traded

                     ~                                                     ~ in the second period.
at equilibrium price Pk in the first period and pays off a gross return of μ k




                                                                                                   5
                                                                                         ~      ~ ~       ~
The vector of market clearing prices of all risky assets is thus given by P ≡ ( P1 , P2 ,..., Pm )′ .

           ~ = ( μ~ , μ~ ,..., μ~ )' and ~
Similarly, μ                             x=   1
                                                  ∑iN=1 ~
                                                        x i = (~
                                                               x1 , ~
                                                                    x2 ,..., ~
                                                                             xm )' denote the vectors of assets’
                   1    2        m            N


return and per capita supplies of each of the m risky assets, respectively.

        Although the realizations of return and supply are unobservable until the second period,
                                                                                         ~ follows
their prior joint distribution is commonly known to all investors. The vector of returns μ

a normal distribution with mean μ and variance Σ μ . The supply of risky assets ~
                                                                                x is normally

                                                                          ~ and ~
distributed with mean x and variance Σ x . For simplicity, we assume that μ     x are

uncorrelated and Σ x is a diagonal matrix.3 The assumed existence of random exogenous supply

shocks is critical in the analysis, because such shocks cannot be forecasted through search for

information signals. Thus, the market prices of risky assets become “noisy” – they cannot fully

reveal the private information held by each investor, which in turn generates incentives for

investors to collect costly private information.

        The objective of information collection, or asset management, is to generate a forecast of

returns based on the observed asset prices and moments of the unconditional distributions of

future returns known to all investors, plus private information signals that lower forecast errors.

The ( m × 1 ) vector of private forecasts acquired by investor i , ~
                                                                   zi , is unbiased but imperfectly

                                              zi = μ~ + ε~i , where ε~i follows a normal distribution
                                ~ as follows: ~
correlated with the true return μ

  (      )
N 0, Si−1 and is uncorrelated with both μ~ and ~
                                               x . Si is our measure of private information

precision. For analytical simplicity, we assume that S i is a diagonal matrix and ε~i is independent

of ε~ j for all i ≠ j , i.e., that elements of the vector of forecast errors ε~ are uncorrelated across

both investors and assets. Investors do not have any control over the actual realization of the




                                                                                                              6
private forecast, ~
                  zi . They can increase the magnitude of each diagonal entry in the precision

matrix S i , however, by engaging in costly asset management activities.


        Investor i ’s human wealth consists of an (m + 1)× 1 vector of human capital endowments

                                                                                     [                   ]′
containing both “general” and “country specific” elements, denoted by H i = H i , 0 , H i ,1 ,..., H i , m ,

and T hours of productive time. H i , 0 denotes an endowment of general human capital of investor


i and its cumulative density function is defined over the compact set F : [ H , H ] → [0,1] . 4

General human capital, which we proxy empirically as education, or formal schooling, stands for

predetermined extra-territorial knowledge which augments the efficiency of all productive

activities in all countries; it increases the investor’s labor market skills, hence the market wage

rate, as well as the efficacy of acquiring private information about all risky assets - both domestic

and foreign. By contrast, individual specific human capital endowments associated with country

k’s home asset, H i , k , k ≠ 0 , represent the predetermined knowledge that improves the efficiency

of acquiring private information just about that country’s asset. At the international level the

endowed specific human capital corresponds to the knowledge of specific country attributes such

as cultural heritage, language, politics, economy, legal system and institutions. 5

        Several aspects of our concept of “specific human capital” should be flashed out. First, it

does not need to be comparable across countries. This is partly because we do not have a good

proxy measure for the importance of command over language, communication ability, or cultural

awareness in different countries. It is more like a country-based social capital. Indeed, whether

H i , k is equal to or different from H j , l (where j refers to residents of country l) has no bearing on

any of our behavioral propositions. We do assume, however, as is plausible, that the average

investor in each country is significantly more knowledgeable about her home asset (k) than about

foreign assets ( l ), i.e. H i , k > H i , l ( k ≠ l ). Second, by our interpretation of specific human




                                                                                                         7
capital, its endowment measure H i , k can be thought of as largely uniformly distributed across all

investors within a country, although its effectiveness is influenced the individual level of general

human capital endowments, as defined by equation (1a) below.

        Individuals can allocate their endowed productive time T between two sectors: the labor

market and the household sector, where they search and acquire private information signals

(leisure is subsumed under final-period consumption). Specifically, productive time is allocated

between the management of each asset k , qi , k , and labor hours, T − qi where qi ≡ ∑ mk=1 qi , k

denotes the total asset management time of investor i . The production function of information

precision by investor i for home-asset k is assumed to be of a Cobb-Douglas type:

(1a)                                           Si , k = Aqiθ,1k H iθ, 02 H iθ,3k

where A stands for technological factors facilitating private information acquisition, 0 < θ1 ≤ 1 ,

θ 2 > 0 and θ 3 > 0 . The actual asset management time employed is

(1b)                                                       [         (
                                   qi , k ≡ q (S i , k ) = Si , k / AH iθ, 20 H iθ,3k   )]
                                                                                         1 / θ1




Hence, the total cost of asset management function, C (S i ; H i ) , is given by


                                   C i ≡ C (S i ; H i ) = ∑ (wi ( H i , 0 , λi )q( S i.k ) + C k , 0 )
                                                                 m
(1c)
                                                                k =1



where Ck , 0 is a fixed cost associated with the management of risky asset k , and wi ( H i , 0 , λi ) is

investor i ’s wage rate which is a function of both general human capital and job-related factors .6

We assume that wi is uncorrelated with asset returns, partly because there is no consensus in the

literature regarding the direction of this correlation, but mainly in order to focus on the

contribution of human capital to information production. (We return to this issue in section 6.)

Information costs are a convex function of private information S i , as 0 < θ1 ≤ 1 .




                                                                                                         8
        The market value of investor i ’s initial wealth is Wi 0 = Bi 0 + P ′~
                                                                             x i + Twi ( H i ,0 , λi ) . The

decision rule in our model is maximization of the expected utility of second-period (final) wealth,

                      ~ ′ D + B , where D and B denote, respectively, the demand for risky
or consumption, Wi1 = μ    i   i1        i     i1


assets and the risk-free bond by investor i . The utility function is assumed to be exponential,

with a common risk-tolerance coefficient, r . The investor’s objective is thus

(2)                                            max E [− exp(− Wi1 / r )],
                                            {S i , Di , Bi1 }


subject to the initial periods budget constraint

                                            ~
(2a)                                        P ′ Di + Bi1 + C i = Wi 0 .

        The assumed exponential utility function, or constant absolute risk aversion, is standard

in the literature because of its computational advantage: it allows for closed form solutions, as

wealth is normally distributed. As is well-known, however, this function does not allow for any

pure wealth effects. Thus, if we assume a common risk tolerance, r, to focus on variation in

opportunities, not preferences, portfolio decisions would be attributable solely to diversity in

private information, hence to varying general and specific human capital endowments.7



                            2. Optimization and Equilibrium analysis

A. Optimal demand for risky assets

        The investor’s maximization problem (2) can be decomposed heuristically into two

stages by the law of iterated expectation, although both parts are solved simultaneously. In the

second stage the investor solves for an optimal demand for the m risky assets in the portfolio,

subject to both the implicit public information signal within the market price and the private

information signal produced by optimal asset management. In the first part the optimal demand

for assets the investor relies on her optimal demand rule to solve for optimal private information

collection or “asset management”. The general maximization problem can be stated as follows:



                                                                                                          9
                                     max E~z i , P~ ⎡⎢ max Eμ~ i [− exp (− Wi1 / r ) zi , P ]⎤⎥
                                     {S i }          ⎣{Di , Bi1 }                             ⎦
(3)

                     {S i }          ⎣ {Di , }
                                              [                                                               ]
                   = max E~z i , P~ ⎡⎢max Eμ~ i − exp (− {( μ i − P )′ Di + Wi 0 − C (Si ; H i )}/ r ) zi , P ⎤⎥
                                                                                                               ⎦

where μ i = E μ[ i        ]
              ~ z , P and E ~ denotes an expectation operator defined over the distribution of
                           X


                  ~                                                ~
a random variable X and zi and P denote the realizations of ~
                                                            zi and P , respectively. Equation

(3) is restated alternatively to be maximized over just Si and Di using equation (2a).

        In solving the second stage maximization problem in (3) – determining the optimal

demand for m risky assets conditional on optimal asset management – we invoke (and prove) the

existence of a rational expectations-asset market equilibrium as stated in previous literature (e.g.,

Admati 1985, Verrecchia and Kim 1991, and EHY 2008). Investors are assumed to follow a

linear conjecture concerning the properties of the equilibrium price,

                                       ~
(3a)                                   P = φ0 + φ1μ~ − φ2 ~
                                                          x ,

                                                      ~, ~              ~
By the linear conjecture, the joint distribution of ( μ  z i , P ) is normal. In this case, investors’

conditional demand for risky assets is thus given by

                               Di ≡ D( zi , P ) = rVi −1 (E [μ~ zi , P ] − P ) , where
                               ~
(4a)


(4b)                                                         (
                                 Vi ≡ Var (μ~ z i , P ) = Σ −μ1 + S i + r 2 SΣ −x1 S   )
                                                                                       −1




(4c)                               E[ μ~ z i , P] = η 0i + η1i z i + η 2i P and

                                                  N
                                          1
                                                  ∑ S = ∫ S (H )dF (H )
                                                             H
(4d)                                   S≡                i
                                          N       i =1
                                                             H




Equation (4b) implies that the gap between the prior variance of the returns on risky assets, ∑ −μ1 ,

and the lower posterior variance, Vi , as perceived by the informed investor is affected by both the




                                                                                                                   10
private information signal, Si, and the implicit public signal, r 2 S ∑ −x 1 S , reflecting the mean

private information level about the asset. We term the latter “price information content”, or PIC.8

                                                                    ~
        Using the market clearing condition,             1
                                                         N   ∑ iN=1 Di = ~
                                                                         x , we can show that in equilibrium, the

coefficient matrices φ ’s and η ’s in equations (3a) and (4c) represent a consistent solution (see

Appendix A.1 for the exact expressions of φ ’s and η ’s). This indicates that the equilibrium

outcome is indeed a rational-expectation-equilibrium.9

        From (4a) and (4b), investor i ’s expected excess demand (over per-capita supply) for

risky asset k is

                             Di , k ≡ E[ Di , k ] = r (Si , k − S A, k ) E[ μ~k − Pk ] + xk
                                         ~                                        ~
(5a)                                                                                           for all i, k

where

(5b)                           [    ~
                             E μ~ − P = ] (Σ 1
                                             r
                                                  −1
                                                  μ    + S + r 2 SΣ −x1 S ) x
                                                                           −1




and S A, k denotes the k th diagonal entry of average precision of private information concerning

asset k, and S A ≡ S =   1
                         N   ∑iN=1 S i . Investor i’s expected demand for asset k in equation (5a) has a

few immediate implications. First, the expected demand for each risky asset consists of two

                                                                                         (     )
                                                                                           ~ − P ] and
components: one that is driven by private information, Di , k − xk = r S i , k − S A, k E[ μ k  k
                                                                                                          ~

                                                                                     ~
                                                           ~ − P ] and x . Note that if S =
another that includes elements common to all investors, E[ μ k  k       k                i,k


SA,k , the expected individual demand would just equal the asset’s expected supply, and thus be

identical across all investors in all markets, as predicted by CAPM. Second, the component of

demand driven by private information is proportional to S i , k − S A, k or the information advantage

of investor i relative to the world’s average investor. Third, the deviation between the average

supply of asset k per investor and the expected demand for k by investor i, Di , k − xk , is

                                                    ~ − P ].           ~
proportional to the expected excess return on k, E[ μ k  k




                                                                                                              11
B. Optimal Demand for Private Information and Asset Management

         Having solved for optimal demand conditional on available information precision, we can

now shift attention to the first stage of the maximization problem (3) - the determination of the

optimal asset management. In the following analysis we focus on the demand for the optimal

information precision for asset k, Si,k , rather than its optimal “management”, i.e., the allocation of

time to search for and apply information signals, qi,k , essentially for expositional convenience.

The derived-demand for asset management time can then be inferred from the solution for Si,k ,

using the production function (1). The closed-form solution for optimal information precision for

asset k, Si,k , is given by

                                           ⎧⎪        r          ∂Ci        ⎫⎪
(6a)                          Si , k = max ⎨0, Si , k Vi , kk −         = 0⎬ for k = 1, 2,..., m
                                            ⎪⎩       2          ∂Si , k     ⎪⎭

where S i , k and Vi , kk are k th diagonal entries in the S i and Vi matrices (see Appendix A.2).10

         Equation (6a) is a generalization of the optimal demand for private information in

Verrecchia (1982) and EHY (2008), where k = 1. An interior optimum requires the marginal

revenue of asset management with respect to risky asset k , MRi , k , to be equated to its marginal

cost , MCi , k . Substituting (1a) ~ (1c) into (6a) yields

                            r             ∂qi ,k
                   MRi , k = Vi , kk = wi
                            2             ∂S i ,k
(6b)
                               1
                                                 (                  )
                                          1−θ1
                                                                    −1 / θ1
                          =        wi S i ,θk1 AH iθ, 20 H iθ, 3k             = MCi , k for k = 1, 2,..., m
                              θ1

         Equation (6b) indicates that MRi , k is proportional to investor i ’s posterior variance of

the risky asset k ’s return, Vi , kk . In other words, the marginal gain of managing a specific asset is

highest when the investor is most uncertain about the return. Also, MRi , k is decreasing in S i , k , as

more precise information reduces the posterior variance of the assets’ returns Vi , kk , while MCi ,k



                                                                                                              12
is non-decreasing in S i , k , since 0 < θ1 ≤ 1 . Thus, the second order optimality condition for S i , k is

satisfied. Equation (6b) also indicates that since the specific human capital level possessed by an

investor concerning the home asset (d) always exceeds that concerning a foreign asset (f), or

H i , d > H i , f , the marginal cost curve of home information production is always lower than that

of the foreign information production.

            In the following sections, we derive the model’s behavioral implications at the micro and

macro levels. To simplify matters, we focus on a world with just two countries and two related

assets: a home (d) and a foreign asset (f), which can be perceived of as a value weighted fund

consisting of all m − 1 foreign risky assets.



                                            3. Behavioral Propositions at the Micro Level

            We begin by developing the behavioral implications of the model at the micro level. By

assuming a large competitive economy, individual investors’ choices do not affect aggregate level
                                                           ~
variables such as the equilibrium price P and the average information precision, S . We focus on

the impact of exogenous shifts in the model’s human capital and related endowments.

a. General human capital, private information and the demand for risky asset. An increase in

general human capital, proxied by education Hi,0, imposes opposing effects on the optimal

demand for private information and the corresponding portfolio choices. While it raises the

efficiency of private information acquisition for both risky assets, thus shifting the marginal cost

curves downward (see equation (6b)), it also raises the opportunity cost of asset management, wi ,

thus raising the marginal cost curves in the opposite direction. Formally, the net effect of an

unconditional increase in Hi,0 will increase optimal private information and the demand for all

risky       assets         if        the      elasticity   of   qi   with   respect   to   Hi,0   in   equation   (1b)

             H i , 0 ∂q i ,k
εq H ≡
  i   i,0    q i ,k ∂H i , 0
                                          = θ 2 / θ1 exceeds the elasticity of the wage with respect to general human
                               dS i = 0




                                                                                                                   13
                                                      ∂wi H i , 0
capital in equation (1c), ε wi , H i , 0 ≡           ∂H i , 0 wi
                                                                    . From equation (1a), this would be the case when the

production of private information precision is enhanced much more by general human capital

H i ,0 than by asset management time, qi ,k , or θ 1 << θ 2 . A conditional increase in general

human capital at a given wage level, by comparison, will raise unambiguously the optimal private

information and demand for all assets.

         Proposition 1: An unconditional increase in general human capital, Hi,0                                                   ,   raises the

investor’s optimal private information precision and absolute demand for risky assets provided

that (ε qi H i , 0 − ε wi , H i , 0 ) > 0 . A conditional increase in Hi,0 , given the opportunity cost of time, wi ,

unambiguously raises the corresponding information precision and assets’ demand. Formally,

                     ∂S i , k                                   ∂Di , k
(7a)                                       > 0 and                                   >0 ,                and
                     ∂H i , 0                                   ∂H i , 0
                                dwi = 0                                    dwi = 0



                     ∂S i , k                  ∂S i , k             ∂Di , k                   ∂Di , k
(7b)                                       >              and                             >                        for k = d, f.
                    ∂H i , 0                   ∂H i , 0             ∂H i , 0                  ∂H i , 0
                                dwi = 0                                         dwi = 0


Equations (7a) and (7b) imply that the conditional elasticities of demand for both domestic and

risky asset with respect to investors’ schooling, given their market wage rates, should be larger in

absolute magnitudes than the respective unconditional elasticities. This is because an

unconditional increase in Hi,0 also increases the opportunity costs of asset management, which at

least partially offsets the education effect.

b. General human capital effects on portfolio concentration. Although more education increases

the demand for all risky assets, it is not clear whether it also increases individual demand for

domestic relative to foreign stocks, Di , d / Di , f . 11 A general insight into this question can be

derived by partially differentiating equation (5a) with respect to Hi,0 as follows:

               ∂ (Di , d / Di , f   )      ⎡ ∂S i , d               ∂S i , f          ~ Di , d ⎤ 1
(8)                                       =⎢                [  ~
                                                       E μ~d − Pd −
                                                                    ∂H i , 0
                                                                            ]E μ~ f − Pf         [
                                                                                                 ⎥
                                                                                         Di , f ⎥⎦ (Di , f
                                                                                                               ]              )
                    ∂H i , 0               ⎣⎢ ∂H i , 0


                                                                                                                                              14
where subscripts d and f, denote investor i’s domestic and foreign assets.

         By equation (8), three major factors determine the way the optimal portfolio

concentration in domestic assets varies with general human capital. The first is the impact of

education on domestic investors’ relative advantage in producing forecasts about their home asset,

i.e., the magnitude of ( ∂S i , d / ∂H i , 0 ) relative to ( ∂S i , f / ∂H i , 0 ), which is ambiguous at the

individual level.12 The second is the magnitude of expected excess returns on the home, relative
                                 ~                     ~
                        ~ − P ] vs. E[ μ~ − P ] ), which is affected by the determinants of
the foreign asset, ( E[ μ d  d           f   f


        ~
E[ μ~ − P ] = 1r (Σ −μ1 + S + r 2 S 2 Σ −x 1 ) −1 x . The third is the investor’s initial expected demand for

domestic, relative to foreign assets, Di ,d / Di , f , which typically exceeds 1.

         Proposition 2: The Impact of higher individual general human capital (Hi,0) on relative

information precision and the relative demand for home vs. foreign assets (“individual home

bias”) is generally ambiguous. Even if individuals’ relative home advantage in producing private

information were always rising with Hi,0, and thus induced a higher concentration in home assets,

market-level factors could offset (reinforce) this outcome. If the expected excess return on the

                                                                                   ~ − P ] <<        ~
domestic asset were sufficiently lower (higher) than that on the foreign asset, E[ μ d  d


                ~
        ~ − P ] , “home bias” could decrease (increase) with H
(>>) E[ μ f  f                                                i,0.



         As indicated by equation (5b), the expected excess return on any specific risky asset k,
         ~
E[ μ~k − Pk ] , is higher the higher is the asset’s prior “riskiness”, as measured by the variances of

the asset’s return and supply, Σ μ( )   kk
                                                 ( )
                                             and Σ x   kk
                                                            respectively, but the lower is the asset’s price


                                                ( )
information content PICk = Δ kk ≡ r 2 S A2 ,k Σ −x 1   kk
                                                            , where Δ kk denotes kth diagonal entry of the

matrix Δ ≡ r 2 SΣ −x 1S . This is because a higher PIC for a home asset (PICd), reflecting a higher

level of average information precision about the home asset, SA,d , lowers the perceived risk of the

home asset. This, in turn, increases its price and lowers its excess return and thus the individuals’


                                                                                                         15
demand for the home asset. Furthermore, a higher PICd also lowers the schedule of marginal

benefits from “managing” the home asset, MRi,k = (r/2) Vi,dd in equation (6b), which exerts a

negative feedback on the investor’s demand for the home asset. Equation (8) indicates that for a

country like the US, where stock market volatility and supply shocks are relatively low and PICd

is relatively high owing to high schooling attainments, “individual home bias” might be a

monotonically decreasing function of individual schooling attainments. In other countries,

however, “individual home bias” may be monotonically increasing in schooling attainments. 13

c. The impact of shifts in the opportunity costs and technology of asset management.

         Proposition 3: (wage and technology effects) For the same reasons driving propositions

1 and 2, a conditional increase in individual opportunity costs of asset management, wi , will

generate opposite effects on the absolute demand for domestic and foreign assets and their

relative portfolio concentration, or “individual home bias”, relative to the impact of a higher

endowment of general human capital as summarized by propositions 1 and 2. A better technology

of information collection (A in equation 1a), in contrast, will have the same qualitative effects as

those of a higher level of general human capital, as summarized by propositions 1 and 2.

        Proposition 4: (Specific human capital effects). An upward shift in country-specific

human capital, Hi,k , increases optimal asset management and expected demand for asset k, as

well as asset k’s relative portfolio concentration (see Appendix A.4). Clearly, a higher specific

human capital H i , k improves the efficiency of asset management concerning the home asset, and

thereby also optimal S i ,k , Di ,k and Di ,k / Di ,l . Recent studies offer supportive evidence for this

proposition. See, e.g., Huberman (2001) and Massa and Simonov (2006).



                          4. Behavioral Propositions at the Macro Level

        Unlike our analysis at the micro level, where both asset prices (Pk) and the degree to

which they convey information (PICk) were taken to be given to investors, at the macro or


                                                                                                      16
country level, both of these variables must be treated as endogenous variables. To simplify the

analysis, we assume that each country has a continuum of identical representative investors

whose characteristics may differ across countries. We also derive our main insights for a two-

country case: domestic (d) and foreign (f). As in the micro section, we invoke the assumption

that the representative investor’s specific human capital corresponding to home assets, is strictly

larger than that which corresponds to foreign assets, or H d , d > H d , f and H f ,d < H f , f .

        Since we retain the competitive nature of markets, our representative investors take the

market equilibrium outcomes like price and price information content (PIC) as given. We do

account, however, for the fact that changes in the model’s underlying parameters will change the

market equilibrium outcomes as well. Specifically, we focus on the impact of the main

determinants of the demand for risky assets on the absolute and relative demands for domestic

and foreign assets on the one hand, and the assets’ market prices and PIC levels, on the other.

Although the propositions below are expressed in terms of the impact of conditional increments

in the average endowment of general human capital in reference countries, the qualitative impacts

would work in the same direction for increments in technological variables which lower the costs

of asset management, but in opposite directions as a result of conditional increments in investors’

average opportunity costs of time, w(H0,k, λk), in conformity with proposition 3.

a. Variations in average precision, excess returns and price information content

Proposition 5: (General human capital, information advantage, and PIC). A conditional

increase in country d’s representative investor’s general human capital, H d , 0 , with no change in

that of country f, H f , 0 , subject to the conditions spelled out in proposition 1, increases the

information advantage of country d’s investors concerning their home asset, relative to the

average world investor S d , k − S A, k , as well as the price information content of the domestic asset

(PICd), and generally the foreign, asset (PICf) as well.14




                                                                                                     17
         A formal proof is offered in Appendix A.6. We here trace its logic. Initially, by

Proposition 1, a conditional upward shift in H d , 0 increases the private information precision of all

investors in country d, and hence their average information precision concerning both home and

foreign assets, S d , k , k = d, f. The average (world) private information precision and price

information content of asset d, and generally also of asset f , S A, k , also rise with H d , 0 (see fn.

14). At the same time, the average information advantage of domestic investors over the average

world investor, S d , k − S A, k for k = d, f, also expands because the feedback effect of a higher PICf

in the foreign country where general schooling remains constant, causes asset management

activity and the information precision of asset f to fall. The two upper panels in Figure 1 present

numerical simulations showing that Sd,k – SA,k and PICk, k =d , f, are indeed increasing functions

of H d , 0 when H f , 0 (and all other parameters) remain constant.

Proposition 6: (General human capital, expected asset prices and expected excess returns).

Expected prices on the home (foreign) asset d (f) are non-decreasing, and thus the excess returns

on asset d (f) are non-increasing in the general human capital of the representative investor in

country d (f), if the posterior covariance of returns on assets d and f is non-negative ( Vdf ≥ 0 ).

Proof: Partially differentiating equation (5b) with respect to S A,l yields


         ∂E[ μ~k − Pk ] / ∂S A,l = −Vkl E[ μ~k − Pk ](2r 2 S A,l (Σ −x 1 )ll + 1) < 0 for k, l = d, f.
                   ~                             ~
(9)

By proposition 5, if H d , 0 rises both S A, d (PICd) and S A, f (PICf) rise. Since Vdf ≥ 0, equation

(9) holds.15 Higher endowments of general human capital raise the information content of asset

prices, which lowers their perceived risk and excess returns.

b. Variations in expected demand for risky assets at the market level

Proposition 7: (Direct and cross effects of Hd,0 on expected demands for assets d and f). The

expected demands for both home (d) and foreign (f) securities by country d’s representative



                                                                                                           18
investor are inverted-U-shaped functions of conditional increments in the investor’s general

human capital, H d , 0 . Because of market-clearing conditions in the asset markets, in contrast, the

expected demands for home (f) and foreign (d) securities by country f’s representative investor

would be inverse mirror images, or U-shaped functions of the same increments in Hd,0 .

        By equation (5a), expected excess demand (over the world’s per-capita supply) for asset k

                                                                              (            )~ − P ].
= d, f by country d’s representative investor depends on the product of S d , k − S A, k E[ μ k  k
                                                                                                       ~


The impact of a conditional rise in H d , 0 (schooling) on expected excess demand thus depends on

the way it affects these two components. By proposition 5, more schooling always raises the

domestic investor’s information precision concerning asset k, S d ,k , which militates in favor of a

higher expected demand for asset k. At the same time, by proposition 6, since the asset price Pk

and its information component (PICk) also rise, the corresponding expected excess return,
         ~
E[ μ~k − Pk ] , declines. This generates an offsetting effect on the expected demand for risky assets,

both domestic and foreign. The net effect depends on the domestic investor’s information

advantage relative to the average world investor (i.e. the sign of S d , k − S A, k for k =d, f ). By

equation (5a), the well informed investor ( S d , k − S A, k > 0 ) reduces his demand for asset k as

PICk increases. This is because for that investor, the perceived risk of asset d, e.g., is already

lower than the average investor’s, so the dominant influence of a higher PICd is that it lowers

excess returns on asset d. For the less informed investor ( S d , k − S A, k < 0 ), by contrast, the

dominant effect of a higher PICd is that it lowers asset d’s riskiness, which reinforces the effect of

more schooling on the investor’s private information precision. The net effect on this investor

would be an increase in expected demand for asset d.

        Figure 1 demonstrates the general pattern of results. When H d , 0 is very low compared to

H f ,0 the information advantage S d ,k − S A,k is likely to be negative (upper left panel), therefore



                                                                                                           19
Dd ,k < x k for both domestic and foreign stocks (lower right panel). As H d ,0 increases, both the

information advantage of the average domestic investor and PICk increase. They reinforce each

other as long as S d , k − S A, k < 0, which accelerates the increase in demand for domestic and

foreign assets. As H d , 0 increases sufficiently and the relative information advantage of country

d’s investor (“agent d”), ( S d , k − S A, k ), rises above zero, the impact of the resulting higher PICk

on the expected excess returns erodes the effect of the higher relative information advantage.

Therefore, when PICk reaches a sufficiently high level its effect starts dominating the impact of

the relative information advantage. In the limit, where PICk approaches an infinite value so that

Pk tends to become fully information revealing, asset k’s riskiness approaches zero and it’s excess

return should approach that of the risk-free rate (lower left panel). Investors’ expected demand for

each asset (k=d, f) should then approach the asset’s average supply, as the CAPM model would

predict. This analysis demonstrates why the absolute demands for both the domestic and the

foreign asset in the reference country d are expected to be inverted-U-shaped functions of the

general human capital of the representative investor in that country, H d , 0 .

        Since in equilibrium, the world’s (i.e., country d’s plus f’s) demands for assets d and f

must equal the world’s supplies of these assets, the demands for foreign (f) and domestic (d)

assets by the representative foreign investor as a function of increments in the average

endowment of general human capital in country d (i.e., the cross effects of Hd,0) must be opposite

mirror images of the corresponding demands by the representative investor of country d (not

shown in Figure 1). The same holds for the relative information advantage of the foreign

representative investor as a function of the average general human capital in country d, Hd,0 .

c. General human capital and optimal portfolio concentrations at the country level

Proposition 8: (Direct effects and cross effects of Hd,0 on “home bias” in markets d and f). The

optimal portfolio concentration in the home, relative to the foreign, asset of country d’s




                                                                                                        20
representative investor, Dd ,d / Dd , f , is an inverted-U-shaped function of the direct effects of

conditional increments in the investor’s human capital endowment, H d , 0 . The same holds for the

cross-effects of H d , 0 on the optimal portfolio concentration in the home asset of country f’s

representative investor, D f , f / D f ,d . However, the inflection point of the inverted-U trajectory

of Dd ,d / Dd , f occurs at a lower level of H d , 0 than that for D f , f / D f ,d (see Figure. 2).

         When the average level of general human capital in country d, H d , 0 , is very low relative

to H f , 0 , the average domestic investor’s relative information advantage S d , k − S A, k for k=d, f is

negative. (The opposite is the case in country f where S f , k − S A, k > 0.) By the analysis in the

preceding section, an improvement in information advantage is reinforced by the impact of an

increase in PIC on expected excess return on asset k = d, f. Given that the representative

investor’s specific human capital endowments are always higher for home relative to foreign

assets ( H d , d > H d , f ), an increase in the average level of general human capital in country d,

H d ,0 , induces the average precision of both private information concerning the home asset

( S d ,d ) and the corresponding PIC ( Δ dd ) to change faster than those of the foreign counterparts

( S d , f and Δ ff ). Consequently, the portfolio concentration in country d’s home asset,

Dd ,d / Dd , f , first increases sharply as H d , 0 rises from zero (see the solid line in the upper panel

of Figure 2). As country d’s representative investor’s education continues to rise, however, her

private information concerning the home asset ultimately approaches that of the average world

investor ( S d , d − S A, d > 0 ) while still being less informed concerning the foreign asset

( S d , f − S A, f < 0 ). When S d , d − S A, d becomes positive, her demand for the home asset starts

slowing down while her demand for the foreign risky asset is still enhanced by the increase in

PICf . The ratio of her expected demand for home vs. foreign stocks thus starts falling before her


                                                                                                         21
expected absolute demand for the home asset reaches an inflection point. As PICd continues to

rise when H d , 0 increases, the home bias of the domestic market keeps falling and ultimately

approaches the level predicted by CAPM. As the solid line in the upper left panel of Fig. 2

demonstrates, Dd ,d / Dd , f is an inverted-U-shaped function of H d , 0 .

    Note that while Proposition 8 defines as a measure of “home bias” the ratio of the expected

absolute demands for the home relative to the foreign asset, Dd , d / Dd , f the conventional

empirical measure of “home bias” has been

                                               1 − ACTk    ACTk − CAPM k
(10)                      HomeBiask = 1 −                =
                                              1 − CAPM k    1 − CAPM k

where ACTk ≡ Pk Dk , k /( P′Dk ) denotes the percent of domestic stocks in country k’s total

portfolio of risky assets (P’Dk) while CAPM k ≡ Pk x k /( P ′x) is country k’s optimal portfolio

share of asset k by CAPM, i.e., asset k’s share of the world’s market capitalization. Unlike the

ratio of absolute demands, equation (10) captures the deviation of the actual portfolio share of the

home asset in country k from the CAPM’s predicted share, normalized by country k’s relative

market capitalization. Under given average asset supplies xk , k= d,f , however, these two

measures are monotonically related (see the broken v. solid lines in the upper panel of Figure 2).

        The Cross effects of average education in country d on country f’s home bias, measured

as ( D f , f / D f , d ) or HomeBiasf in equation (10), are also inverted U-shaped functions of country

d’s general human capital, H d , 0 . This is because the foreign investor’s absolute demand for each

asset is a mirror image of the domestic investor’s demand for the same asset due to the market

clearing condition. Also, the inflection point of the home bias trajectory in country f occurs at a

higher level of H d , 0 than that in country d, when both are depicted as functions of the same

increments in H d , 0 , as illustrated by the upper and lower panels of Figure 2.16




                                                                                                     22
                                    5. Micro-Level Evidence

        The data set we use to test the micro-level implications of our model consists of six

surveys of individual asset holdings for 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, and 2007 that are reported

in the Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) based on separate national

probability samples. This data source was also used in EHY (2008), but in this study we include

only the surveys beginning in 1992, which is the first year when SCF started reporting foreign

asset holdings. All surveys contain information about household initial portfolio composition by

asset categories, household wage income, and personal characteristics of household heads.

        We adopt the regression specification in EHY (2008) as our baseline model to test the

implications of propositions 1-3 concerning individual demand for domestic and foreign assets:

(11) lnRASSTk = a0 + a1lnEDU + a2lnTASST+ |a3lnWAGE*| + a4AGE + a5 PROF + a6RAV

+|a7 SELF|,     k = d, f .

        Consistent with our model, the dependent variable in this DEMAND equation is the log

value of risky assets holdings, lnRASST, defined as all publicly tradable stocks and corporate

bonds, which in turn are separated into domestic and foreign securities. Implicitly, we treat the

remainder of the portfolio as a “safe” asset. The explanatory variables account for determinants of

productivity at, and opportunity cost of, asset management by household heads. These include,

the household head’s number of years of schooling EDU (average schooling of husbands and

wives yields similar results) and the predicted wage rate of the household’s head, lnWAGE*,

discussed below. As in the EHY (2008), we also include as a regressor, however, the investor’s

portfolio size or nonhuman wealth in logarithmic form, lnTASST. Although our theoretical model

rules out pure wealth effects, portfolio size may account for economies of scale in asset

management, which lower fixed analysts or trading costs per share in domestic and international

asset categories, as well as for investors’ experience in managing assets as an efficiency variable

in information production (A in equation 1a). In this context, we further include an indicator of




                                                                                                23
“managerial and professional-specialty occupations” lumping together managers of all types;

specialty occupations varying from speech therapists to nuclear engineers, some of which might

be conducive to asset management (PROF); and self-employment vs. salaried status which needs

to be examined separately for reasons we explain later in this section. Investors also provide self-

assessments of their relative risk aversion intensity (RAV), using 4 categories (1-4) in ascending

order of risk aversion. While this may not be a reliable measure of risk tolerance, we introduce it

as a robustness check on the validity of our hypotheses, which do not rely on differences in

attitudes toward risk to explain risky assets demand and management. And although our model

abstracts from life-cycle dynamics, we add the investor’s age (AGE) to account for the “vintage”

effect of schooling or see if one’s life-cycle stage has an independent effect on demand.

        The specification of the lnWAGE* regressor warrants a short discussion. Following EHY,

we use a projected wage rate based on Mincer’s human capital-earnings function, rather than the

actually reported wage income for two reasons. Actual wage income is a function of labor hours,

or (1-q) in equation 1b, which are an endogenous variable in our model. Also, for self-employed

investors, reported wage income is subject to significant distortions since the portion of business

income allocated to wages is a choice variable motivated by tax considerations. To overcome

both problems we estimate an “expected wage rate” from a reduced form, generalized Mincer

regression applied to just salaried workers, and then use the estimated coefficients from that

regression to project an imputed wage rate for the self-employed. In the “extended Mincer

model”, we include EDU, EXP, EXP2, GENDER, RACE, MARRIED, and HEALTH as

regressors. The experience variable, EXP, may serve as an instrumental variable in this study

since it is designed to measure experience in the labor market, not in asset management.

        We run separate regressions for the salaried and the self-employed individuals in both the

baseline and alternative models partly to account for the use of an imputed wage variable for the

latter group and partly because business assets account for a relatively large proportion of the




                                                                                                 24
total portfolio of self-employed, and the latter assets are not included in our definition of

securities that are tradable in a centralized exchange.

        Since our theoretical analysis assumes that all investors have positive expected demands

for the risky asset, in our “baseline model” we have thus restricted the regressions to include

individuals with positive net wealth and risky-asset holdings.           This restriction has the

disadvantage, however, of excluding all the observations including zero holdings of both

domestic and foreign securities. This limitation severely limits the sample size of especially

salaried workers. Since only about 1/3 of the respondents report holding positive risky assets and

only 20.8% of those hold foreign securities (of those 38% are salaried workers), we also run

alternative regression specifications as robustness checks (see below). In terms of our theoretical

model, zero holdings of tradable securities can be justified as corner solutions owing to fixed

information and asset management costs. To allow for the inclusion of zero risky asset holdings,

we also specify the dependent variable as log(1+RASST) in equation (11) [Model 2]. As an

additional robustness test, we employ the selectivity bias method to account for the separate

decision to hold zero securities, although our theoretical model does apply to this decision.

        Following proposition 1, equation (11) allows for two basic specifications: one that

excludes WAGE in the regression, to allow for estimation of the theoretical “unconditional”

effect of EDU on DEMAND, and one that includes WAGE to allow for conditional effects of

both education and wage effects. It also allows distinguishing wage and salary workers from all

investors by including the dummy variable SELF as a separate regressor. While the exact

functional form of equation (11) cannot be pinned down theoretically, following EHY, we enter

EDU in log form. Variables defined in continuous dollar values are also introduced in log form,

while those defined as discrete variables are entered in natural form. Box-Cox analyses of optimal

transformation strongly support this regression format.




                                                                                                25
A. Demand Regressions

        We first estimate our baseline model in equation (11) for 3 categories of risky assets:

Total Risky Assets (TRA), Foreign Risky Assets (FRA), and Domestic Risky Assets (DRA).

Since sample sizes are quite small annually, especially for salaried workers, we focus on a pooled

regression model for all 6 annual data sets. In this specification, we restrict only the slope

coefficients of lnEDU, lnWAGE* and lnTASST to be identical, allowing for both constant terms

and the slope coefficients of all other regressors to vary across samples. The results are

summarized in Table 1, where we report only the estimated coefficients of the model’s key

variables. The full results are reported in Appendix B.

        The basic message we get from Table 1 is a solid confirmation of propositions 1-3. In

almost all cases, education significantly raises the demand for all asset categories. The only

exceptions appear in the regression concerning the demand for foreign risky assets by salaried

workers owing to its small sample size and the relatively small variability in the EDU variable in

this subsample. The WAGE* variable unambiguously lowers the demand for risky assets, which

is a key discriminating implication of our theoretical framework. Moreover, the unconditional

effect of education on the demand for the risky assets is lower in absolute value than its

conditional effect where WAGE* is held constant, consistent with equation (7b) in proposition 1.

        We believe that the relatively weak impact of education on the demand for foreign risky

assets stems mainly from the small sample size dictated by the logarithmic transformation we use

for the dependent variable, which eliminates all observations with zero foreign assets. Indeed,

when we estimate equation (11) using Model 2 in which the alternative, monotonically related

dependent variable is log (1+ RASST), the sample size increases significantly, especially in the

foreign assets regression, where it expands about 5 folds. The results are listed in Table 1A. In

this table, the impact of our 3 basic variables becomes significant at the 1% significance level,

confirming all of our testable hypotheses in all regressions.




                                                                                               26
        As a further robustness test, we apply a sample selection model as an alternative

approach for incorporating observations with zero risky asset holdings. Specifically, we run the

probit model in the selection stage using the same set of regressors as in equation (11) to explain

investors’ decision to hold positive amounts of domestic and foreign assets and then estimate the

baseline regression model conditional of positive holdings of these risky assets. These results are

also listed in Table 1B. Due to the small sample size for salaried workers, we only apply the

sample selection model to all investors. This application produces our expected education and

wage effects for both domestic and foreign risky assets.

B. Portfolio Concentration regressions (individual home bias)

        To estimate the implications of proposition 2 concerning optimal portfolio concentrations

in home securities, we use two alternative definitions of individual home bias (HB). Adopting

our regression specification for the demand for risky assets in equation (11), we run the following

regression specification:

(12) HB = a0 + a1lnEDU + a2lnTASST+ |a3lnWAGE*| + a4AGE + a5 PROF + a6RAV

+|a7 SELF|.

As in section A, we run the regression by pooling all 6 data sets together, but allowing intercepts

and slope coefficients of AGE, PROF, RAV, and SELF to vary across years.

        The basic definition we use to run the portfolio concentration regression is HB0 =

log(1+DRA/TRA) - the logarithm of 1 plus the ratio of domestic risky assets (DRA) to all risky

assets (TRA). Note that HB0 is a monotonic transformation of HB’ = DRA/TRA used to derive

proposition 2 and should then account for this measure as well. We adopt HB0 as our first

measure in order to maximize the sample size since this transformation allows us to incorporate

observations with zero DRA but also experiment with HB’ = DRA/TRA, as a robustness check.

        The results for this inclusive specification are summarized in Table 2, and those for the

robustness checks are summarized in Table 2A. As proposition 2 indicates, the impact of the

education variables at the individual investor level are generally ambiguous. While the general


                                                                                                27
prediction is that the HB measure would be an inverted-U-shaped function of our schooling

variable, for a country like the US, where the schooling level of the investors in our sample is

relatively high, we expect to observe mainly the downward sloping segment of the HB trajectory

(see Figure 1 in section 4). Indeed, our results for both definitions of the home bias variable are

consistent with this conjecture: the schooling coefficient is negative and significant at the 1%

level. More important, our discriminating implication concerning the impact of the lnWAGE*

variable is also confirmed, since its coefficient has the opposite sign of that of the schooling

variable as proposition 3 suggests. These results are also significant at the 1% level. Furthermore,

the conditional education effect, holding WAGE* constant, is larger in magnitude than the

corresponding unconditional one, as predicted by proposition 1.

        The portfolio size variable appears to have generally insignificant effects in Table 2,

largely perhaps because of the role this variable is playing in our regressions. Since our

theoretical model rules out pure wealth effects, we have justified the inclusion of TASST in

equations (11) and (12) as an technological variable accounting for economies of scale in

information collection, or for trading experience and lower trading costs, since those with larger

portfolios either inherit them or accumulate them through past investments. In Tables 1 and 1A

we see that this variable has very similar effects in the regressions concerning home and foreign

assets, which militates in favor of the second explanation. Thus, to the extent trading costs are

similar for home and foreign assets, the coefficient of this variable should be insignificant in the

home bias regressions.



                                    6. Macro-Level Evidence

        In this section we test the basic implications of our model at the macro level using IMF

and World Federation of Exchange data on the aggregate capitalized values of home and foreign

stock holdings. Since the financial data are available only in aggregate format, we can not

construct a reasonable proxy for equity holdings per investor, because we do not have data on the


                                                                                                 28
number of participating investors in each market. However, this problem does not exist for

measures of relative holdings of domestic and foreign equities, since we can normalize the

aggregate data by computing their ratios. We thus focus on “home bias” at the macro level.

        In implementing proposition 8 we attempt to test the following main hypotheses:

(1) (Direct effects). A country’s home bias is an inverted-U function of its own general human

capital. Our numerical analysis suggests that the upward sloping part of the trajectory is brief,

occurring around very low educational attainments. Since our data are from developed countries,

we may capture the downward-sloping portion of the trajectory in the upper panel of Figure 2.

(2) (Cross effects). A country’s home bias is an inverted-U function of general human capital in

the foreign country. Our numerical analysis indicates that this curve has a longer upward sloping

portion around the same range of years of schooling. Our estimated cross effects may thus capture

the upward-sloping portion of the trajectory (see the lower panel in figure 2).

(3) (Wage and portfolio size effects). We expect the country’s average wage measure, to the

extent it effectively accounts for opportunity costs of time in non-market activities, to have an

opposite sign to that of the education effect. We also expect the estimated impact of education on

home bias to be larger in absolute magnitude when the wage measure is used as a regressor

relative to the case when the wage measure is not controlled for. Consistently with our micro-

level regressions we are also using GDP per-capita as a rough proxy for portfolio size, to account

for potential economies of scale which reduces transaction and trading costs involved in asset

management.

        We use the following regression specifications to test our main hypotheses:

(13) log(HomeBias) = a0 + a1log(EDUd) + a2log(EDUf) + |a3log(WAGE*d)| + |a4log(WAGE*f)|

+ a5log(GDPPCd) + a6log(GDPPCf)

(13a) equation (13) + b×other control variables

        Equation (13) is our “baseline model”, as it aims to test the implications of our theoretical

model assuming that the financial markets in our sample are fully integrated. Equation (13a)


                                                                                                  29
allows for additional controls to correct for deviations from this assumption. We construct our

dependent variable HomeBias using equation (10) based on CAPM and ACT, which in turn are

constructed from cross equity holdings and market capitalizations. The cross-country equity

portfolio holding is collected from the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) of the

International Monetary Fund (IMF) while the market capitalization is obtained from the time

series database of the World Federation of Exchanges (WFE). Based on data availability, we

construct a sample of 23 countries covering 7 years from 2001 to 2007. The 23 countries are

Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy,

Japan, South Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Singapore, Spain, Sweden,

Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. These 23 countries account for about

80% of the capitalized value of the WFE database. Country k’s CAPM in year t is constructed as

CAPM k ,t = Mcap k ,t / ∑s =1 Mcap s ,t , where Mcap k ,t denotes the capitalized value of country
                             23




k’s stock market in year t. while its ACT in year t is defined as the fraction of its domestic stocks

in its total stock holdings in year t.

        We use “average schooling years of total population aged 25 and over as of 1999

(TYR99)” taken from Barro and Lee (2000) as a measure of general human capital, EDUd. Our

results are robust to the choice of alternative measures by Barro and Lee (2000), such as the

average schooling of male population 25 years and over. However, our schooling variable is not

available on an annual basis over our sample period. We believe that this constraint should not

affect our results significantly. First, we note that the distributions of average years of schooling

in 1999 and 1995 are almost identical - the correlation coefficient is 0.99. We thus expect the

cross-sectional distribution of average years of schooling to remain very similar over our sample

period. Second, we find that the explanatory power of our regressions comes mostly from the

cross-sectional variations as both our qualitative results and our measured R2 from annual

regressions we conducted as a robustness check are almost the same as in our pooled regressions.



                                                                                                  30
          In order to estimate cross effects of our main explanatory variables, EDU, WAGE*,

and GDPPC, we need to control for measures of these variables in “foreign” market

corresponding to each country as well as in the domestic market. We construct the “foreign

education” variable, EDUf, e.g., as a weighted average of schooling years for all countries except

the k-th country, using the corresponding market capitalizations as weights. We use the same

method to compute all other “foreign” regressors.

          Unlike our micro-level sample, we do not have data related to the opportunity cost of

time of actual equity holders in different countries. We are confined to use instead data on the

average hourly rate of the population. The Bureau of Labor Statistics offers a measure defined as

the ‘international (real) hourly wage rate of the manufacturing sector’. However, this measure

does not represent the wage rate applicable to the population of salaried investors in each country,

nor can it serve as a good indicator of the opportunity cost of time of self-employed investors,

whose ownership of equities also varies across different countries. Another concern is the

possibility of inconsistent treatment of fringe benefits in computing an international wage rate.

To correct for these problems we use instead a projected international wage derived from a

Mincerian regression model, (as in Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen 2002). The equation we

use, constrained by data availability for all countries in our sample, is the basic Mincer regression

                 log(wk ,t ) = a + b0 EDU k + b1 EXPk ,t + b2 ( EXPk ,t ) 2 + errork ,t

where EDUk is country k’s average education as of 1999 and EXPk,t is a proxy for the work

experience of the representative investor in country k at time t. As in Yamarik, 2008, we compute

EXPk,t by subtracting EDUk from the country’s average life expectancy at time t, which we take

from the World Bank database.

        We run our baseline regression model (13) including and excluding WAGE*, to compare

the unconditional and conditional effects of education. We apply the regression model to the

pooled cross-sectional samples for all 7 years after adding year dummies. As a robustness check,




                                                                                                  31
we also run the model using only the subsample of OECD countries. The estimated regression

coefficients are summarized in Table 3.

        The results of the baseline regression model in Table 3 support proposition 8 and our

three tested macro-level hypotheses. A country’s average education level always lowers its home

bias, as anticipated in the upper panel of figure 2 of section 4, and the magnitude of the impact,

conditional on wage rate, is always significant at the 1% level (the t-values are constructed from

White’s robust standard errors). Also, the elasticity of the education effect conditioned on the

wage rate is larger in absolute magnitude than the unconditional elasticity. This supports the

basic hypothesis of the model about the enhancing effect of education on private information

precision. The estimated cross effects of the conditional and unconditional impacts of average

education in the relevant foreign subsets on home bias are statistically insignificant. One reason

may be that they apply to the flat portion of the trajectory of the cross effects in the lower panel of

figure 2. The impact of an economy’s projected wage rate on home bias is always opposite to that

of the country’s education variables. In particular, the country’s own wage rate always lowers its

home bias, contrary to the impact of the country’s education level, reflecting what we generally

ascribe to the impact of the opportunity costs of asset management on the level of private

information precision in its own country, and the estimated coefficient is significant at the 5%

level. In contrast, the foreign wage effect is negative and significant, consistent with the cross

effects of our basic determinants of asset management. The country’s own per-capital GDP

lowers home bias in conformity with our third hypothesis, while its foreign counterpart turns out

to be statistically insignificant. These effects may indeed reflect the impact of “portfolio size” in

our micro-level regressions. The fact that the results hold for both the full sample and the OECD

subsample indicates the robustness of our findings.

        It is also noteworthy that the regression line showing the correlation between our

empirical home-bias measure and average schooling attainments, estimated from equation (13),




                                                                                                    32
bears a very strong resemblance to the corresponding theoretical trajectory, as simulated in Figure

2. In Figure 3, the two trajectories look quite congruent.

        In addition to the baseline regression model, we have also estimated the expanded

regression model (13a) by additional control variables which are frequently used in the

international finance literature to account for factors that enhance integration, although these are

only loosely connected to our model. They include: M/Gd and M/Gf – domestic and foreign

market capitalizations relative to their respective GDPs; LONG – the longitudinal difference

between domestic and foreign stock exchanges; EU, ENGLISH and SPANISH – dummy

variables distinguishing EU countries and countries where the dominant language is English or

Spanish. The results are reported in Appendix Table B3.

        The results of the baseline model concerning the conditional and unconditional education

effects are robust to the inclusion of additional controls in the expanded model. The same holds

for the effect of the GDPPC. The qualitative effects of the projected wage rates remain the same

but the impact of the country’s own wage becomes statistically insignificant. A shortcoming of

this variable may be both the quality of international data on average wage rates and the fact that,

unlike the wage data in our micro-level regressions, which reflect the wage rates associated with

the actual investors, the BLS average wage rate reflects that of manufacturing workers. Another

constraint is the relatively small size of our pooled sample. The impact of the additional controls

generally confirms previous findings, but not all are statistically significant.17



      7. Additional Inferences Concerning the Observed Diversity in Home Bias

A. Alternative hypotheses

        Are the findings in our paper also consistent with alternative hypotheses involving

overlooked diversification motives? This can be assessed on two alternative assumptions.

If human capital is a safe asset, as we assume in this model, optimal diversification in an



                                                                                                 33
extended portfolio, including both traded and non-traded assets, would create a tendency

to hold more risky financial assets (see EHY, 2008). This alternative hypothesis rests on a

positive human wealth effect. But our consistent finding is that higher wages lower

individuals’ absolute demand for all risky assets (section 5). Indeed, the wage rate effect

is consistently estimated to have an opposite sign of that of education.

         Alternatively, if human capital were a risky asset, its impact on domestic v.

foreign assets at the macro level would depend essentially on the estimated covariance of

the wage rate and the return on domestic assets, cov(μ d , wd ) . The literature reports

contradicting findings, some suggesting a positive correlation, which should exacerbate

the home bias puzzle (see, e.g., Baxter and Jermann, 1997), while others finding the

opposite correlation (e.g., Bottazzi, Pesenti and Van Wincoop, 1996). A later study

(Pesenti and Van Wincoop, 2002) finds that the hedge against human capital explains

only a small portion of home bias. Neither of these studies accounts, however, for the

pattern of the home-bias trajectory as a function of conditional increments in schooling,

or the opposite effects of schooling and the wage rate on home bias we predict and

confirm empirically.

B. Information costs

         Our model ascribes the observed concentration in domestic assets to the relative

information advantage the representative investor in country d has about home asset d

over the foreign asset f. This advantage can be stated in terms of the differential

information cost the representative investor would have to bear in order to achieve the

same level of private information precision concerning the two assets, i.e., Sd,d = Sd.f. By

equation (1c) defined for country d’s investor, the information cost incurred in managing

                                                                                        [
each asset is given by C (S d ,k ) = wi q (S d ,k ) + C k ,0 , where q (S d ,k ) = S d ,k / AH dθ 2,0 H dθ 3,k   ]   1 / θ1
                                                                                                                              is



                                                                                                                              34
the time input involved in managing asset k = d,f. If we set the fixed cost of management

to zero (Ck,0 = 0), the opportunity cost that agent d would incur from achieving the same

private information for the foreign relative to the home asset would be C (S d , f ) / C (S d ,d ) =

( H d ,d / H d , f )θ 3 / θ1 , i.e., agent d’s relative home-asset information advantage raised to the

power (θ3/ θ1). This represents the maximal value of the cost differential required to

explain home bias as an outcome of optimal asset management. If Ck,0 >0, the required

cost differential would be less than ( H d ,d / H d , f )θ 3 / θ1 .

         A partially-calibrated numerical exercise allows us to gain insight about the

numerical value of the actual cost differential, based on the empirically observed pattern

of home bias of the “representative investor”. Applying the set of parameters used in

Figures 1 an d 2, with r=.25, we search for ratio of specific human capital endowments

( H d ,d / H d , f ) which produces a simulated trajectory of home bias in country d as a

function of Hd,0 which closely resembles the pattern of the corresponding trajectory of

home bias we observe empirically, as depicted by the regression line estimated from

Table 3 for the full sample.

         The representative investor’s differential cost value ( H d ,d / H d , f )θ 3 / θ1 , however,

depends on the distribution of investors it represents. In a scenario in which all investors

are homogeneous (“scenario 1”), we estimate the specific human capital endowment ratio

( H d ,d / H d , f ) which produces a simulated trajectory closely resembling our empirically

estimated regression line to be 6 (see the dotted line in Fig. A.1). With θ3/ θ1 assumed to

be 2, the differential cost estimate becomes 62 = 36. This differential, however, grossly

overstates the relevant cost differential because investors are quite heterogeneous.

         The US-based micro-level data used in section 5 suggest that 79% of investors

with positive risky assets hold just domestic assets (group 1) while 21% hold foreign



                                                                                                     35
assets as well (group 2). The respective portfolio shares of groups 1 and 2 in the US

portfolio of risky assets are 60% and 40%, respectively. The large size of group 1 thus

reduces significantly the estimated specific human capital endowment ratio that is

required to explain the average home bias exhibited by group 2. If this distribution of

groups 1 and 2 is representative of all markets (“scenario 2”), our method of assessing the

value of ( H d ,d / H d , f ) that is required to explain the observed home bias trajectory

across international financial markets would be 2, which makes the cost differential

needed to explain the observed pattern of home bias across the observed international

sample equal to 22 = 4. (See Appendix C for a detailed computational account.) This

exercise suggests that the cost differential which accounts for the observed level and

pattern of home bias across international financial markets may be surprisingly low.



        Concluding remarks

        The basic innovation in this paper is the treatment of private information about risky

assets and the “price information content" of corresponding asset prices as endogenous variables

that are influenced by human capital endowments.           Our theoretical analysis and empirical

findings indicate that this may be a promising approach for understanding systematic variations in

portfolio choices across individuals and diversities in portfolio concentrations across markets.

        Our model produces a set of testable propositions concerning the impact of measures of

benefits and costs of asset management on absolute and relative demand for domestic and foreign

assets. The tests we conduct using 8 annual micro-level SCF national probability samples of

individual investors in the US, and 7 annual macro-level IMF and World Federation of Exchange

data on international financial markets are consistent with our theoretical analysis.




                                                                                                   36
Our propositions are subject to strong assumptions, especially our treatment of international

financial markets as fully integrated. We are clearly aware of the existence of capital constraints,

regulations, and constraints on trade which impede the openness of international financial

markets, and which our analysis has not attempted to capture. Yet this is also the strength of our

model and empirical analyses, which focus on the power of our basic theoretical constructs to

explain systematic diversities in “home bias” while employing limited controls.

        Despite the limitations of the data, our basic findings are shown to be generally robust to

the introduction of various controls such as professional and occupational affiliations and self-

reported attitudes toward risk at the micro level, and commonality of language and geographical

proximity at the market level, in explaining systematic variations in both “individual home bias”

and “macro-level home bias”. This indicates that our model may indirectly contribute to the

assessment of the roles of regulatory constrains and barriers to trade in financial and currency

markets, and increase our understanding of the performance of these markets. In particular, our

study suggests that educational attainments and opportunity costs of information acquisition need

to be accounted for in attempts to assess the role of regulatory constraints and policy variables.

        The analysis in this paper also offers a unifying approach to deal with other market-level

characteristics we have only touched upon in this paper. For example, our model has direct

implications concerning the degree to which international financial markets are “disconnected”

with fundamentals such as the basic implications of CAPM, as a consequence of variations in the

degree to which prices are actually “information revealing”. Indeed, we show that such

“disconnect”, as indicated by variations in home bias across international markets, can be

accounted for by fairly mild levels of information-cost advantage enjoyed by domestic investors

concerning home, relative to foreign assets, as our illustration in section 7.B indicates. The model

can be extended to explain phenomena like “flight to quality” during times of market distress,

which we can link with a decline in the price information content of risky assets. It has direct

implications concerning variability in the magnitude of risk premiums across markets. It can also


                                                                                                     37
help explain the pattern of volatility contagion across international markets, e.g., by identifying

which markets have been more susceptible to the recent financial crisis in the US. And although

in this paper we have focused on the model’s ability to explain variability in “home bias”, it can

be applied to address apparent diversities in asset holdings across industries and geographical

units within an economy. Last but not least, our work attempts to expand the scope of issues in

the “new information economy” where human capital theory can provide new insights.




                                                                                                38
                                         References

Admati, Anat R. 1985. "A Noisy Rational Expectations Equilibrium for Multi-Asset Securitites
Markets." Econometrica, 53(3), pp. 629 - 58.

Admati, Anat R. and Paul Pfleiderer. 1988. "A Theory of Intraday Patterns: Volume and Price
Variability." The Review of Financial Studies, 1(1), pp. 3-40.

Baxter, M and UJ Jermann. 1997. "The International Diversification Puzzle Is Worse Than You
Think." The American Economic Review, pp. 170-80.

Bottazzi, L; P Pesenti and E Van Wincoop. 1996. "Wages, Profits and the International Portfolio
Puzzle." European Economic Review, 40(2), pp. 219-54.

Chan, K; V Covrig and L Ng. 2005. "What Determines the Domestic Bias and Foreign Bias?
Evidence from Mutual Fund Equity Allocations Worldwide." Journal of Finance, pp. 1495-534.

Cohen, D and M Soto, 2007. “Growth and Human Capital: Good Data, Good Results.” Journal of
Economic Growth, 12(1), pp. 51-76.

Coval, JD and TJ Moskowitz. 2001. "The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading and Asset
Prices." Journal of Political Economy, 109(4), pp. 811-41.

____. 1999. "Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in Domestic Portfolios." Journal of
Finance, pp. 2045-73.

Ehrlich, Isaac; William A. Hamlen Jr. and Yong Yin. 2008. "Asset Management, Human Capital,
and the Market for Risky Assets." Journal of Human Capital, 2, pp. 217-61.

French, KR and JM Poterba. 1991. "Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets."
The American Economic Review, pp. 222-26.

Grinblatt, M and M Keloharju. 2001. "How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
Stockholdings and Trades." Journal of Finance, pp. 1053-73.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. "On the Impossibility of Informationally
Efficient Markets." The American Economic Review, 70(3), pp. 393 - 408.

Ivkovic, Z and S Weisbenner. 2007. "Information Diffusion Effects in Individual Investors'
Common Stock Purchases: Covet Thy Neighbors' Investment Choices." Review of Financial
Studies, 20(4), pp. 1327.

Jeske, K. 2001. "Equity Home Bias: Can Information Cost Explain the Puzzle?" Economic
Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 86(3), pp. 31-42.

La Porta, R; F Lopez-de-Silanes; A Shleifer and RW Vishny. 1998. "Law and Finance." Journal
Of Political Economy, 106, pp. 1113-55.

Lewis, KK. 1999. "Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption." Journal
of Economic Literature, pp. 571-608.



                                                                                            39
Massa, M and A Simonov. 2006. "Hedging, Familiarity and Portfolio Choice." Review of
Financial Studies, 19(2), pp. 633-85.

Pesenti, P and E Van Wincoop. 2002. "Can Nontradables Generate Substantial Home Bias?"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pp. 25-50.

Portes, R and H Rey. 2005. "The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows." Journal of
International Economics, 65(2), pp. 269-96.

Sercu, P and R Vanpee. 2007. "Home Bias in International Equity Portfolios: A Review,"

In. Tesar, LL and IM Werner. 1995. "Home Bias and High Turnover." Journal of International
Money and Finance, 14(4), pp. 467-92.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S and L Veldkamp. 2009. "Information Immobility and the Home Bias
Puzzle." The Journal of Finance, 64(3), pp. 1187-215.

Verrecchia, Robert E. 1982. "Information Acquisition in a Noisy Rational Expectations
Economy." Econometrica, 50, pp. 1415-30.

Yamarik, Steven J. 2008 "Estimating Returns to Schooling from State-Level Data: A Macro-
Mincerian Approach," The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics: Vol. 8 : Iss. 1 (Contributions),
Article 23.




                                                                                         40
                                                            Endnotes
1
  Direct inputs may include purchase of informational services from analysts or brokers, which we do not
model in this paper, but this does not affect any of our results since heterogeneous analysts offer
information signals of varying precision. Searching for good analysts and monitoring their performance is
part of what we call asset management. Thus, unlike studies where purchased financial services are final
inputs in the production of private information (see, e.g., Admati and Pfleiderer 1990 and Veldkamp 2006),
in our approach investors draw independent inferences from information obtained from sellers.

2
  For example, the Morgan Stanley Capital International index for the All Country World Index
(MSCI/ACWI)) render opportunities to hold a value weighted global index fund capturing about 85% of
the world market at 0.35% of net asset value per year.

3
    Our model’s basic solution and inferences do not rely on the independence of       μ~   and ~
                                                                                                x or the
                                                                                  ~ and ~
diagonality of Σx. The former can be replaced with the the milder assumption that μ      x are
imperfectly correlated (see Admati, 1985). We assume that Σx is a diagonal matrix to simplify the
exposition of the analytical proofs of some of our market level propositions.

4
 The compactness of the set is one of the necessary conditions for proving the existence of rational-
expectation equilibrium.

5
  La Porta et al. (1998) and Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) have emphasized the importance of these
factors in portfolio decisions.
6
  λi accounts for job-specific factors affecting individual wages, such as job training or work experience.
Ck,0 incorporates fixed costs of analysts or trading costs which are common to all investors, but can also be
influenced by one’s portfolio size owing to economies of scale in information production and asset trading.

7
    A simple extension of our model can allow for diversity in both risk tolerance and specific human capital.
8
 Put differently, PIC, which Verrecchia (1982) calls “price informativeness”, accounts for the difference
between the variance of the risky returns that is conditional on both private and implicit public signals,
                     (
Var (μ~ zi , P ) = Σ −μ1 + S i + r 2 SΣ −x1S   )
                                               −1
                                                                                            (
                                                    , rather than just a private signal Var μ  i) (
                                                                                            ~ z = Σ −1 + S
                                                                                                    μ      i   )   −1
                                                                                                                        .

9
 For proof see, for instance, Admati (1985). The solutions we derive also indicate why investors must
generally recognize that the observed prices are subject to supply noises, i.e., φ2 ≠ 0 in equation (3a). If
φ 2 = 0 , then μ = φ1 −1 (P − φ 0 )   by (3a). Since rational investors know    φ0 and φ1 , the observed prices
would become fully revealing of available private information, eliminating the incentive to engage in costly
asset management.

10
   Equation (6a) is a natural extension of EHY (2008) and Verrecchia (1982). Note that each investor’s
optimal precision Si is a function of Vi,kk, which in turn (see equation 4b) is a function of the average
precision S. Since the latter represents the aggregation of individual asset management, equilibrium
requires their mutual consistency. We can also prove the existence of information equilibrium in this
framework.

11
     Di ,d / Di , f is a suitable measure of the cross-sectional variation in the portfolio concentration at the
individual level within countries, as equilibrium prices and total market capitalization are constant across
individuals, and the measure is also monotonically related to Di ,d /( Di ,d + Di , f ) .



                                                                                                                    41
12
  Although by equation (1a), a higher Hi,0 lowers both the level and slope of the marginal cost schedule of
“managing” asset d relative to asset f, the impact on optimal information precision is ambiguous, since it
depends on the difference in the levels and slopes of the respective marginal revenue schedules in equation
                                                                             (            )
(6b), except at sufficiently high levels of Hi,0, where we can prove that ∂ S i , d − S i , f / ∂H i , 0 > 0 . See
Appendix A.3.
.
13
   Note that PICk ≡ Δ kk is a quadratic function of average information precision, SA,k. Even a small rise in
the average schooling level in country d, raising SA,d , can thus produce a much larger increase in PICd.

14
     By proposition 1, a conditional increase in Hd,0 always increases PICd and the domestic investor’s
information advantage about both domestic and foreign securities, but it may not always increase PICf .
Specifically if H d , f is nil or close to nil and Hd,0 is relatively low, an increase in Hd,0 and PICd would
induce a lower SA, f , since we can show that ∂S i , f / ∂Δ dd ≤ 0 for all i (see appendix A.5). A continued
decline in PICf when Hd,0 rises, however, increases the marginal benefit of managing the foreign asset for
all investors, Vi , ff , so S A, f and PICf must eventually increase with Hd,0 . Our extensive simulations show
that both PICd and PICf are monotonically increasing functions of Hd,0 for positive values of H d , f .

15
     The assumption V df   ≥ 0 in the two-country case is natural since it implies that expected excess
                                                                                  d ] = (V dd x d + V df x f ) and
                                                                          ~ −P  ~
returns on the countries’ risky assets are positive. This is because E[ μ   d

 E[ μ~ f − Pf ] = (Vdf x d + V ff x f ) . We implicitly invoke the assumption that both Vdf ≥ 0 and
           ~

(Σ ) μ df   ≥ 0 , since we expect both risky assets to command a positive risk premium under any given
relative values of expected supplies, x d and x f .

16
     By symmetry, our measure of domestic “home bias” ( Dd , d / Dd , f ) or HomeBiasd in equation (10) is an
inverted-U-shaped functions of country f’s general human capital, Hf,o. Note that since the average
schooling levels in countries with developed stock markets are typically high, the empirically observed
segments of the home bias measures depicted in the upper panel of figures 2 may capture mostly the
downward-sloping segments of the inverted-U-shaped curves. In the lower panel of figure 2, in contrast,
depicting the “cross effects” of a higher Hd,0 on country f’s corresponding “home bias” measures, the
inflection point occurs at a considerably higher level of average schooling. Empirically, then, the observed
segments of the home bias measure in the lower panel of Figure 2 may be upward sloping.
17
  As checks for robustness of our regression specifications, we also run the baseline and expanded models
by using projected wage rates from an extended Mincer regression model by including both sex ratios (the
ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education) and infant mortality rates as additional
instrument variables. The results are reported in Appendix Tables B4 and B5. These results are consistent
with the ones reported in the text. As additional robustness tests, we have employed an alternative measure
of average schooling attainments, based on Cohen and Soto (2007) in addition to the Barro and Lee
measure in all regressions, and an alternative wage rate measure computed by OECD, in addition to our
BLS measure, in our OECD-subsample regressions. All robustness tests produce similar findings.




                                                                                                                42
                  Table 1: Demand for Domestic and Foreign Risky Assets

                                          Total Risky       Domestic Risky       Foreign Risky
                                             Assets            Assets               Assets
                                        Salaried Workers
   Log(EDU)          Unconditional             0.577              0.555               0.268
                                              (6.07)              (5.82)             (0.92)
                      Conditional             1.025               1.000               0.400
                                              (10.1)              (9.87)             (1.28)
   Log(Wage)          Conditional             -0.407             -0.407              -0.086
                                             (-12.0)             (-11.9)             (-1.18)
  Log(TASST)         Unconditional            0.834               0.836               0.741
                                              (75.0)              (74.8)             (28.7)
                      Conditional             0.886               0.888               0.747
                                              (74.5)              (74.3)             (28.3)
       N                                       3153                3112                509
                                          All Investors
   Log(EDU)          Unconditional             0.634             0.618                0.152
                                              (10.3)             (10.0)              (0.90)
                      Conditional             1.085              1.059                0.358
                                              (16.2)             (15.8)              (1.94)
   Log(Wage)          Conditional             -0.402            -0.396               -0.125
                                             (-17.0)            (-16.7)              (-2.75)
  Log(TASST)         Unconditional            0.848              0.847                0.739
                                             (110.9)            (110.3)              (47.4)
                      Conditional             0.896              0.896                0.748
                                             (110.3)            (109.5)              (46.9)
       N                                       6444               6356                1340

Notes: The regression model is equation (11). “Unconditional” refers to the regression excluding
the WAGE* regressors. “Conditional” refers to the regression including them. The numbers in
parentheses are t-ratios.
  Table 1A: Demand for Domestic and Foreign Risky Assets: Alternative Transformation

                                                   Log(1+DRA)            Log(1+FRA)
                                                 (retaining zeros)     (retaining zeros)
                                   Salaried Workers
     Log(EDU)            Unconditional                  0.559                0.883
                                                       (5.90)               (6.17)
                          Conditional                  1.004                 1.557
                                                       (9.91)               (10.2)
     Log(Wage)            Conditional                  -0.407               -0.612
                                                      (-12.0)               (-11.9)
    Log(TASST)           Unconditional                 0.835                 0.276
                                                       (75.2)               (16.5)
                          Conditional                  0.887                 0.353
                                                       (74.7)               (19.7)
          N                                             3153                 3153
                                      All Investors
     Log(EDU)            Unconditional                  0.621                0.790
                                                       (10.1)               (7.95)
                          Conditional                  1.062                 1.397
                                                       (15.9)               (12.9)
     Log(Wage)            Conditional                  -0.396               -0.542
                                                      (-16.7)               (-14.1)
    Log(TASST)           Unconditional                 0.846                 0.306
                                                      (110.8)               (24.8)
                          Conditional                  0.895                 0.372
                                                      (110.0)               (28.3)
          N                                             6444                 6444

See notes to Table 1.

Table 1B: Demand for Domestic and Foreign Risky Assets: Sample Selection Model for All
                                     Investors

                                            Domestic Risky Assets    Foreign Risky Assests
     Log(EDU)           Unconditional               0.923                    3.053
                                                   (10.2)                    (2.36)
                         Conditional                1.351                    3.547
                                                   (11.6)                    (2.52)
     Log(Wage)           Conditional               -0.368                   -0.750
                                                   (-10.6)                  (-2.51)
    Log(TASST)          Unconditional               0.956                    1.677
                                                   (93.9)                    (4.89)
                         Conditional                1.009                    1.417
                                                  (102.6)                    (5.90)
          N                                         6356                      1340

See notes to Table 1.
       Table 2: Portfolio Concentration (Individual “Home Bias”) Regression Results

                                                              HB = log(1+DRA/TRA)
                                                            All               Salaried
     Log(EDU)                Unconditional                -0.022                -0.033
                                                         (-5.77)                (-5.66)
                              Conditional                 -0.027               -0.0428
                                                         (-6.39)                (-6.91)
     Log(Wage)                Conditional                  0.004                0.0093
                                                          (2.74)                (4.49)
    Log(TASST)               Unconditional               0.00013               0.00073
                                                          (0.28)                (1.08)
                              Conditional               -0.00036              -0.00045
                                                         (-0.70)                (-0.62)
          N                                                6444                  3153

Notes: The regression model is equation (12). “Unconditional” refers to the regression excluding
the WAGE* regressors. “Conditional” refers to the regression including them. The numbers in
parentheses are t-ratios.


   Table 2A: Portfolio Concentration Regression Results using Alternative HB Measure

                                                                 HB’ = DRA/TRA
                                                           All                Salaried
     Log(EDU)                Unconditional               -3.431                -6.686
                                                         (-5.98)               (-7.18)
                              Conditional                -4.255                -1.987
                                                         (-6.81)               (-5.76)
     Log(Wage)                Conditional                 0.735                 1.545
                                                         (3.32)                (4.96)
    Log(TASST)               Unconditional               -0.043                 0.055
                                                         (-0.61)               (0.54)
                              Conditional                -0.132                -0.141
                                                         (-1.74)               (-1.29)
          N                                               6444                  3153

See notes to Table 2.
            Table 3 Home Bias Regression at the Macro Level: Baseline Model

                                Full Sample                          OECD Sample
    Variable         Unconditional       Conditional        Unconditional    Conditional
   log(EDUd)           -0.1805              -0.2456           -0.2518          -0.3069
                        (-3.07)             (-4.40)            (-4.61)          (-6.77)
   log(EDUf)           -0.0439              -0.3176            0.5802           0.4844
                        (-0.04)             (-0.26)             (0.58)          (0.50)
 log(WAGE*d)                                0.0802                              0.0898
                                             (2.05)                             (2.94)
 log(WAGE*f)                                -1.5285                            -1.5918
                                            (-5.63)                             (-5.84)
 log(GDPPCd)           -0.1314              -0.1912           -0.1807          -0.2537
                        (-5.85)             (-4.80)            (-12.3)          (-9.12)
  log(GDPPCf)           -0.112              1.2597            -0.7524           0.4942
                        (-0.11)              (0.97)            (-0.79)          (0.49)
      N                   148                 148                126              126
  Adjusted R2           0.4192              0.5111             0.5452           0.6620

Notes: The Baseline model is equation (13). “Unconditional” refers to the regression excluding
the WAGE* regressors. “Conditional” refers to the regression including them. The numbers in
parentheses are t-ratios constructed from robust standard errors.
Figure 1: Impact of the general human capital of country d's investor on relative info.
advantage, PIC, excess returns, and absolute demands for home and foreign assets.

          Information advantage of country d's investor                          PIC of home and foreign assets
     40                                                               60
                   Sd,d - SA,d                                                         Δdd

                   Sd,f - SA,f                                        50               Δff
     30
                                                                      40
     20
                                                                      30

     10                                                               20

                                                                      10
      0
                                                                       0
          0      20       40        60        80          100              0      20         40       60        80           100



  Expected excess return of domestic and foreign assets           Expected demand for home and foreign asset in country d
   2.5                                                               2
                                                                                                          E[Dd,d]
                                            E[μd - Pd]
                                                                                                                  E[Dd,f ]
      2                                     E[μf - Pf ]

                                                                     1.5
    1.5


      1
                                                                       1

    0.5


      0                                                              0.5
       0       20       40      60        80       100                  0       20       40      60        80       100
      Average schooling attainments in country d, Hd,0                 Average schooling attainments in country d, Hd,0




                                                                                                                         ⎡10 5 ⎤
Underlying parameters: H f , 0 = 5 , H d , d = H f , f = 3 , H d , f = H f ,d = 1 , μ1 = μ 2 = 10 , x1 = x 2 = 1 , Σ μ = ⎢     ⎥,
                                                                                                                         ⎣ 5 10⎦

     ⎡3 0 ⎤
Σx = ⎢    ⎥ , θ 1 = 0.5 , θ 2 = θ 3 = 1 , r = 1/3 A = 1, N d / N = N f / N = 0.5
     ⎣0 3⎦
Figure 2: Impact of the general human capital of country d's investor on measures of
relative demand for the home asset and home bias.

                                            Direct effects on portfolio concentrations in home asset (d)
                                    6                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                   E[Dd,d]/E[Dd,f ]
                                                                                                   Home Bias d

                                    4                                                                                   0.6
                 E[Dd,d]/E[Dd,f ]




                                                                                                                              Home Bias
                                    2                                                                                   0.4




                                    0                                                                                  0.2
                                        0   1        2      3       4       5     6      7        8           9       10
                                                    Average schooling attainments in country d, Hd,0


                                                Cross effects on portfolio concentrations in home asset (f)
                                    4                                                                                   0.8



                                                                                                                        0.6
                 E[Df,f ]/E[Df,d]




                                                                                                                              Home Bias
                                    2                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                     E[Df,f ]/E[Df,d]
                                                                                                     Home Bias f
                                                                                                                        0.2



                                    0                                                                                  0
                                        0   1        2      3       4       5     6      7        8           9       10
                                                    Average schooling attainments in country d, Hd,0




Based on the same set of parameters as in figure 1
Figure 3: Empirically estimated, and theoretically simulated, trajectories side by side




                                                                        Home Bias d
                                                                                                   Baseline Regression
                                   1        Brazil          Mexico                  Poland
                                                                                        Korea
                                                                            Hungary
                                                                              Israel
    Average Home Bias 2001-2007




                                                                Spain
                                                                                  Japan
                                  0.9
                                                              Italy                      Australia
                                                                                      Finland
                                  0.8                                                   Switzerland
                                                                           ArgentinaGermany
                                                                        Singapore                   UnitedStates
                                                                                UnitedKingdom Canada
                                  0.7
                                                                            Austria             Sweden
                                                                                                 NewZealand
                                                                                      Denmark
                                  0.6                                                              Norway

                                  0.5
                                        4     5       6      7       8       9    10      11      12        13       14
                                                     Average schooling attainments in country d, Hd,0


                                                  Measures of portfolio concentrations in home assets (d)
                                   6                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                  E[Dd,d]/E[Dd,f ]
                                                                                                  Home Bias d
                                   5
                                                                                                                      0.6
               E[Dd,d]/E[Dd,f ]




                                                                                                                            Home Bias
                                   4

                                                                                                                      0.4
                                   3



                                   2                                                                                  0.2
                                        0     1       2      3       4       5     6      7        8        9        10
                                                     Average schooling attainments in country d, Hd,0



The lower panel is based on parameters in Figure 1
         Figure A.1: The equilibrium cost differential under scenarios 1 and 2


            1                                                                 Baseline Regression
           Mexico                                 PolandKorea
                                                                              Hd,d=6: Scenario 1
                                      Hungary
                    Spain                                                     Hd,d=2.1: Scenario 2
                                                Japan
          0.9
                Italy
                                                        Australia
                                                  Finland
                                                      Switzerland
          0.8                                   Germany                        United States
                                                                     Canada
                                        United Kingdom
          0.7
                                      Austria                 Sweden NewZealand
                                                    Denmark
          0.6
                                                                          Norway


          0.5



          0.4
                7           8          9         10        11         12         13            14
                                Average schooling attainments in country d, Hd,0


Underlying parameters: H f , 0 = 5 , H d , f = H f ,d = 1 , μ1 = μ 2 = 10 , x1 = x 2 = 1 ,

     ⎡10 5 ⎤       ⎡3 0 ⎤
Σμ = ⎢     ⎥ ,Σx = ⎢    ⎥ , θ 1 = 0.5 , θ 2 = θ 3 = 1 , r = 1/4 , A = 1, N d / N = N f / N = 0.5
     ⎣ 5 10⎦       ⎣0 3⎦

The simulated plots are parallel shifted by 7 to the right.
                                                    Appendix A: Mathematical Appendix
A.1 Asset Market Equilibrium
From Admati (1985), the market price has an equilibrium solution as follows:
      ~
      P = φ0 + φ1μ~ − φ2 ~
                         x almost surely,

                                                                               (
where φ0 = V (Σ −μ1μ + rSΣ −x 1 x ) , φ1 = V S + r 2 SΣ −x 1S , φ2 = V r −1 I + rSΣ −x 1 and    )              (                  )
                      (
            V = Σ −μ1 + S + r 2 SΣ −x1S                        )
                                                               −1



The investor i’s posterior forecast about the return, μ~ , is normal with its mean and
variance as follows:

             E [μ~ zi , P ] = η 0i + η1i zi + η 2i P and Vi = Var [μ~ zi , P ] = Σ −μ1 + S i + r 2 SΣ −x1S    (                                )
                                                                                                                                               −1




where η 0i = Vi [ I − Σ x (rS ) + rI  {              −1
                                                                   } ](Σ
                                                                    −1     −1
                                                                           μ    μ + rSΣ −x1 x ) , η1i = Vi Si , and η 2i = rVi SΣ −x1φ2−1 .


A.2 Proof of equation (6a)
By substituting the optimal conditional demand for risky assets, Di = rVi
                                                                                                                                  −1
                                                                                                                                       (μ~ − P~ ), into
                                                                                                                                           i


the first stage problem, we derive the following:
                                              ~
         max E ~zi ,P~ [ − exp{− 1r ( B0 + P T x0 + wi − C (S i ; H i ))
           {Si }
(A.1)
                                  ~~     ~ ~                   ~~     ~ ~
                         − 12 ( E[μ zi , P ] − P ) T Vi −1 ( E[μ zi , P ] − P )}]

where x0 and B0 denote investor i’s initial endowment of risky assets and safe bond,
respectively. It can then be shown that (A.1) is equivalent to the optimizing problem:
                                      1/ 2          1/ 2
                               ΩP            Ωz                                                      C (S i , H i )⎤
                                                           exp ⎢t PT Ω −P1t P + {λ 3Ω z λT3 − λ 6 }+
                                                               ⎡               1
(A.1)’ max −                                 1/ 2                                                                  ⎥⎦ ,
              {Si }                   M                        ⎣               2                          r

          ⎛ Σ + S −1                                        Σ μ φ1T       ⎞                ω                       ω12 ⎤
where M = ⎜ μ T i                                                         ⎟ , M −1 = Ω = ⎡⎢ 11                            ,
          ⎜ φ Σ
          ⎝ 1 μ
                                                                        T ⎟
                                                    φ1 Σ μ φ1 + φ2 Σ x φ2 ⎠
                                                     T              T
                                                                                          ⎣ω21                     ω22 ⎥⎦

        (
ω11 = Σ μ + S i                 ) + (Σ
                              −1 −1
                                               μ    + Si       )
                                                           −1 −1
                                                                                          (
                                                                    Σ μ φ1T ω22 φ1Σ μ Σ μ + S i       )
                                                                                                    −1 −1
                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                            , ω21 = −ω22 φ1Σ μ Σ μ + S i              )
                                                                                                                                                    −1 −1
                                                                                                                                                            = ω12
                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                                                                  ,

         [
 ω22 = φ1 (Σ μ−1 + S i ) φ1T + φ2 Σ x φT2
                                      −1
                                                                    ]−1
                                                                          , λ1 = η1TiVi −1η1i , λ 2 = (η2i − I ) Vi −1η1i , λ 3 = (μ − P ) Vi −1η1i ,
                                                                                                                      T                                     T




λ 4 = (μ − P ) Vi −1 (η2i − I ) , λ 5 = (η2i − I ) Vi −1 (η2i − I ) , λ 6 = (μ − P ) Vi −1 (μ − P ) ,
                          T                                                           T                                       T




Ω −z 1 = (ω11 + λ1 ) , t PT = λ3 Ω z ω 21 + λ2             (               )
                                                                           T
                                                                                   − λ4 − x0T / r , and
Ω −P1 = −(ω 21 + λ 2 )Ω z (ω 21 + λ 2 ) + (ω 22 + λ5 ) .
                                                    T



Taking the differentiation of the object function in (A.1)’ with respect to Si ,k and using

∂ M Si / ∂Si ,k = M S i Vi ,kk , ω11 + λ1 = Ω −z 1 = Si , ω21 + λ2 = − Si , ∂t P / ∂S i , k = 0,

                                   {                                       }
∂Ω P / ∂S i , k = 0, and ∂ λ3 (ω11 + λ1 ) λT3 − λ 6 / ∂S i , k = 0 , we prove the result. QED
                                                            −1




A.3 Proof of Proposition 1.
Taking partial differentiation of (6a) with respect to the general human capital, H i , 0 ,

applying Cramer’s rule on it and using (1a) ~ (1c), we derive
                ⎛ ∂S ⎞
           sign⎜⎜ i ,d ⎟⎟ =
                ⎝ ∂H i ,0 ⎠
(A.2)
                ⎡⎛ θ                   ⎞ ⎧⎪                                         ⎛ 1 − θ1 ⎞ ⎫⎪ Vi , ff ⎛ r ⎞ ⎤
                                                                                                               2

           sign ⎢⎜⎜ 2 − ε wi ,H i , 0 ⎟⎟ ⎨Vi ,ddVi , ff − (Vi ,df ) + i ,dd
                                                                   2 V
                                                                                    ⎜⎜       ⎟⎟ ⎬         ⎜ ⎟ ⎥
                ⎣⎢⎝ θ1                 ⎠ ⎪⎩                           Si , f         ⎝ θ1 ⎠ ⎪⎭ H i ,0 ⎝ 2 ⎠ ⎥⎦

where ε X ,Y denotes the elasticity of X with respect to Y.

As Vi is covariance matrix, Vi ,dd Vi , ff − (Vi ,df                  )2
                                                                           > 0 . Hence, the sign of ∂S i ,d / ∂H i , 0

depends on the sign of θ 2 / θ1 − ε wi , H i , 0 . A conditional increase in Hd,0 at a given wage

level (i.e. ε wi , H i , 0 =0) increases S i ,d more than the unconditional increase in Hd,0. By

equation (5a) and the large economy assumption, it is straightforward to see
sign(∂Di ,k / ∂H i ,0 ) = sign(∂S i ,k / ∂H i ,0 ) for k = d and f. Finally, by (A.2) and symmetry,

                 ∂ (S i ,d − S i , f   )                       ⎡⎛ 1        1        ⎞      ⎛                 ⎞ 1 − θ1 ⎤
                                           = χ 0Vi ,dd Vi , ff ⎢⎜        −          ⎟ DV + ⎜ 1 − 1           ⎟
                       ∂H i ,0                                   ⎜
                                                               ⎢⎣⎝ Vi ,dd Vi , ff   ⎟      ⎜S                ⎟ θ ⎥⎥
                                                                                    ⎠      ⎝ i , f S i ,d    ⎠ 1 ⎦

                               (                        )
where χ 0 = (r / 2 ) θ 2 / θ1 − ε wi , H i , 0 / H i , 0 > 0 and DV = Vi , dd Vi , ff − Vi , df > 0 .
                           2                                                                                 2



Thus, ∂ (S i , d − S i , f ) / ∂H i ,0 > 0 , if Vi , dd < Vi , ff and S i , d > S i , f . QED


A.4 Proof of Proposition 4
Without loss of generality, we prove it for H i ,d . Taking differentiation of first order

conditions with respect to H i ,1 and applying Cramer’s rule on it, we derive the following:
                      ∂S i , d       ⎡ ∂ 2C               ⎛r 2                      ⎞⎤
                                                          ⎜ V + ∂ C
                                                                        2
                                                                                    ⎟⎥      1
                                  = −⎢                                                               >0
                                                          ⎜2        ∂ (S i , f )    ⎟⎥ V o V + D 2 C
                                                             i , ff
                      ∂H i ,d        ⎢⎣ ∂S i ,d ∂H i ,d   ⎝
                                                                                2
                                                                                    ⎠⎦
                                                                                       r
                                                                                       2 i  i


because the expression in the square bracket is negative given that ∂ 2 C /(∂S i ,d ∂H i ,d ) <0

by (1a)~(1c). Similarly, it can be shown that
                       ∂S i , f     r            ∂ 2C
                                   = Vi ,2df                 ≤0
                       ∂H i ,d      2        ∂S i ,d ∂H i ,d

where the equality holds when Vi , df = 0 . Since investor i’s average demand for risky

asset k, E[Di,k], is proportional to Si,k, at the individual level the concentration ratio
(D   i,d   / Di , f ) increases in H i , d . QED


A.5 Lemmas to prove Proposition 5
Lemma 1: (The impact of PIC). The price information content (PIC) of asset k lowers
optimal asset management and private information precision concerning this asset, i.e.,
∂S i , k / ∂Δ kk < 0 for all investors. Also, ∂S i ,k / ∂Δ ll ≤ 0 for k ≠ l where equality holds

when Vi , df = 0 .

Proof. (WLOG, we prove it for Δ dd only) Taking differentiation of (6a) with respect to

PICd , Δ dd and the application of Cramer’s rule yields the following:

∂S i ,d       1 ⎡⎛ r ⎞                     ⎤                                    ∂S i , f
                        2
                           ⎛r⎞                                                                  1 ⎛r⎞
           = − ⎢⎜ ⎟ DV 2 + ⎜ ⎟Vi ,2dd C ff ⎥ < 0                     and                   =−     ⎜ ⎟C dd Vi , df ≤ 0
                                                                                                             2

∂Δ dd         D ⎣⎢⎝ 2 ⎠    ⎝2⎠             ⎦⎥                                   ∂Δ dd           D ⎝2⎠

where
D ≡ det ( 2r Vi o Vi + D 2 C ) = ( 2r ) {(Vi , dd Vi , ff ) 2 − (Vi ,2df ) 2 } + 2r (Vi ,2dd C ff + Vi ,2ff C dd ) + C dd C ff ,
                                              2



                                              2
C kl = ∂C /(∂S i , k ∂S i ,l ) and DV = Vi ,2dd Vi ,2ff − Vi ,4df . The result follows. QED.


Denote F1 (H i ,0 ) and F2 (H i , d , H i , f ) as marginal distributions for specific and general

human capital applied to the world investors. We place a hat to denote new distributions:
Fˆ1 (H i ,0 ) and Fˆ2 (H i , d , H i , f ) are first order stochastic shifts of F1 (H i , 0 ) and F2 (H i , d , H i , f ) .
Lemma 2: A first order stochastic dominance shift in the distribution of general human
capital increases the PIC of at least one asset (either Δ dd or Δ ff or both).

Proof. Suppose otherwise. In other words, a FOSD shift in the distribution of general
human capital lowers both PICd and PICf. Then, by Lemma 1, the new equilibrium
functions of individual asset management Sˆ i , d and Sˆ i , f are higher than the initial levels,

S i , d and S i , f , for a given H i . Therefore,

Δ dd ≡ ⎡ ∫ S i , d (H i )dF2 (H i , d , H i , f )dF1 (H i ,0 )⎤ (Σ −x1 ) dd ≤ ⎡ ∫ Sˆ i , d (H i )dF2 (H i , d , H i , f )dF1 (H i ,0 )⎤ (Σ −x1 ) dd
                                                                2                                                                      2

       ⎢⎣ H i                                                 ⎥⎦              ⎣⎢ H i                                                  ⎥⎦

≤ ⎡ ∫ Sˆ i , d (H i )dFˆ2 (H i , d , H i , f )dFˆ1 (H i ,0 )⎤ (Σ −x1 ) dd ≡ Δˆ dd
                                                         2

  ⎢⎣ H i                                                    ⎥⎦
which is a contradiction of the initial assumption, Δ̂ dd < Δ dd . QED


A.6 Proof of Proposition 5
Suppose otherwise. If both PICd and PICf fall, it is contradiction by Lemma 2 Error!
Reference source not found.because an increase in Hd,0 is trivially a FOSD shift in the
distribution of general human capital. If an increase in H d , 0 lowers PICd (and SA,d) and

increases PICf (and SA,f), it is a contradiction too, because H d , d > H d , f . QED.


In general PICf also increases as Hd,0 increases because the magnitude of ∂S i , f / ∂Δ dd ≤0

is of second order: To see the mechanism, a rise in H d , 0 increases both S d , d and S d , f ,

raising both PICd and PICf . This in turn erode S i , d and S i , f for all investors by Lemma 1.

However, the feedback effect cannot exist without the initial rise in PICs. Therefore,
PICf is likely to increase in equilibrium unless the negative feedback effect of
∂S i , f / ∂Δ dd is large.
                                Appendix B: Full Regression Results
                        Table B1: (Conditional) Demand for Risky Assets

                             All Investors                           Salaried Workers
 Variable      log(TRA)       log(DRA)       log(FRA)    log(TRA)       log(DRA)        log(FRA)
 Constant        -0.191         -0.264         -0.211       0.372          0.291          -0.424
                 (-0.74)        (-1.02)        (-0.36)      (0.98)         (0.76)         (-0.43)
  lnEDU           1.085          1.059          0.358       1.025          1.000           0.400
                 (16.2)          (15.8)         (1.94)      (10.1)         (9.81)          (1.28)
 lnTASST          0.896          0.896          0.748       0.886          0.888           0.747
                (110.3)         (109.5)         (46.9)      (74.5)         (74.3)          (28.3)
lnWAGE*          -0.402         -0.396         -0.125      -0.407         -0.407          -0.086
                 (-17.0)        (-16.7)        (-2.75)     (-12.0)        (-11.9)         (-1.18)
    y95          -0.450         -0.511          1.062      -0.658         -0.717           1.500
                 (-2.65)        (-2.98)         (3.75)     (-2.71)        (-2.92)          (3.10)
    y98           0.128          0.148          0.333      -0.120         -0.061           0.919
                 (0.79)          (0.91)         (1.08)     (-0.52)        (-0.26)          (1.80)
    y01           0.211          0.483         -3.221       0.162          0.402          -3.040
                 (1.29)          (2.94)        (-10.5)      (0.69)         (1.70)         (-5.70)
    y04          -0.220         -0.219         -1.317      -0.315         -0.288          -1.358
                 (-1.30)        (-1.27)        (-4.13)     (-1.30)        (-1.18)         (-2.81)
    y07          -0.205         -0.170          1.301      -0.095         -0.017           0.887
                 (-1.24)        (-1.02)         (3.90)     (-0.40)        (-0.07)          (1.76)
   AGE            0.012          0.012         -0.001       0.006          0.007          -0.001
                 (5.88)          (5.96)        (-0.15)      (2.22)         (2.32)         (-0.09)
 y95*AGE         -0.010         -0.008         -0.021      -0.002         -0.001          -0.035
                 (-3.34)        (-2.88)        (-3.89)     (-0.57)        (-0.18)         (-3.71)
 y98*AGE         -0.016         -0.016         -0.007      -0.012         -0.013          -0.020
                 (-5.47)        (-5.61)        (-1.19)     (-2.98)        (-3.14)         (-2.25)
 y01*AGE         -0.020         -0.022          0.007      -0.019         -0.022           0.008
                 (-7.05)        (-7.89)         (1.39)     (-4.70)        (-5.41)          (0.99)
 y04*AGE         -0.016         -0.015         -0.008      -0.006         -0.005          -0.010
                 (-5.65)        (-5.23)        (-1.40)     (-1.47)        (-1.24)         (-1.10)
 y07*AGE         -0.011         -0.012         -0.013      -0.015         -0.015          -0.014
                 (-3.94)        (-4.10)        (-2.27)     (-3.71)        (-3.82)         (-1.49)

See notes to Table 1.
                Table B1 (Conditional) Demand for Risky Assets (Continued)

                           All Investors                        Salaried Workers
 Variable      log(TRA)     log(DRA)       log(FRA)   log(TRA)     log(DRA)        log(FRA)
  PROF            0.122        0.137         -0.144      0.219        0.242          -0.555
                 (2.53)       (2.85)        (-1.36)      (3.22)       (3.54)         (-3.43)
y95*PROF         -0.172       -0.180         -0.087     -0.342       -0.356           0.327
                 (-2.54)      (-2.63)       (-0.63)     (-3.60)      (-3.73)         (1.45)
y98*PROF         -0.017       -0.049          0.506     -0.015       -0.043           0.731
                 (-0.25)      (-0.73)        (3.51)     (-0.15)      (-0.45)         (3.23)
y01*PROF          0.036       -0.023          0.873     -0.055       -0.088           1.311
                 (0.54)       (-0.34)        (6.06)     (-0.58)      (-0.93)         (5.85)
y04*PROF          0.083        0.041          0.265     -0.007       -0.074           0.620
                 (1.23)       (0.61)         (1.73)     (-0.08)      (-0.77)         (2.79)
y07*PROF         -0.015       -0.043          0.087     -0.095       -0.127           0.439
                 (-0.22)      (-0.63)        (0.56)     (-0.99)      (-1.32)         (1.90)
   RAV           -0.350       -0.332         -0.066     -0.359       -0.333          -0.113
                 (-11.7)      (-10.9)       (-1.17)     (-8.39)      (-7.72)         (-1.21)
 y95*RAV          0.325        0.324         -0.093      0.312        0.308          -0.104
                 (7.27)       (7.18)        (-1.12)      (4.90)       (4.80)         (-0.66)
 y98*RAV          0.327        0.327         -0.168      0.365        0.355          -0.191
                 (7.75)       (7.68)        (-2.08)      (6.05)       (5.83)         (-1.42)
 y01*RAV          0.332        0.294          0.829      0.354        0.324           0.659
                 (7.69)       (6.52)         (8.71)      (5.71)       (5.20)         (3.87)
 y04*RAV          0.367        0.362          0.371      0.256        0.252           0.368
                 (8.16)       (7.99)         (3.74)      (3.90)       (3.81)         (2.30)
 y07*RAV          0.255        0.243         -0.250      0.293        0.267          -0.141
                 (5.83)       (5.54)        (-2.52)      (4.74)       (4.30)         (-0.86)
   SELF          -0.483       -0.502         -0.160
                 (-8.31)      (-8.56)       (-1.40)
y95*SELF          0.352        0.377         -0.365
                 (4.05)       (4.30)        (-2.42)
y98*SELF          0.618        0.643          0.251
                 (7.51)       (7.77)         (1.55)
y01*SELF          0.404        0.449         -0.133
                 (4.94)       (5.44)        (-0.85)
y04*SELF          0.454        0.473          0.435
                 (5.66)       (5.85)         (2.76)
y07*SELF          0.410        0.444          0.164
                 (4.83)       (5.20)         (1.01)
     N            6444         6356           1340      3153         3112            509

See notes to Table 1.
                           Table B2 Regression Results for Home Bias

                                HB = DRA/TRA                    HB=log(1+DRA/TRA)
    Variable            All Investors      Salaried        All Investors     Salaried
    Constant                105.7            100.7             0.733            0.702
                            (43.6)          (29.0)             (45.5)          (30.4)
     lnEDU                 -4.255           -6.686            -0.027          -0.0428
                           (-6.81)         (-7.18)            (-6.39)          (-6.91)
    lnTASST                -0.132           -0.141          -0.00036         -0.00045
                           (-1.74)         (-1.29)            (-0.70)          (-0.62)
   lnWAGE*                  0.735            1.545             0.004           0.0093
                            (3.32)          (4.96)             (2.74)          (4.49)
      Y95                  -13.21           -14.49            -0.088          -0.0961
                           (-8.32)         (-6.51)            (-8.34)          (-6.50)
      Y98                  -3.976           -1.751            -0.026          -0.0111
                           (-2.63)         (-0.82)            (-2.60)          (-0.78)
      Y01                  -2.551            1.858            -0.021           0.0084
                           (-1.67)          (0.87)            (-2.12)          (0.59)
      Y04                   3.579            6.323             0.025           0.0438
                            (2.25)          (2.85)             (2.33)          (2.97)
      Y07                  -6.934           -4.466            -0.046          -0.0289
                           (-4.47)         (-2.07)            (-4.48)          (-2.02)
      AGE                  -0.044           -0.061          -0.00029         -0.00039
                           (-2.31)         (-2.31)            (-2.27)          (-2.24)
   y95*AGE                  0.108            0.107           0.00067          0.00065
                            (3.97)          (2.82)             (3.70)          (2.57)
   y98*AGE                  0.016            0.043           0.00009          0.00026
                            (0.59)          (1.15)             (0.53)          (1.05)
   y01*AGE                  0.017            0.008           0.00012           0.0001
                            (0.65)          (0.23)             (0.72)          (0.24)
   y04*AGE                 -0.028           -0.041          -0.00024         -0.00031
                           (-1.08)         (-1.12)            (-1.39)          (-1.28)
   y07*AGE                  0.033            0.034           0.00023          0.00023
                            (1.26)          (0.95)             (1.32)          (0.98)

See notes to Table 2.
                   Table B2 Regression Results of Home Bias (Continued)

                                HB = DRA/TRA                   HB=log(1+DRA/TRA)
    Variable            All Investors      Salaried      All Investors      Salaried
     PROF                  -0.469            1.085         -0.0033           0.0069
                           (-1.04)          (1.75)          (-1.11)          (1.67)
   y95*PROF                -1.732           -2.526         -0.0114          -0.0165
                           (-2.73)         (-2.91)          (-2.69)          (-2.86)
   y98*PROF                -0.055           -0.540         -0.0005          -0.0041
                           (-0.09)         (-0.62)          (-0.13)          (-0.70)
   y01*PROF                 0.702           -1.075          0.0050          -0.0068
                            (1.12)         (-1.24)           (1.20)          (-1.18)
   y04*PROF                 1.756            1.321          0.0119           0.0083
                            (2.79)          (1.52)           (2.84)          (1.44)
   y07*PROF                -1.446           -2.243         -0.0087          -0.0145
                           (-2.27)         (-2.56)          (-2.06)          (-2.48)
      RAV                  -0.355            0.720         -0.0035           0.0037
                           (-1.26)          (1.84)          (-1.89)          (1.40)
   y95*RAV                  2.245            2.856          0.0158           0.0199
                            (5.38)          (4.90)           (5.69)          (5.14)
   y98*RAV                  1.293            0.105          0.0089           0.0012
                            (3.28)          (0.19)           (3.39)          (0.32)
   y01*RAV                  0.479           -0.763          0.0045          -0.0038
                            (1.19)         (-1.35)           (1.68)          (-1.00)
   y04*RAV                 -1.375           -2.176         -0.0086          -0.0143
                           (-3.27)         (-3.63)          (-3.06)          (-3.58)
   y07*RAV                  1.356            0.479          0.0092           0.0033
                            (3.32)          (0.85)           (3.40)          (0.87)
     SELF                  -2.620                          -0.0178
                           (-4.82)                          (-4.92)
   y95*SELF                 3.242                           0.0222
                            (3.99)                           (4.12)
   y98*SELF                 1.850                           0.0129
                            (2.40)                           (2.52)
   y01*SELF                 1.041                           0.0065
                            (1.36)                           (1.28)
   y04*SELF                 1.980                           0.0139
                            (2.64)                           (2.78)
   y07*SELF                 3.220                           0.0222
                            (4.05)                           (4.20)
       N                     6444            3153             6444            3153

See notes to Table 2.
                Table B3: Home Bias at the Macro Level: Expanded Model

        Expanded Model Using Projected Wages from Baseline Mincer Regressions

                                Full Sample                           OECD Sample
    Variable         Unconditional       Conditional        Unconditional     Conditional
   log(EDUd)           -0.1007              -0.1572           -0.4454           -0.4233
                        (-1.40)             (-2.24)            (-8.38)           (-7.92)
   log(EDUf)            0.5444              -0.1822            0.8045            0.4788
                         (0.70)             (-0.18)             (1.12)           (0.75)
 log(WAGE*d)                                0.0569                               0.0268
                                             (1.49)                              (1.13)
 log(WAGE*f)                                -1.1287                             -0.7397
                                            (-3.85)                              (-2.94)
 log(GDPPCd)           -0.2165              -0.2496           -0.2893           -0.3050
                        (-8.64)             (-7.14)            (-19.4)           (-15.8)
  log(GDPPCf)          -0.8593              0.7086            -1.0716           -0.1838
                        (-1.15)              (0.66)            (-1.55)           (-0.27)
     M/Gd               0.1250              0.1089             0.1723            0.1584
                         (6.61)              (5.62)             (13.1)           (10.9)
      M/Gf              0.8891              0.0746             0.9665            0.5107
                         (1.71)              (0.24)             (1.92)           (1.29)
     LONG               0.1800              0.1470             0.1119            0.0830
                         (3.54)              (3.24)             (3.53)           (3.19)
      EU                0.0261              0.0477            -0.0417           -0.0248
                         (1.52)              (2.88)            (-3.23)           (-1.80)
   ENGLISH             -0.1180              -0.1063           -0.0969           -0.0936
                        (-6.49)             (-6.29)            (-7.09)           (-6.80)
   SPANISH              0.0235              0.0078            -0.0946           -0.0856
                         (0.71)              (0.24)            (-3.78)           (-3.55)
      N                   148                 148                126               126
  Adjusted R2           0.6353              0.6627             0.8591            0.8680

Notes: The expanded model includes our additional control variables. “Unconditional” refers to
the regression excluding the WAGE* regressors. “Conditional” refers to the regression including
them. The numbers in parentheses are t-ratios constructed from robust standard errors.
                   Table B4 Home Bias Regression at the Macro Level
         Baseline Model Using Projected Wages from Extended Mincer Regressions

                                 Full Sample                             OECD Sample
    Variable          Unconditional       Conditional          Unconditional     Conditional
   log(EDUd)            -0.1263              -0.2092             -0.2347           -0.3279
                         (-2.04)             (-2.96)              (-4.35)           (-6.05)
   log(EDUf)             0.8719              0.7796               0.6148            0.4228
                          (0.91)              (0.78)               (0.62)           (0.41)
 log(WAGE*d)                                 0.1291                                 0.1266
                                              (5.35)                                (5.32)
 log(WAGE*f)                                 -1.2152                               -1.2798
                                             (-5.51)                                (-5.38)
  log(GDPPCd)           -0.1783              -0.2894             -0.1836           -0.2966
                         (-11.8)             (-13.1)              (-12.7)           (-14.4)
  log(GDPPCf)           -0.9846              -0.2537             -0.7792             0.088
                         (-1.08)             (-0.25)              (-0.82)           (0.08)
      N                    133                 133                  123               123
  Adjusted R2            0.5148              0.6441               0.5471            0.6887

Notes: The Baseline model is equation (13). The extended Mincer regression includes sex ratios
and infant mortality risks in addition to the basic Mincer regression. “Unconditional” refers to the
regression excluding the WAGE* regressors. “Conditional” refers to the regression including
them. The numbers in parentheses are t-ratios constructed from robust standard errors.
                  Table B5 Home Bias Regression at the Macro Level
        Extended Model Using Projected Wages from Extended Mincer Regressions

                                 Full Sample                             OECD Sample
    Variable          Unconditional       Conditional          Unconditional     Conditional
   log(EDUd)            -0.1075              -0.1041             -0.4391           -0.4330
                         (-1.26)             (-1.24)              (-8.47)           (-7.55)
   log(EDUf)             1.8582              1.3108               0.9917            0.7267
                          (2.48)              (2.04)               (1.41)           (1.17)
 log(WAGE*d)                                 0.0590                                 0.0551
                                              (2.15)                                (2.27)
 log(WAGE*f)                                 -0.7912                               -0.5336
                                             (-3.93)                                (-2.67)
  log(GDPPCd)           -0.2479              -0.2886             -0.2858           -0.3233
                         (-12.7)             (-14.4)              (-18.4)           (-17.7)
  log(GDPPCf)           -2.1093              -1.0756             -1.2682           -0.6768
                         (-2.93)             (-1.61)              (-1.88)           (-1.06)
      M/Gd               0.1323              0.1081               0.1677            0.1482
                          (7.43)              (5.14)               (12.1)           (8.80)
      M/Gf               0.6513              0.0315               0.8485            0.4155
                          (1.41)              (0.10)               (1.74)           (1.08)
     LONG                0.2518              0.1731               0.1489            0.0848
                          (4.38)              (3.40)               (3.46)           (2.31)
       EU                0.0165              0.0137              -0.0350           -0.0388
                          (0.97)              (0.85)              (-2.52)           (-2.97)
   ENGLISH              -0.0956              -0.0975             -0.0969           -0.0998
                         (-5.15)             (-5.75)              (-6.81)           (-7.10)
   SPANISH               0.0756              0.0875              -0.0833           -0.0701
                          (2.20)              (2.65)              (-3.31)           (-2.98)
      N                    133                 133                  123               123
  Adjusted R2            0.7635              0.7804               0.8622            0.8728

Notes: The expanded model includes our additional control variables. The extended Mincer
regression includes sex ratios and infant mortality risks in addition to the basic Mincer regression.
“Unconditional” refers to the regression excluding the WAGE* regressors. “Conditional” refers
to the regression including them. The numbers in parentheses are t-ratios constructed from robust
standard errors.
    Appendix C – determining the equilibrium cost differential under scenario 2

        To gain insight about the equilibrium cost differential ( H d ,d / H d , f )θ 3 / θ1 which is

consistent with the observed trajectory of home bias as a function of general human

capital (Hd,0) proxied by schooling, we pursue the following exercise, based the on micro-

level US data used in section 5. These data show that groups 1 and 2, as defined in

section 7.A, account for 60% and 40% of the dollar value of US’s risky portfolio. In this

case the share of domestic assets in the risky portfolio of the representative investor in the

US (SR), and thus the US home bias measure, can be computed as

(C.1) HBd = 0.6 HB1 + 0.4 HB2,

where HBj (j=1,2) represents the share of domestic assets in the risky asset portfolio of

groups 1 and 2, respectively. In the following exercise, we assume that the US shares of

groups 1 and 2 in the risky portfolio are the same across all countries (thus country d).

        Since group 1 specializes in the domestic asset, the trajectory of the home-bias

level of group 1 as a function of schooling is thus a flat curve at a value HB=1. To

determine the corresponding home-bias trajectory of group 2, we pursue the same method

discussed in Section 7.A under “scenario 1”. That is, we assume that group 2 consists of

homogeneous investors, all holding equal shares of assets d and f. We then simulate our

model numerically to derive trajectories of the home bias of group 2’s representative

investor under alternative values the investor’s endowed information advantage

( H d ,d / H d , f ). For each trial value, we compute the home bias trajectory of the average

investor in country d using equation (C.1). We then determine the equilibrium value of

H d ,d / H d , f as the one producing the trajectory which most resembles the empirically

observed trajectory in Figure (A.1), i.e., the estimated regression line based on Table 3

for the full sample. This produces an equilibrium value of H d ,d / H d , f = 2.1. The maximal

equilibrium cost differential explaining the observed trajectory of home bias is thus 4.4.
