                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ECONOMICS OF INFORMATION AND THE
                 THEORY OF ECONOMIC DEV[JOPMENT


                        doseph r.   tig±itz

                      Working   Paper No. 1566




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in International Studies and Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper 1/1566
                                          February 1985




                Economics of Information and the
                 Theory of Economic Development



                               ABSTRACT




    This paper shows how recent developments in the Economics of

Information can provide insights into economic relations in less

developed countries, and how they can provide explanations for in-

stitutions which, in neoclassical theory, appear anomalous and/or

inefficient. Sharecropping and other tenancy relationships in the

rural sector and wage determination and urban unemployment   are both
investigated   within this perspective.




                                          Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Princeton University
                                          Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                                                  /
                                                                               9 /5 84



        ECONOMICS OF INFORMATION AND THE THEORY OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT*

                                    by

                               J. E. Stiglitz



        There is a widespread feeling that traditional neoclassical economic

theory has little, if any relevance to the problems of less developed

economies.     Some of the important developments in the theory   during the

past quarter of the century have provided considerable justification for

that view. Though the Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics has shown

rigorously that there is a set of conditions under which Adam Smith's con-

jecture concerning the invisible hand has some validity, the conditions

required seem particularly inapplicable to the circumstances in which most

l.d.c.'s find themselves. In particular, there is not the full set of mar-

kets——whether for risks, capital (futures), labor or products——that the

theorem   requires; information is far from perfect; the assumption of a
fixed   and known technology seems particularly incongruent with an attempt

to understand the process by which l.d.c.'s adopt more advanced technologies

and by which new technologies diffuse through the economy; and the first

stages of development require the provision of infrastructure, which is a

public good, and/or is characterized by strong non—convexities.

      The problems I have listed are, of course, well recognized, and they

are widely discussed under the rubric of "market failures." The liberal doctrines



*   Invited lecture, 1983 Meetings of Sociedade Brasileira de Econometria,
    Belem, Brazil, December 6, 1983. Financial support of the National Science
    Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
                                 —2—



of the 1960's and early 1970's had it that a certain amount of tinkering by

a benevolent government could remedy these deficiencies in the marketplace,

and with these limited interventions, the market economy would function well,

in the way that the classical theory had said it would all along.

     To believers of neoclassical theory, the difference between l.d.c.'s and

developed countries was a matter of degree: the market failures were perhaps

more pronounced and thus stronger government intervention might be called

for. To critics, the qualifications were of central importance.

     Two developments during the past decade, however, have necessitated a

reshaping of these views. The first is well known: many of the attempts by

governments, both in l.d.c.'s and developed countries, to remedy the market

failures, which they saw have been less than successful. If markets do not

work, but government interventions to remedy their deficiencies also do not

work, where re we to go?

     The second is perhaps. not so well known: at the same time that the

standard neoclassical theory was continually being refined, a number of

economists were attempting to construct models of the economy using neo-

classical tools of analysis, but introducing more realistic assumptions:

they were concerned with. investigating the causes and consequences of incom-

plete markets, imperfect information, and imperfect competition.1 In many

cases, these studies were motivated by an attempt to provide models with a



1.   Among these earlier studies were George Akerlof's Theory of Lemons, which
     became the forerunner of innumerable, analyses of markets characterized by
     adverse selection, in which prices convey information (his work was moti-
     vated in part by observations concerning information problems he observed
     during an extended stay in India).; Gary Fields' models of the education
     market,   and gjgjzs study of education as a screening device, both of
     which were motivated by their experiences in Kenya (though 1'lichael Spence
     independently derived a quite similar theory of education as a signal
     J1974fl.
                                      —3—



greater relevance to l.d.c.'s; but the models which worked well often also

provided considerable insight into the kinds of macro—economic disequilibria

observed in developed countries as well.

     These two developments are not unrelated: the Economics of Information

has focused on the information and incentive problems which are common both

to public and private organizations; it has provided at least part of the

rationale for Public Failures as well as Private Failures, and has provided

a frework within which a more rational basis for the assignment of

responsi'bilitiès to each sector can be made.

        In   the first part of this paper I wish to survey some of the more important
applications of the economics of information to the theory of economic de—
velopiuent, suggesting how the theory provides an explanation of phenomena
which,   within the traditional neoclassical paradigm, appear irrational and/

or inefficient; I wish to go on to show that the policy implications of the

alternative paradigm may differ markedly from those of standard neoclassical

theoryq In the second part of this paper, I shall discuss in very general

terms    some of the broader implications provided by the perspective of the
Economics of Information on the developmeht process and the role of the govern-
ment in that process.1
                                      I..
1.   Tenancy.Relationships in Agriculture: Sharecropping

     The prevalence of sharecropping in agriculture in less developed countries



1,   In this survey I shall not provide details of the models on which the
     analysis is based; accordingly, I shall not be able to provide a corn—-
     plete list ofqualifications which need to be made, either to any des—
•



     criptive statement made or to any policy inference based on those des-
     criptive statements. For these, the reader is referred to the original
     papers on which this lecture is based.
                                   —4—



has always been somewhat of a puzzle to economists. Under sharecropping,

a worker receives less than the value of his marginal product, and this

seems to introduce an inefficiency. How could an inefficienct system of

land tenure be so persistent?

     One   natural answer was that it provided a means of risk
sharing. Workers were 'more risk averse than landlords, and the sharecropping
contract allowed the landlord to absorb 'more of the risk than he would if
workers rented the land from the landlord. Thus, the prevalence of   share—

               rct-     vc.1 fr1 tr rr eF tht r1,.t- -f.4i,mc- 1rcrl
earlier,   the absence of a complete set of risk markets, in which the worker

could insure himself against the many risks which he faced.

     It was subsequently shown, however, that transferring risk provided

part, hut only part, of the explanation of sharecorpping: all the possi-

bilities of risk sharing which sharecropping provided could be provided

by combining wage and rental contracts, which seemingly lacked the inef—

fi.ciencies associated with sharecropping (,$tiglitz Il9J4a]). Iwent on to

show, however, that if there were no informational problems, there would, in

fact, be no inefficiencies associated with sharecropping; the contract would

specify precisely the amount of labor to be supplied by the worker. Cheung (1969),

having made a similar observation, argued that accordingly, if sharecropping

is widely observed, it must be because of some advantage in transactions

costs. While agreeing with the tenor of that argument, it has always seemed

to me that referring to transactions costs as an explanation is too easy and

incomplete an answer. If the explanation of some important phenomena resides

in the nature of the transactions costs, then transactions costs need to be

the focus of the analysis, and a more detailed 'modeling of the structure of
                                    —5--




transactions costs and of the implications of alternative institutional struc-

tures for transactions costs is required. In a sense, my focus on information

costs can be thought of as providing that detailed analysis) The information

problems that I focused on were associated with monitoring the actions of the

worker: it is prohibitively expensive, under most agricultural environments,

to monitor perfectly the actions of the worker, to ensure that he acts in the

interests of the landlord; for instance, that he weeds when and as much as he

should.     It is far less costly to monitor the output of the farm than the

worker's input of effort. Moreover, because of the innumerable environmental

factors   which affect each farm (weather, pestilence, disease), which again
cannot be perfectly monitored, by observing output one cannot make a perfect
inference   concerning the worker's input of effort.

     If workers were risk neutral,2 then rental contracts would be employed.

Rental contracts allow the worker to receive the full value of the marginal

product of his efforts. But rental contracts force the worker to absorb all

the risk,

     On the other hand with wage contracts the landlord absorbs all the risk,

which is a good thing, given that the landlord is so much less risk averse

than the worker. However, with a wage contract the worker has little incentive



1.   In this. sense, the transactions costs approach, which has been so admirably
     developed in somewhat different context by Oliver Williamson, and the
     Economics of Information should be viewed as complementary. While the
     former has identifed a number of broad considerations which are relevant
     to the design of institutional arrangements, the latter has investigated
     in detail the implications of one important source of transactions costs,
     those arising out of the costs of acquiring and transferring information.

2.   And there was no risk of tenants defaulting on their rental payments.
     The consequences of the possibility of default have been investigated (in
     a somewhat different context) by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981).
                                         6—




to work; to ensure that he performs requires a high level of monitoring.

Though the costs of monitoring may not be too high for certain kinds of

crops, for others these costs may make such contracts undesirable.

       The equilibrium sharecropping contract is       thus   seen as a compromise:

between   the incentive properties of rental contracts and the risk proper-
ties of wage contracts.
        Changes in the environment and in technology——in the degree of risk,
in alternative means by which workers can divest themselves of risk or
diversify out of the risk (outside uncorrelated income opportunities), in
the degree of risk aversion (as the result of changes in wealth), and in the
costs of monitoring——Will alter the equilibrium contractual arrangement.
Thus,     the new theory provides not only an explanation of sharecropping, but

also for the observed differences in land tenure systems, both over time

and in different locations. Sharecropping is not seen as an inefficient,

primitive method of land tenure, but as a rational solution to certain real

problems facing these economies.

        Indeed,   this analysis of   sharecropping has served as a prototype of

a   whole class of information problems known as "principal—agent problems".
These    are concerned with situations in which      one individual (the   agent)

must take actions which affect another (the principal), where the agent

has more information than the principal (the worker knows the weather

better than the landlord), but the agent is         risk averse. Principal—agent
problems    arise in labor markets (the       employer—employee relationship) and
in insurance markets. They are pervasive in all          economies; understanding

them    provides considerable insight into a number of institutional arrange-
ments, both       in developed and less developed economies, and alters in a
    fundamental way the conclusions reached in standard neoclassical analysis.1

         Let me mention four further applications of this analysis to l.d.c.'s

    A.
                   .2
         Cost Sharing

         Most agriculture requires inputs other than labor and land. The

    question arises, how should those costs, e.g., of fertilizer, be shared

    between the landlord and the worker? Though sharecropping contracts usually

    entail some cost sharing, and though the share of costs borne by the worker

    is frequently his share in output, this is by no means the universal form

    of contractual arrangement. How do we explain these deviations from what

    would appear to be the simplest, and most reasonable rule? It seems par-

    ticularly difficult to explain these departures, in light of the fact that

    the rule of equating cost share to output share would seem to lead to the

    efficient utilization of inputs:, the worker would set his share of cost



    1.   In this lecture I am limiting myself to a discussion of how information
         analysis affects the analysis of problems facing            but I should
         briefly mention how introducing these concerns alters the standard neo-
         classical results. First, the usual convexity assumptions are not, in
         general, satisfied: indifference curves and feasibility sets are not,
•
         in general, convex (rnott and Stiglitz [1983a]);coinpetitive equilibrium
         may not exist, even when all the other strong assumptions of the standard
         theory obtain (Arnott and Stiglitz 1l983bJ); when it does, it may have a
         quite different character than depicted in standard competitive models,
         as we have noted here, in the case of agricultural markets. (In other
         markets, the price paid or received may depend on the quantity traded,
         and there may be quantity rationing.) When competitive equilibrium exists,
         it will not, in generals bePareto efficient (Arnott and Stiglitz {l983c]).
          (Greenwald and Stiglitz [1984]); and it may not be possible to decentralize
         efficient resouce allocations.

    2.   For a more extended discussion of cost sharing contracts, see Braverman
         and Stiglitz (1983).
                                    —8—




equal to the value of the marginal product, times his share in output.

When the two are equal, the value of the marginal product would equal the

marginal cost (Cf. Heady [1947]). Once we recognize, however, that the

reason for sharecropping was the unobservability of effort, we can immediately

obtain an explanation of these contractual arrangements: the landlord wishes

to encourage the worker to increase his effort; if the application of some

other input increases the worker's marginal product, and thus leads him to

increase his effort, then the landlord may wish to subsidize that input

(paying more than his proportionate share of the costs). Moreover, cost

sharing contracts are preferable to contracts in which the landlord speci-

fies the level of input, again because of the information asymmetry between

landlords and workers: the worker can adapt the level of inputs to changes

in circujntances in a way in which the landlord could not.



B.         erl_1g
      In   many situations, thc landlord is not only the landlord; he is also

the provider of credit and, in some cases, the supplier of inputs, the

purchaser of outputs, etc. There is, in other words, extensive interlinking

between credit, labor, land, and product markets. Earlier allegations that

these were means by which the landlord attempted to exploit the worker were

never completely convincing: they never explained why, if the landlord

was really in a monopoly—monoposony position, he could not exploit all his

monopoly power through his land contract, extracting all the surplus from the

workers and forcing them down to the subsistence level.



 1.   This section is based on joint work with A. Braverman (Braverman—
      Stiglitz 11983]).
                                  —9—




     Our theory provides an explanation for this phenomenon, equally—-

applicable to competitive and noncompetitive environments. The landlord

would like the worker to work harder. In the previous paragraph we noted

that the worker's level of effort may well be affected by the supply of

other inputs (fertilizer). By the same token, the worker's level of effort

may be affected by what goes on in product and credit markets. The former

is easy to see: if alcohol decreases productivity, the landlord may wish

to restrict consumption of alcohol; if certain kinds of foods increase

productivity, the landlord may wish to encourage their consumption by

providing meals on the job or by subsidizing them in the company store.

If workers can be induced to borrow heavily, and then face the threat of

bondage, they may well work harder than they otherwise would.

     So far in our discussion, we have focused on the landlord's interest

in encouraging the worker to supply greater effort. But there are other

decisions which the worker makes which affect the landlord. There are

innumerable risk decisions: by harvesting earlier, risk may be reduced,

but the average crop may be smaller. By postponing harvest, on average,

the crop may be larger, but there is some chance that a hailstorm will

destroy a significant fraction of the crop. It should be clear that the

interests of th landlord and the tenant are not likely to coincide: the

landlord, being less risk averse, may be more concerned with the effects

on average output. At the same time, in situations in which bonded labor

is not allowed, the landlord Tnr not be able to collect rents at the end

of the season, if the crop is bad, anc he lender may not-be able to force

the borrower to repay his loan. The probability of these events is again
                                   —l 0—




affected by the actions of the worker. The availability of credit and the

terms on which it is available thus may affect the probability that the

worker fails to pay his rent, and the risks he undertakes; and the terms

of the tenancy contract may affect the probability that a borrower fails to

repay his loan, and the risks he undertakes. There is a clear inter-

dependency in these two contracts, an important externality. Interlinkage

provides a way by which this externality is internalized.

     In this new view, then, interlinkage is the natural response of the

market to a problem of externalities which arises whenever monitoring either

effort or risk—taking is costly. Attempts to restrict interlihkage,

either directly or indirectly (e.g., through providing credit at greatly

subsidized rates, which eliminates the landlord's favorable position for

providing credit) thus may reduce the efficiency with which rural markets

function, and may, in the long run, make both landlords and workers worse off.



C.   Land Reform

     One of the central results of the neoclassical paradigm is the clean

dichotomy it provides between equity (distribution) and efficiency con—

siderations Every competitive market equilibrium is Pareto efficient,

and every Pareto efficient allocation can be attained through some redis-

tribution of initial endowments.

     In the newly developing theory that I have been describing in this

lecture, there is not so clean a distinction. First, not only is it

recognized that lump sum redistributions do not occur, but it provides an

explanation for why redistributive taxes are always distortionary: the
                                          —11—



 government can only base redistributions on certain observable character-

 istics of the individual, such as his income, and these characteristics

 are always alterable. The government does not have the information re-

 quired to implement an equitable, non—distortionary redistributive scheme.

        Second, the nature of the contractual arrangements which occur in an

 economy depends critically on the distribution of wealth, and these con-

 tractual arrangements have an important effect on the productivity of the

 economy. Sharecropping (with its associated second—best distortions)

 dLbb
 __J___.__   1_.       ____1__._..
                       WULL UOi_LLUL t______
                                     LAVt LLI_1__WL±LU
                                                 ___11_                  -,
                                                          tO purcLlase Luelr
                                                                      __1_
                                                                             OwnIianuI
 and to bear the associated risks.2 A land reform thus             has the potential
 of   substantially increasing the productivity of the economy; because

 workers obtain the full marginal productivity of their efforts, they may

 be willing to put in more effort (and to make "efficient" choices of
                   3
 technique).
        Two caveats tcY the argument that land reform may increase produc-

 tivity, both based on information theoretic considerations, should, how-

 ever, be noted, First, agricultural productivity depends not only on



1.     This view of taxation has been put forward         in   Atkinson—stiglitz (1980)
       and Stiglitz (l982c).

2.     More precisely, if all individuals had the seme wealth and degree of
       risk aversion, then there would be no need to transfer risks, and hence,
      a principal—agent (moral hazard) problem would
      uals differed in their risk aversion, even withnot arise. If individ-
                                                      an equalitaian wealth
      distribution, there would be some          risk transferring, and hence some
      moral hazard problem, but it would         be much less significant than under
      the present wealth distribution.

3.    As we noted earlier, whenever there is a principal—agent problem, the
      agent may make choices of techniques which are not in the interests of
      the principal. Bue even when there is not a principal—agent problem,
      if there is an incomplete set of markets, and the relative price of the
      agricultural good is sensitive to the level of output, then, in general,
      the equilibrium is not (constrained) Pareto efficient.
                                     —12—



the input of labor (effort), but on other inputs as well. Poor farmers may

not have the working capital to obtain the requisite inputs of fertilizer

or high—quality seeds, or the resources to make productivity—enhancing

improvements to their land. More generally, access to capital markets for

small borrowers is likely to be more restricted than for large land-

lords, and when small farmers do have access, the terms at which they

obtain   capital   may be less favorable; this will adversely affect agricul-

tural productivity. This differential access to capital markets should

not be viewed simply as a market imperfection; rather, it may reflect the

lenders' experiences with repayments of loans from small versus large

borrowers, and the differential costs of assessing who among the small

borrowers are good risks)

     Second, productivity in agriculture may begreatly affected by tech-

nical progress; improved seeds, improved fertilizers, and improved farming

practices. Large landowners may be in a better position to acquire, and

then disseminate, this information, than are small farmers; in any case,

given    that the costs of acquiring this information may be viewed as a
fixed cost, independent of the scale of operation of the farmer, the
incentives    for large landowners to stay abreast are greater.



D.      Technical Progress

        There has been a long debate over whether landlords resist innova—

tions which might improve the plight of peasants. Neoclassical theory



1.      Stiglitz and Weiss (1981, 1983) have formulated models of competitive
        capital markets in which there is credit rationing, and in which some
        classes of potential borrowers are excluded from the market and differ-
        ent classes of borrowers are charged different interest rates.
                                     —13—



provides an easy answer to this: any innovation which moves the production

possibilities schedule outward will move the utilities possibilities

schedule' outward; in a competitive economy, no landlord will be in a

position to resist the innovation (even if, in the new equilibrium, land—

lords as a wholewill be better off), while any monopolist landlord who

was in a position to push his peasants down to the subsistence level would

wish to adopt the innovation (Figure 1).

     The New Theory has shown that this argument is not necessarily correct.
There are innovations which shift the production possibilities curve out-
ward, but shift the utility possibilities schedule inward; these innova-
tions will nob be adopted, even though net national income might be in-
creased. The reason for this is simple: some innovations, while increas-
ing the level of output at each level of input, may exacerbate the moral
hazard—incentive problems of which   we spoke earlier.   An innovation which

increased   the average productivity of workers but decreased the marginal
productivity of workers might, in a sharecropping economy, result in the
peasant decreasing his work effort, enough so that output is actually
reduced   and the landlord is worse off. The landlord may, in such in-

stances, attempt to restrict the adoption of these innovations.



2.   Wage Determination and Urban Unemployment

     The second general application of the New Theory which I wish to dis-

cuss today is to the problem of urban wage determination and urban



1.   The utility possibilities schedule gives the maximum utility that one
     (group of) individuals(s) can obtain given the utility level of all other
     individuals.

2.   For a more extensive discussion of the theory of technological innova-
     tion in these circumstances, see Braverman and Stiglitz (    ).
                                              1 3a




Utility
(landlords)




                                                     After technical change, no moral hazard
                                                     problem
                                                          Before technical change, no moral
                                                          hazard problem            -

                                                                Before   technical change, moral
                                                               hazard problem
                                                                    After innovation, moral
                                                                    hazard problem exacerbated




                                                        Utility (workers)



                                          Figure 1


              A technical change which, in the absence of moral hazard, moves
              the utilities possibilities schedule unambiguously outward, and
              will always be adopted, with moral hazard may move the utilities
              possibilities schedule inward.
                                    —14—



unemployment. It has long been noted that wages in the urban sectorseem per-

sistently higher than those in the rural sector, and that these high wages

are associated with extensive urban unemployment. (High levels

of unemployment have also been a persistent feature of more developed

countries   as well.) Wages at above market—clearing levels seem inconsist-
ent with traditional neoclassical economic theory. Earlier development
economists ascribed these high wages to institutional rigidities, unions,
etc These theories——if they can be called that——have always seemed a
bit unstisfactory. First, they never gave much insight into what poli-
cies   might change the urban wage, or indeed, what policies were feasible.

If   unions "set" the real wage, would it respond to an increase in food
prices   by raising money wages, to keep workers' utility constant? Many

analyses of how the government should reduce urban unemployment have been

predicated on a rigid wage model which presumes a level of naivete on the

part of unions, if it is they who are setting the wage, which is hard to

believe. Second, unemployment has characterized—-and continues to charac-

terize——economies in which unions are not strong.

       The New Theories provide an explanation for high wages, i.e., wages

above market—clearing levels. All that is required is that productivity

of   workers increases with wages and that workers are not paid on a
strictly piece—rate basis.
       Whenever productivity increases with wages, it is possible that market
equilibrium will be characterized by unemployment.     The usual argument
for why market equilibrium is characterized by full employment is that,
if there is an excess supply of workers, the unemployed worker approaches
                                   —15—



the firm   , offering his services at a lower wage than that paid to the
current employees. The wage is thus driven down, the demand for labor

increased, and the supply decreased; the process continues until full

employment is attained. But if productivity depends on wages, the

employer will not necessarily hire a worker who offers to -work at a

lower wage; the employer may believe that his productivity will be lower,

sufficiently lower than his labor costs will actually be increased.

Thus, there may be an equilibrium with unemployment, with no forces

leading to a reduction in wages. The wage which minimizes labor costs

(minimizes   the wage per efficiency unit) is   called the efficiency wage

and   is depicted in Figure 2.
      There are several reasons that productivity may increase with    wages.

Earlier work (Leibenstein) focused on a nutritional relationship, though

more recent work (B1iss—Stern has raised questions concerning this.

But the Economics of Information has provided two other sets of ex—

planat ions.

       First, workers differ in their bilities, but firms may not be

able to ascertain perfectly who is better and who is worse. But firms

know that if they pay a higher wage they will get a higher quality

applicant pool% Thus, firms will not cut wages, in the face of excess-

supply of labor, because of the fear that it will -reduce the quality of

their applicant pool.    (See Stiglitz 1l976a],Weiss 1l9.80J).

       Second, firms seldom can monitor costlessly, or perfectly, the

actions of the workers. To induce workers to work hard, there must he

some "punishinent' for -being caught   shirking. Consider an economy in
                                             1 5a




Productivity
(efficiency units




                                              /

                                   /
                              //
                          /
                      /

                                        w*                  Wages



                                       Figure 2


    The efficiency wage, w , minimizes the labor costs per efficiency unit.
                                    —16-




which all workers are identical (so no worker is more of a shirker than

another) and all firms are identical. In neoclassical theory, equilibrium

would be characterized by all workers receiving the same wage and there

being no unemployment. If a worker shirked, the worst punishment that h

could be given would be to be fired; but since there is no unemployment,

he would be immediately rehired: the worker would have no incentIve not

to shirk. To •induce workers to work, a firm might attempt to Taise its

wage over rivals; but since all firms are identical, they all try to

raise their wages. At the higher wages, their demand for labor is reduced.

There is an equilibrium level of unemployment. The unemployment acts as a

discipline device for workers: now there is a real cost to shirking (even

if when they eventually get rehired they get paid the same wage that the7

did in the previous job). (See Shapiro—Stiglitz [1984), Calvo [1979].)


     This example illustrates a more general principle: when, because of

the relationship between wages and productivity, wages are rigid (in the

sense   expla:tned above), unemployment may serve as an equilibrating device.
     These are not the only explanations of the relationship between wage
and productivity. Lowering the wage may Increase labor turnover, and if
there are. specific training—hiring costs which are borne by the firm, this
will increase the firm's total labor costs.' (See Stiglitz, 1974a, 1974b.)


1.   For a more extended discussion of these alternative theories,   see
     Stig1tz (1982a, 1984a), Akerloff (1984),.and Yellon (1984).
                                    —17—



     Thus, we have shown that one of the fundamental tenets of neoclassical

economics, the law of supply and demand, which holds that competitive equi—

librium requires the equality of demand and   supply,   is not, in general,

valid. Equilibrium may be——and frequently appears to be——characterized

by an excess supply of laborers.

     These   arguments apply with equal force to other 'markets as well. Equi-
librium in capital markets may be characterized by credit rationing, by an
excess demand for capital. Increasing the rate of interest ray have
aderse    selection effects——the applicant pool may have a higher probability

of default——and adverse incentive effects——those who do borrow may have an

incentive to undertake greater risks.1

     Not only does the New Theory provide an explanation for an important

set of phenomena which neoclassical theory cannot explain, but it also

has strong policy implications. We consider here only three.



     A.    Wage Subsidies

     In the older view, the presence of unemployment meant that the oppor-

tunity cost of labor was zero, and firms 'should be induced to hire 'more

workers. Thus, a common prescription recommended on the 1960s was for

the government to provide a wage subsidy. Most of these analyses assumed,

however, that the urban wage would remain unchanged; our analysis suggests

that some fraction of the wage subsidy may be shifted towards workers.

(The extent of shifting will depend on the source of the relationship



1.   Thus, the standard paradigm requires that the employer (the lender,
     the landlord) be able to observe perfectly (and costlessly) the actions     of
     the employee (borrower, tenant) so that the compensation of the agent
     depends precisely on his actions (and only on his actions).
                                     —18--




between   wages and productivity, and the form of the wage subsidy; whether

the wage subsidy is an ad valorem wage subsidy or a specific wage subsidy

will, in this theory, have an important effect on the extent of shifting.

If there is shifting, then the higher urban wage may result in more migra-

tion from the rural sector, the equilibrium level of unemployment may in-

crease, and the level of national income might actually decrease.



     B.     Unemploent Compensation
     In some versions of the New Theory, unemployment compensation may
actually   increase the   unemployment rate and lead to a lower level of

national   income. This is    true, for instance, of the model where unemploy-

ment is serving as a discipline device for workers. The penalty that a

worker faèed upon being fired depends on the magnitude of unemployment

compensation; the larger the uneinploynient compensation, the lower the

cost of being fired, and hence, the higher the wage must be to induce

workers not to shirk.



     C.     Shadow Wages

     The observation of extensive urban unemployment led many economists

to conclude that the shadow wage of workers was zero.

     Subsequent work in the 1960s and early 1970s emphasized that increas-

ing employment might increase consumption, and thus decrease the surplus

which is available for investinent Thus, if investment is more highly

valued at the margin thaü consumption, the shadow wage will be positive

(though so long as consumption has some marginal value, less than the

urban wage). In the new view, increasing urban employment has at least
                                         —19—




two important effects that need to be taken into account. First, it affects

the equilibrium level of wages in the urban sector. Second, the change in

the   wage, as well as the change in the employment level, results in migra-
tion   from the rural sector. In       the polar case where both the urban and
rural wage remain unchanged, and migration continues to the point where
the expected urban wage (that is, the wage times the probability of getting
the job) equals the rural wage, the unemployment rate will remain unchanged,
the loss in output in the rural sector is just equal to the urban wage,
and   there is no    change in   aggregate   consumption. Thus, independent of the
social   weight attached to investment, the shadow price on labor is just the

urban wage. Although this is clearly a polar case, it is clearly more            -




reasonable than the other polar cases investigated in the literature,
e.g., which assume that there will be no migration from the rural to the
urban    sector.




                                         II.

        In the previous sections I have attempted to sketch how the New

Economics of Information has changed our views of how markets work, of

the nature of equilibrium as well as the efficiency of competitive markets.

In this section, I want to explore some of the insights which the New

Theory    provides on the broader issues of the nature of the development
process nd the role of the government. By their nature, my remarks in
this section are intended to be more speculative than those of the pre-
ceding    section.




1.     For a more extensive development of these ideas, see Stiglitz (1982b),
       and Sah and Stiglitz (1984).
                                     —20—



       What distinguishes less developed countries from more develope&-

countries? This is a question which has been at the center of debates

over the development process for decades. If one could identify the

critical determinants, one presumably might have greater hope for inter-

vening, in a positive way, to assist this process.

       For a while, there was a view that a principal difference between

developed    and less developed economies was the level of capital accumula-
tion; this diagnosis led to an immediate prescription: transfer (either
by gifts or loan)    capital and the difference between the developed and

the   less developed   countries will be significantly lessened. Though a

lack   of capital is obviously associated with a lack of development, this
in itself is not a sufficient explanation——if it were, presumably the
return to capital would be high, and the usual market forces would be at
work leading to a transfer of capital from developed to less    developed

countries.

       Others   have attributed the lack of development to a lack of human

resources, with the obvious prescription that what is required is invest-

ment in human capital. Though again, this may be important, it is only

part of the explanation: the high levels of unemployment among the

educated in some l.d.c.'s, and the large numbers of the highly educated

working at jobs utilizing few of their skills suggests that something

more is at stake.

       A third "missing factort' that is often noted is rather more vague

than the preceding two; it is referred to as entrepreneurship, the ability

to organize resources, to produce goods and services that are wanted by
                                  —21—



other individuals, and to market and deliver those goods and services.

Again, though this may be part of the explanation, there are cultures

which are noted for their entrepreneurial talents; ethnic groups which,

when they migrate to other countries, seem to flourish, but within their

native environment seem unable to bring about the transformation of their

own country.

     Though the absence or presence of entrepreneurship by itself is not

sufficient to account for the state of the economy, entrepreneurship

combined with certain other critical ingredients may be. An analysis of

these may provide some insight into the appropriate role of the government.

     First, and most important, there must be an appropriate linkage

between entrepreneurship and capital: it is not only the aggregate level

of investment that is important, but also the allocation of capital re-

sources. And it is not just the allocation of resources among sectors,

which has been the focus of traditional planning analyses, it is also the

allocation of (capital) resources among managers. We all know that there

are some enterprises in an industry which turn out to be very profitable,

other enterprises within the same industy which are much less so. Intra—

industry variability in profits may be as large as inter—industry varia—

bility Though there are a large number of factors which account for

these differences, part of the difference lies in what we can refer to

loosely as the quality of management. The allocation of resources among

alternative management teams is one of the central problems facing capi-

talist economies. It is an information problem, and a problem to which

society devotes an enormous amount of resources. (Indeed, it corresponds
                                       —22—




to   the selection problem discussed earlier.) It is, however, a problem

which has been ignored within the planning literature.

      We also noted in our earlier discussion the importance of the incen-

tive problem in market economies. The problem of incentives does not, of

course, disappear when an enterprise is taken over by the government. The

issue of the appropriate design of incentives is as important for state

enterprises as it    is   for private enterprises.

      The   government, it used to be argued, had an advantage over private
enterprises in reeolving another information problem n coordinating deci-
sion making. But this view ignores the enormous amount of information ex-
change and coordination which occurs in decentralized market economies.
Before U.S.    Steel constructed its steel mills on the southern shore of Lake
Michigan,    it had to ensure that it had an assured source of supply for the

necessary inputs (coal, limestone, iron ore) and it attempted to ascertain

whether there would be a ready market for its output. An enormous amount

of coordination, of information exchange, was required, but it occurred in

a decentralized manner. Thus, the question is not whether there should be

coordination, but how that coordination is to occur, where the locus of

information    exchange should be.     If information transmission and process-
ing were costless and if there were no incentive problems——so everyone
transmitted all of his information accurately——clearly there would be
everything to be gained and nothing to be lost, from the centralization
of information. But these assumptions are no more realistic than the
assumption    that goods are costlessly produced, and drop, freely from the

sky, like manna from Heaven.
                                     —23—




     (Note that the traditional competitive paradigm, as exemplified by the

work of Arrow and Debreu, is no more realistic in this respect than:the

traditional planning literature: they assume that all information exchange

occurs via prices, ignoring the importance of othersignals and methods of

information acquisition and dissemination.)

     If the major source of market failure was one of the simple forms dis-

cussed in the early l960s, e.g., externalities, the role of the government

would be clear. It would need to intervene, to ensure either through price

or regulatory interventions, that these externalities become effectively

internalized.      The government simply needs to change the incentives facing

private firms, to ensure that they act in accord with what is socially

desirable.      But if a major source of market failure is associated with

the information problems with which we have been concerned in this lecture,

there is no obvious prescription. The information problems, of selection,

of incentives, of corrdination and information exchange, are no different

for the government than for the private sector, and indeed, in some dimensions,

they may clearly be worse. One may argue that there are market forces

which work to ensure that those who are entrusted to the management of

capital and human resources are those who have a comparative advantage in

doing so. There is no reason to believe that the electoral process (when

it works) works to select public officials who have a comparative advantage

in selecting good managers, or who have a comparative advantage in designing

incentive structures which ensure that individuals work hard, and that

their work is directed at pursuits which are or might be construed to be

in the National Interest. (Indeed, the fact that so many governments have
                                       —24—




devised   regulatory systems and tax structures of such complexity

and with so many distortions that much of the talented resources are

devoted to dealing with these regulations, attempting to avoid their most

deleterious consequences and to tax arbitrage, to taking advantage of the

inconsistencies and differential tax rates which arise inevitably within

these   complex tax structures, suggests      that governments may be particularly

inept   at solving these problems, for reasons which may be explained by
the nature of the political process).
        Similarly, governments, noting   the prevalence of credit rationing,

have    often intervened to improve the functioning of capital markets. They
have simply assumed that the imperfection of the credit market was just
another manifestation of the imperfection        of market economies. A govern-

ment    could easily   intervene, to design a better functioning capital mar-

ket,    allocating capital   on a more rational basis.     The experience ininany

countries    in which governments have attempted this is not entirely favor—
able: default rates have been high, real interest rates have been kept
at low levels, access to credit has been based more on political con-

siderations than       on economic considerations, and overall, there has been
little    evidence that a greater degree of "rationality" in resource allocation

has    been achieved. Our analysis again provides some insight into this
public failure: we have argued that credit rationing will occur in com-
petitive markets characterized by imperfect information, where the lender
is    imperfectly informed concerning the characteristics of potential bor-

rowers and cannot perfectly monitor their actions.          These selection and

incentive problems are no less important when the government takes over
                                        —25—



responsibility for allocating credit. Indeed, the problem becomes

exacerbated, because political consideration may become paramount in

the allocation of credit, in a way which they do not in a market economy.

       In this   lecture, I   have attempted to argue that the information prob-

lems which     are central to private market economies are equally important

in public enterprises; that they give rise to public (government) fail-

ures, just as they give rise to private (market) failures. I have not,

however, had time to show more precisely how Information Analysis can

provide     some insights into the specific nature of   public failures, into

the   widely observed phenomena of excessive red tape and rapid growth in
the size of the administrative labor force in the public sector. A de-
tailed analysis of the incentive structures within the public sector can,
I believe, provide us with considerable insight into these phenomena.1



IV. Concluding Remarks

       In   conclusion, let me reiterate the general theme of this lecture:
traditional economic theory has ignored the central problems associated
with costly information. When due attention is paid to these information
theoretic considerations, the basic propositions of neoclassical analysis
no longer remain valid: market equilibrium may not exist, even when all



1.    The analysis which I have presented often seems so rnuch like simple
      common sense that it hardly deserves to be called an economic theory.
      (This is in contrast to lessons of neoclassical economics, which seem-
      ingly can only be learned through the discipline of a rigorous graduate
      school training.) Let me say two things in my defense. First, there
      is nothing as uncommon as good common sense; and the fact that the
      theory that we have developed here is in accord with everyday obser-
      vations is to be viewed as a virtue, not a vice. Second, rigorous
      formulations of the ideas presented here have been developed elsewhere.
      Understanding these more rigorous formulations does require an under-
      standing of the kinds of tools acquired in a disciplined graduate school
      training, Thus, while the lessons learned in graduate school may no
      longer be valid, the techniques of analysis have not yet become obsolete.
      See Stiglitz (l978 19
                                   —26—



the underlying preferences and production sets are "well behaved"; when

equilibrium exists, it is, in general, not Pareto efficient; it may not

be possible to decentralize efficient resource allocations; the separation

between efficiency and equity considerations which characterizes tradi-

tional neoclassical theory no longer obtains; market equilibrium may be

characterized by an excess demand for credit or an excess supply of labor

(that is, the law of supply and demand no longer holds). The theory

which   has been developed explicitly incorporating information theoretic
considerations provides an explanation of phenomena about which traditional
theory simply had nothing to say.
     In this lecture, I have been particularly concerned with showing how
this New Theory can provide insights into markets in less developed
economies, to show how it can provide explanation for institutions which
in neoclassical theory appear anomalous and/or inefficient. In some cases,
it yields clear implications for policy, implications which are at variance
with    those emerging from traditional neoclassical analysis. In other

cases, all we have obtained so far is a word of caution: information

problems   may give rise to public (governmental) failures just as they
give rise to market failures. The analysis of the appropriate role of the
government is far more complex than traditional analyses lead us to believe.
But if    we have learned this simple lesson, we may have   learned a lot.
                                REFERENCES




Akerloff, George A. (1970), "The Market for Lemons': Qualitative Uncertainty
    and the Market Mechanism", Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 84, 3
     pp. 488—500.
Akerloff, George A. (1984), "Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wage Theory: Four
     Views", American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 74, 2, pp. 79—83.

Arnott, Richard and J.E. Stiglitz (1983a), "Basic Analytics of Moral Hazard",
     Princeton University mimeo, November.

Arnott, Richard and J.E. Stiglitz (1983b), "Moral Hazard and the Existence
     of equilibrii in Competitive Insurance Markets", forthcoming, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics.
Arnott, Richard and J.E. Stiglitz (1983c), "Moral Hazard and Optimal Commodity
     Taxation", NBER Working Paper No. 1154, June.
Atkinson,   A.B. and J.E. Stiglitz (1980), Lectures in Public Economics, New
     York and London: McGraw—Hill Book Company.

Bliss, C. and N. Stern (1978), "Productivity Wages and Nutrition", Journal of
     Development Economics, 5.

Braverman, A. and J.E. Stiglitz (1981), "Landlords, Tenants and Technological
     Change", Princeton University Mimeo3 January.

Braverman, A. and J.E. Stiglitz(1982a), "Sharecropping and the Interlinking
     of Agrarian Markets", American Economic Review, September, pp.695—714.

Braverman, A. and J.E. Stiglitz (1982b), "Moral Hazard, Incentive Flexibility
     and Risk: Cost Sharing Arrangements Under Sharecropping", World Bank,
     August.

Braverman, A. and J.E. Stiglitz (1983), "Cost Sharing Arrangements Under
     Shar.ecropping: Moral Hazard, Incentive Flexibility and Risk, Princeton
     University mimeo, November.

Cheung, S.N. (1969). The Theory of Share Tenancy, Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press.

Calvo, G., (1979), "Quasi—Walrasian Theories of Unemployment", American
     Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May, 69, pp. 102—106.

Fields, G. (1972a), "Private and Social Returns to Education in Less De-
     veloped Countries". Eastern Africa Economic Review. June.
                                    -R2-




Greenwa1d Bruce and J.E. Stiglitz(1984). "Pecuniary and Market Mediated
     Externalities: Towards a General Theory of the Welfare Economics
     of Economies with Incomplete Information and Incomplete Markets",
     NBER Working Paper 1304, March.

Heady, E. (.1947), "Economics of Farm   Leasing   Systems", Journal of Farm
     Economics, August.
Johnson, D. Gale (1950), "Resource Allocation Under Share Contracts",
     Journal of Political Economy, 58: pp. 111—123.

Leibenstein, H. (.1957), Economic Backwardness and EconOmic Growth, New
     York: Wiley.

Nirrlees, J. (1975), "A Pure Theory of Underdeveloped Economies", iiAgri—
     culture in Development Theory. ed. L.A. Reynolds, New Haven: Yale
     University Press.

Nalebuff, B. and J.E. Stiglitz (1983), "Prizes and Incentives: Towards a
     General Theory of Compensation and Competition", Bell Journal, Spring,
     Vol. 14, pp. 21—43.

Newberry, D. and J.E. Stiglitz (1979), "Sharecropping, Risk Sharing and the
     Importance of Imperfect Information", in Risk, Uncertainty and De—
     velopment, eds. J.A. Roumasset, J.B. Boussard and     I.
                                                          Singh, SEARCA,
     AID/C, pp. 311-341.

             J.E. Stiglitz (1984), "Taxation
Sah, TRaaj and                                     and Pricing of Agricultural
     and Industrial Goods", NBER Working Paper     No.. 1338.

Spence. A. Michael (1974), Market Signaling: Informational Transfer in
     Hiring and Related Processes. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Haryard
     University Press.

Stigler, George 3. (1961), "The Economics of Information", Journal of Political
     Economy, June, 69, 3, pp. 213—225.

Stiglitz, J.E. (l974a),"Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping", Review
     of Economic Studies, April, pp. 219—255.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1974b), "Alternative Theories of Wage Development and Uneniploy—
     ment in L.D.C.'s: The Labor Turnover Model", Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     May, pp. 194—227.
                                     -R3—



Stiglitz, J.E. (1975b), "The Theory of 'Screening', Education and the
     Distribution of Income", American Economic Review, June, 65, 3, pp. 283—300.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1976a), "Prices and Queues as Screening Devices in Competitive
     Markets", IMSSS Technical Report No. 212, Stanford University, August.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1976b), "The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labor and
     The Distribution of Income in L,C.D.'s, Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 28.
     No. 2, pp. 185—207.

Stiglitz, J.E.(l978), "Information and Competition", Inaugural Lecture,
     Drummond Professor of Economics, All Souls College, Oxford, June.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1982a),"Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and Unem—
                The Efficiency Wage Model", in jeorv and    Experience of
                                                        __________________
     Economic Development: Essays in Honor of Sir W. Arthur Lewis, eds.
     N. Gersovitz, C.F. Diaz—Alejandro, C. Ranis and M. Rosenzweig; London:
     George Allen & Urwin, pp. 78—106.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1982b.) "Structure of Labor Markets and Shadow Prices in L.D.C. 's",
     in Migration and the Labor Market in Developing Countries, ed. R, Sabot,
     Boulder: Westview Press, pp. 13—64.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1982c), "Self—Selection and Pareto Efficient Taxation",
     Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 17, pp. 213—240.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1984a),"Theories of Wage Rigidity", paper presented at a
     conference on Keynes Economic Legacy, University of Delaware, January.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1984b),"Equilibrium Wage Distribution", NBER Working Paper
     No. 1337, April.

Stiglitz, i.E. (1985),"Infonnation and Economic Analysis: A Perspective"
     EcOnomic Journal, forthcoming.

Weiss,   Andrew (1980), "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with
     Flexible Wages", Journal of Political   Economy, 88,   pp. 526—538.

Weiss, Andrew and i.E. Stiglitz (1983), "Incentive Effects of Terminations:
     Applications to the Credit and Labor Markets", American Economic Review,
     December, 73, 5, pp. 912—927.


Yellen, J. (1984), "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment", American
     Economic Review, May, Vol. 72, No. 2, pp. 200—206.
