NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE TECHNOLOGY OF COGNITIVE AND NONCOGNITIVE SKILL
FORMATION
Flavio Cunha
James Heckman
Susanne Schennach
WORKING PAPER 15664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15664

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

This paper was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (SES-0241858, SES0099195, SES-0452089, SES-0752699); the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (R01HD43411); the J. B. and M. K. Pritzker Foundation; the Susan Buffett Foundation;
the American Bar Foundation; the Children's Initiative, a project of the Pritzker Family Foundation
at the Harris School of Public Policy Studies at the University of Chicago; and PAES, supported by
the Pew Foundation, as well as the National Institutes of Health|National Institute on Aging (P30
AG12836), the Boettner Center for Pensions and Retirement Security and the NICHD R24
HD-0044964 at the University of Pennsylvania. We thank the editor and three anonymous referees
for very helpful comments. We have also benefited from comments received from Orazio Attanasio,

Gary Becker, Sarah Cattan, Philipp Eisenhauer, Miriam Gensowski, Jeffrey Grogger, Lars Hansen,
Chris Hansman, Kevin Murphy, Petra Todd, Ben Williams, Ken Wolpin, and Junjian Yi, as well as
from participants at the Yale Labor/Macro Conference (May 2006), University of Chicago
Applications Workshop (June 2006), the New York University Applied Microeconomics Workshop
(March 2008), the University of Indiana Macroeconomics Workshop (September 2008), the Applied
Economics and Econometrics Seminar at the University of Western Ontario (October 2008), the
Empirical Microeconomics and Econometrics Seminar at Boston College (November 2008), the IFS
Conference on Structural Models of the Labour Market and Policy Analysis (November 2008), the
New Economics of the Family Conference at the Milton Friedman Institute for Research in Economics
(February 2009), the Econometrics Workshop at Penn State University (March 2009), the Applied
Economics Workshop at the University of Rochester (April 2009), the Economics Workshop at
Universidad de los Andes, Bogota (May 2009), the Labor Workshop at University of
Wisconsin-Madison (May 2009), the Bankard Workshop in Applied Microeconomics at the University
of Virginia (May, 2009), the Economics Workshop at the University of Colorado-Boulder (September,
2009), and the Duke Economic Research Initiative (September, 2009). A website containing
supplementary material is available at http://jenni.uchicago.edu/elast-sub. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2010 by Flavio Cunha, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation
Flavio Cunha, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach
NBER Working Paper No. 15664
February 2010
JEL No. C31,J13
ABSTRACT
This paper formulates and estimates multistage production functions for children's cognitive and noncognitive
skills. Skills are determined by parental environments and investments at different stages of childhood.
We estimate the elasticity of substitution between investments in one period and stocks of skills in
that period to assess the benefits of early investment in children compared to later remediation. We
establish nonparametric identification of a general class of production technologies based on nonlinear
factor models with endogenous inputs. A by-product of our approach is a framework for evaluating
childhood and schooling interventions that does not rely on arbitrarily scaled test scores as outputs
and recognizes the differential effects of the same bundle of skills in different tasks. Using the estimated
technology, we determine optimal targeting of interventions to children with different parental and
personal birth endowments. Substitutability decreases in later stages of the life cycle in the production
of cognitive skills. It is roughly constant across stages of the life cycle in the production of noncognitive
skills. This finding has important implications for the design of policies that target the disadvantaged.
For most configurations of disadvantage, our estimates imply that it is optimal to invest relatively
more in the early stages of childhood than in later stages.

Flavio Cunha
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fcunha@sas.upenn.edu
James Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15664

Susanne Schennach
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
smschenn@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

A large body of research documents the importance of cognitive skills in producing social
and economic success.1 An emerging body of research establishes the parallel importance of
noncognitive skills, i.e., personality, social and emotional traits.2 Understanding the factors
affecting the evolution of cognitive and noncognitive skills is important for understanding
how to promote successful lives.3
This paper estimates the technology governing the formation of cognitive and noncognitive skills in childhood. We establish identification of general nonlinear factor models that
enable us to determine the technology of skill formation. Our multistage technology captures different developmental phases in the life cycle of a child. We identify and estimate
substitution parameters that determine the importance of early parental investment for subsequent lifetime achievement, and the costliness of later remediation if early investment is
not undertaken.
Cunha and Heckman (2007) present a theoretical framework that organizes and interprets a large body of empirical evidence on child and animal development.4 Cunha and
Heckman (2008) estimate a linear dynamic factor model that exploits cross equation restrictions (covariance restrictions) to secure identification of a multistage technology for child
investment.5 With enough measurements relative to the number of latent skills and types of
investment, it is possible to identify the latent state space dynamics generating the evolution
of skills.
The linear technology used by Cunha and Heckman (2008) imposes the assumption that
early and late investments are perfect substitutes over the feasible set of inputs. This paper
identifies a more general nonlinear technology by extending linear state space and factor
analysis to a nonlinear setting. This extension allows us to identify crucial elasticity of substitution parameters governing the trade-off between early and late investments in producing
adult skills.
Drawing on the analyses of Schennach (2004a) and Hu and Schennach (2008), we es1
See Herrnstein and Murray (1994), Murnane, Willett, and Levy (1995), and Cawley, Heckman, and
Vytlacil (2001).
2
See Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006), Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel (2008) and
the references they cite. See also the special issue of the Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), Fall 2008 on
noncognitive skills.
3
See Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006) and Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2009).
4
This evidence is summarized in Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron, and Shonkoff (2006) and Heckman (2008).
5
See Shumway and Stoffer (1982) and Watson and Engle (1983) for early discussions of such models.
Amemiya and Yalcin (2001) survey the literature on nonlinear factor analysis in statistics. Our identification
analysis is new. For a recent treatment of dynamic factor and related state space models see Durbin, Harvey,
Koopman, and Shephard (2004) and the voluminous literature they cite.

3

tablish identification of the technology of skill formation. We relax the strong independence
assumptions for error terms in the measurement equations that are maintained in Cunha and
Heckman (2008) and Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003). The assumption of linearity of
the technology in inputs that is used by Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Todd and Wolpin
(2003, 2005) is not required because we allow inputs to interact in producing outputs. We
generalize the factor-analytic index function models used by Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman
(2003) to allow for more general functional forms for measurement equations. We solve the
problem of defining a scale for the output of childhood investments by anchoring test scores
using adult outcomes of the child, which have a well-defined cardinal scale. We determine
the latent variables that generate test scores by estimating how these latent variables predict adult outcomes.6 Our approach sets the scale of test scores and latent variables in an
interpretable metric. Using this metric, analysts can meaningfully interpret changes in output and conduct interpretable value-added analyses.7 We also solve the problem of missing
inputs in estimating technologies in a way that is much more general than the widely used
framework of Olley and Pakes (1996) that assumes perfect proxies for latent factors. We
allow for imperfect proxies and establish that measurement error is substantial in the data
analyzed in this paper.
The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly summarizes the previous literature
to motivate our contribution to it. Section 3 presents our identification analysis. Section 4
discusses the data used to estimate the model, our estimation strategy, and the model estimates. Section 5 concludes.

2

A Model of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation

We analyze a model with multiple periods of childhood, t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }, T ≥ 2, followed
by A periods of adult working life, t ∈ {T + 1, T + 2, . . . , T + A}. The T childhood periods
are divided into S stages of development, s ∈ {1, . . . , S}, with S ≤ T. Adult outcomes are
produced by cognitive skills, θC,T +1 , and noncognitive skills, θN,T +1 at the beginning of the
adult years.8 Denote parental investments at age t in child skill k by Ik,t , k ∈ {C, N }.
6

Cawley, Heckman, and Vytlacil (1999) anchor test scores in earnings outcomes.
Cunha and Heckman (2008) develop a class of anchoring functions invariant to affine transformations.
This paper develops a more general class of monotonic transformations and presents a new analysis of joint
identification of the anchoring equations and the technology of skill formation.
8
This model generalizes the model of Becker and Tomes (1986), who assume only one period of childhood
(T = 1) and consider one output associated with “human capital” that can be interpreted as a composite of
cognitive (C) and noncognitive (N ) skills. We do not model post-childhood investment.
7

4

Skills evolve in the following way. Each agent is born with initial conditions θ1 =
(θC,1 , θN,1 ). Family environments and genetic factors may influence these initial conditions
(see Olds, 2002, and Levitt, 2003). We denote by θP = (θC,P , θN,P ) parental cognitive and
noncognitive skills, respectively. θt = (θC,t , θN,t ) denotes the vector of skill stocks in period
t. Let ηt = (ηC,t , ηN,t ) denote shocks and/or unobserved inputs that affect the accumulation
of cognitive and noncognitive skills, respectively. The technology of production of skill k in
period t and developmental stage s depends on the stock of skills in period t, investment at
t, Ik,t , parental skills, θP , shocks in period t, ηk,t , and the production function at stage s :
θk,t+1 = fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP , ηk,t ) ,

(2.1)

for k ∈ {C, N }, t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T }, and s ∈ {1, . . . , S}. We assume that fk,s is monotone
increasing in its arguments, twice continuously differentiable, and concave in Ik,t . In this
model, stocks of current period skills produce next period skills and affect the current period productivity of investments. Stocks of cognitive skills can promote the formation of
noncognitive skills and vice versa because θt is an argument of (2.1).
Direct complementarity between the stock of skill l and the productivity of investment
Ik,t in producing skill k in period t arises if
∂ 2 fk,s (·)
> 0,
∂Ik,t ∂θl,t

t ∈ {1, . . . , T },

l, k ∈ {C, N }.

Period t stocks of abilities and skills promote the acquisition of skills by making investment
more productive. Students with greater early cognitive and noncognitive abilities are more
efficient in later learning of both cognitive and noncognitive skills. The evidence from the
early intervention literature suggests that the enriched early environments of the Abecedarian, Perry and Chicago Child-Parent Center (CPC) programs promoted greater efficiency in
learning in schools and reduced problem behaviors.9
Adult outcome j, Qj , is produced by a combination of different skills at the beginning of
period T + 1:
Qj = gj (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) , j ∈ {1, . . . , J}.10
(2.2)
These outcome equations capture the twin concepts that both cognitive and noncognitive
9

See, e.g., Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006), Heckman, Malofeeva, Pinto, and Savelyev
(2010), Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2010b), Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz
(2010a), and Reynolds and Temple (2009).
10
To focus on the main contribution of this paper, we focus on investment in children. Thus we assume that
θT +1 is the adult stock of skills for the rest of life contrary to the evidence reported in Borghans, Duckworth,
Heckman, and ter Weel (2008). The technology could be extended to accommodate adult investment as in
Ben-Porath (1967) or its generalization Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998)

5

skills matter for performance in most tasks in life and have different effects in different tasks
in the labor market and in other areas of social performance. Outcomes include test scores,
schooling, wages, occupational attainment, hours worked, criminal activity, and teenage
pregnancy.
In this paper, we identify and estimate a CES version of technology (2.1) where we assume
that θC,t , θN,t , IC,t , IN,t , θC,P , θN,P are scalars. Outputs of skills at stage s are governed by
h
i 1
φs,C
φs,C
φ
φs,C
φs,C φs,C
θC,t+1 = γs,C,1 θC,t
+ γs,C,2 θN,t
+ γs,C,3 IC,ts,C + γs,C,4 θC,P
+ γs,C,5 θN,P

(2.3)

h
i 1
φs,N
φs,N
φs,N
φs,N
φs,N φs,N
,
θN,t+1 = γs,N,1 θC,t
+ γs,N,2 θN,t
+ γs,N,3 IN,t
+ γs,N,4 θC,P
+ γs,N,5 θN,P

(2.4)

and

P
where γs,k,l ∈ [0, 1], l γs,k,l = 1 for k ∈ {C, N }, l ∈ {1, . . . , 5}, t ∈ {1, . . . , T } and s ∈
{1, . . . , S}. 1−φ1 s,k is the elasticity of substitution in the inputs producing θk,t+1 , where
φs,k ∈ (−∞, 1] for k ∈ {C, N }. It is a measure of how easy it is to compensate for low levels
of stocks θC,t and θN,t inherited from the previous period with current levels of investment
IC,t and IN,t . For the moment, we ignore the shocks ηk,t in (2.1), although they play an
important role in our empirical analysis.
A CES specification of adult outcomes is:
o 1
n
φQ,j φQ,j
φQ,j
+ (1 − ρj ) (θN,T +1 )
,
Qj = ρj (θC,T +1 )

(2.5)

where ρj ∈ [0, 1], and φQ,j ∈ (−∞, 1] for j = 1, . . . , J. 1−φ1Q,j is the elasticity of substitution
between different skills in the production of outcome j. The ability of noncognitive skills
to compensate for cognitive deficits in producing adult outcomes is governed by φQ,j . The
importance of cognition in producing output in task j is governed by the share parameter
ρj .
To gain some insight into this model, consider a special case investigated in Cunha and
Heckman (2007) where childhood lasts two periods (T = 2), there is one adult outcome (“human capital”) so J = 1, and the elasticities of substitution are the same across technologies
(2.3) and (2.4) and in the outcome (2.5), so φs,C = φs,N = φQ = φ for all s ∈ {1, . . . , S}.
Assume that there is one investment good in each period that increases both cognitive and
noncognitive skills, though not necessarily by the same amount, (Ik,t ≡ It , k ∈ {C, N }). In
this case, the adult outcome is a function of investments, initial endowments, and parental

6

characteristics and can be written as
Q=

h

τ1 I1φ

+

τ2 I2φ

+

φ
τ3 θC,1

+

φ
τ4 θN,1

+

φ
τ5 θC,P

+

φ
τ6 θN,P

i φ1

,

(2.6)

where τi for i = 1, . . . , 6 depend on the parameters of equations (2.3)–(2.5).11 Cunha and
Heckman (2007) analyze the optimal timing of investment using a special version of the
technology embodied in (2.6).
t
P
1
wQ denote the net present value of the child’s future income
Let R (Q) = A+2
t=2
1+r
computed with respect to the date of birth, and w is the return per unit Q. Parents have
resources M that they use to invest in period “1”, I1 , and period “2”, I2 . The objective of
the parent is to maximize the net present value of the child’s future income given parental
resource constraints. Assuming an interior solution, that the price of investment in period
“1” is one, the relative price of investment in period “2” is 1/(1 + r), the optimal ratio of
period “1” investment to period “2” investment is

log

I1
I2




=

1
1−φ

  

τ1
log
− log (1 + r) .
τ2

(2.7)

Figure 1 plots the ratio of early to late investment as a function of τ1 /τ2 for different values
of φ assuming r = 0. Ceteris paribus, the higher τ1 relative to τ2 , the higher first period
investment should be relative to second period investment. The parameters τ1 and τ2 are
determined in part by the productivity of investments in producing skills, which are generated
by the technology parameters γs,k,3 , for s ∈ {1, 2} and k ∈ {C, N }. They also depend on the
relative importance of cognitive skills, ρ, versus noncognitive skills, 1 − ρ, in producing the
adult outcome Q. Ceteris paribus, if ττ12 > (1 + r), the higher the CES complementarity, (i.e.,
the lower φ), the greater is the ratio of optimal early to late investment. The greater r, the
smaller should be the optimal ratio of early to late investment. In the limit, if investments
complement each other strongly, optimality implies that they should be equal in both periods.
This example builds intuition about the importance of the elasticity of substitution in
determining the optimal timing of lifecycle investments. However, it oversimplifies the analysis of skill formation. It is implausible that the elasticity of substitution between skills in
1
) is the same as the elasticity of substitution between inputs
producing adult outcomes ( 1−φ
Q
in producing skills, and that a common elasticity of substitution governs the productivity of
inputs in producing both cognitive and noncognitive skills.
Our analysis allows for multiple adult outcomes and multiple skills. We allow the elasticities of substitution governing the technologies for producing cognitive and noncognitive skills
11

See Web Appendix 1 for the derivation of this expression in terms of the parameters of equations (2.3)–
(2.5).

7

to differ at different stages of the life cycle and for both to be different from the elasticities
of substitution for cognitive and noncognitive skills in producing adult outcomes. We test
and reject the assumption that φs,C = φs,N for s ∈ {1, . . . , S}.

3

Identifying the Technology using Dynamic Factor
Models

Identifying and estimating technology (2.1) is challenging. Both inputs and outputs can
only be proxied. Measurement error in general nonlinear specifications of technology (2.1)
raises serious econometric challenges. Inputs may be endogenous and the unobservables in
the input equations may be correlated with unobservables in the technology equations.
This paper addresses these challenges. Specifically, we execute the following tasks: (1) Determine how stocks of cognitive and noncognitive skills at date t affect the stocks of skills at
date t + 1, identifying both self productivity (the effects of θN,t on θN,t+1 , and θC,t on θC,t+1 )
and cross productivity (the effects of θC,t on θN,t+1 and the effects of θN,t on θC,t+1 ) at each
stage of the life cycle. (2) Develop a non-linear dynamic factor model where (θt , It , θP ) is
proxied by vectors of measurements which include test scores and input measures as well as
outcome measures. In our analysis, test scores and personality evaluations are indicators of
latent skills. Parental inputs are indicators of latent investment. We account for measurement error in these proxies. (3) Estimate the elasticities of substitution for the technologies
governing the production of cognitive and noncognitive skills. (4) Anchor the scale of test
scores using adult outcome measures instead of relying on test scores as measures of output.
This allows us to avoid relying on arbitrary test scores as measurements of output. Any
monotonic function of a test score is a valid test score. (5) Account for the endogeneity
of parental investments when parents make child investment decisions in response to the
characteristics of the child that may change over time as the child develops and as new
information about the child is revealed.
Our analysis of identification proceeds in the following way. We start with a model where
measurements are linear and separable in the latent variables, as in Cunha and Heckman
(2008). We establish identification of the joint distribution of the latent variables without
imposing conventional independence assumptions about measurement errors. With the joint
distribution of latent variables in hand, we nonparametrically identify technology (2.1) given
alternative assumptions about ηk,t . We then extend this analysis to identify nonparametric
measurement and production models. We anchor the latent variables in adult outcomes
to make their scales interpretable. Finally, we account for endogeneity of inputs in the

8

technology equations and model investment behavior.

3.1

Identifying the Distribution of the Latent Variables

We use a general notation for all measurements to simplify the econometric analysis. Let
Za,k,t,j be the j th measurement at time t on measure of type a for factor k. We have
measurements on test scores and parental and teacher assessments of skills (a = 1), on
investment (a = 2) and on parental endowments (a = 3). Each measurement has a cognitive
and noncognitive component so k ∈ {C, N }. We initially assume that measurements are
additively separable functions of the latent factors θk,t and Ik,t :
Z1,k,t,j = µ1,k,t,j + α1,k,t,j θk,t + ε1,k,t,j

(3.1)

Z2,k,t,j = µ2,k,t,j + α2,k,t,j Ik,t + ε2,k,t,j ,

(3.2)

where E(εa,k,t,j ) = 0, j ∈ {1, . . . , Ma,k,t }, t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, k ∈ {C, N }, a ∈ {1, 2}
and where εa,k,t,j are uncorrelated across the j.12 Assuming that parental endowments are
measured only once in period t = 1, we write
,

Z3,k,1,j = µ3,k,1,j + α3,k,1,j θk,P + ε3,k,1,j , 13 14

(3.3)

E (ε3,k,1,j ) = 0, j ∈ {1, . . . , M3,k,1 }, and k ∈ {C, N }.

The αa,k,t,j are factor loadings. The parameters and variables are defined conditional on
X. To reduce the notational burden we keep X implicit. Following standard conventions
in factor analysis, we set the scale of the factors by assuming αa,k,t,1 = 1 and normalize
E(θk,t ) = 0 and E (Ik,t ) = 0 for all k ∈ {C, N }, t = 1, . . . , T . Separability makes the
identification analysis transparent. We consider a more general nonseparable model below.
Given measurements Za,k,t,j , we can identify the mean functions µa,k,t,j , a ∈ {1, 2, 3}, t ∈
12
An economic model that rationalizes the investment measurement equations in terms of family inputs is
presented in Web Appendix 2. See also Cunha and Heckman (2008).
13
This formulation assumes that measurements a ∈ {1, 2, 3} proxy only one factor. This is not strictly
required for identification. One can identify the correlated factor model if there is one measurement for
each factor that depends solely on the one factor and standard normalizations and rank conditions are
imposed. The other measurements can be generated by multiple factors. This follows from the analysis
of Anderson and Rubin (1956) who give precise conditions for identification in factor models. Carneiro,
Hansen, and Heckman (2003) consider alternative specifications. The key idea in classical factor approaches
is one normalization of the factor loading for each factor in one measurement equation to set the scale of the
factor and at least one measurement dedicated to each factor.
14
In our framework, parental skills are assumed to be constant over time as a practical matter because we
only observe parental skills once.

9

{1, . . . , T }, k ∈ {C, N }, which may depend on the X.

3.2

Identification of the Factor Loadings and of the Joint Distributions of the Latent Variables

We first establish identification of the factor loadings under the assumption that the εa,k,t,j
are uncorrelated across t and that the analyst has at least two measures of each type of child
skills and investments in each period t, where T ≥ 2. Without loss of generality, we focus on
α1,C,t,j and note that similar expressions can be derived for the loadings of the other latent
factors.
Since Z1,C,t,1 and Z1,C,t+1,1 are observed, we can compute Cov (Z1,C,t,1 , Z1,C,t+1,1 ) from the
data. Because of the normalization α1,C,t,1 = 1 for all t, we obtain:
Cov (Z1,C,t,1 , Z1,C,t+1,1 ) = Cov (θC,t , θC,t+1 ) .

(3.4)

In addition, we can compute the covariance of the second measurement on cognitive skills
at period t with the first measurement on cognitive skills at period t + 1:
Cov (Z1,C,t,2 , Z1,C,t+1,1 ) = α1,C,t,2 Cov (θC,t , θC,t+1 ) .

(3.5)

If Cov (θC,t , θC,t+1 ) 6= 0, one can identify the loading α1,C,t,2 from the following ratio of
covariances:
Cov (Z1,C,t,2 , Z1,C,t+1,1 )
= α1,C,t,2 .
Cov (Z1,C,t,1 , Z1,C,t+1,1 )
If there are more than two measures of cognitive skill in each period t, we can identify α1,C,t,j
for j ∈ {2, 3, . . . , M1,C,t }, t ∈ {1, . . . , T } up to the normalization α1,C,t,1 = 1. The assumption
that the εa,k,t,j are uncorrelated across t is then no longer necessary. Replacing Z1,C,t+1,1 by
Za0 ,k0 ,t0 ,3 for some (a0 , k 0 , t0 ) which may or may not be equal to (1, C, t), we may proceed in
the same fashion.15 Note that the same third measurement Za0 ,k0 ,t0 ,3 can be reused for all a, t
and k implying that in the presence of serial correlation, the total number of measurements
needed for identification of the factor loadings is 2L + 1 if there are L factors.
15

The idea is to write
Cov (Z1,C,t,2 , Za0 ,k0 ,t0 ,3 )
α1,C,t,2 αa0 ,k0 ,t0 ,3 Cov (θC,t , θk0 ,t0 )
α1,C,t,2
=
=
= α1,C,t,2
Cov (Z1,C,t,1 , Za0 ,k0 ,t0 ,3 )
α1,C,t,1 αa0 ,k0 ,t0 ,3 Cov (θC,t , θk0 ,t0 )
α1,C,t,1

This only requires uncorrelatedness across different j but not across t.

10

Once the parameters α1,C,t,j are identified, we can rewrite (3.1), assuming α1,C,t,j 6= 0, as:
Z1,C,t,j
µ1,C,t,j
ε1,C,t,j
=
+ θC,t +
, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M1,C,t }.
α1,C,t,j
α1,C,t,j
α1,C,t,j

(3.6)

Z

1,C,t,j
In this form, it is clear that the known quantities α1,C,t,j
play the role of repeated errorcontaminated measurements of θC,t . Collecting results for all t = 1, . . . , T , we can identify the
joint distribution of {θC,t }Tt=1 . Proceeding in a similar fashion for all types of measurements,
a ∈ {1, 2, 3}, on abilities k ∈ {C, N }, using the analysis in Schennach (2004a,b), we can
identify the joint distribution of all the latent variables. Define the matrix of latent variables
by θ, where


θ = {θC,t }Tt=1 , {θN,t }Tt=1 , {IC,t }Tt=1 , {IN,t }Tt=1 , θC,P , θN,P .

Thus, we can identify the joint distribution of θ, p(θ).
Although the availability of numerous indicators for each latent factor is helpful in improving the efficiency of the estimation procedure, the identification of the model can be
secured (after the factor loadings are determined) if only two measurements of each latent
factor are available. Since in our empirical analysis we have at least two different measurements for each latent factor, we can define, without loss of generality, the following two
vectors
!0
T 
T 
T 
T

Z1,N,t,i
Z2,C,t,i
Z2,N,t,i
Z3,C,1,i Z3,N,1,i
Z1,C,t,i
,
,
,
,
,
Wi =
α1,C,t,i t=1
α1,N,t,i t=1
α2,C,t,i t=1
α2,N,t,i t=1 α3,C,1,i α3,N,1,i
i ∈ {1, 2}.
These vectors consist of the first and the second measurements for each factor, respectively.
The corresponding measurement errors are

ωi =

ε1,C,t,i
α1,C,t,i

T


,

t=1

ε1,N,t,i
α1,N,t,i

T


,

t=1

ε2,C,t,i
α2,C,t,i

T


,

t=1

ε2,N,t,i
α2,N,t,i

T

ε3,C,1,i ε3,N,1,i
,
,
t=1 α3,C,1,i α3,N,1,i

!0
.

i ∈ {1, 2}.
Identification of the distribution of θ is obtained from the following theorem. Let L
denote the total number of latent factors, which in our case is 4T + 2.
Theorem 1 Let W1 , W2 , θ, ω1 , ω2 be random vectors taking values in RL and related through
W1 = θ + ω1
W 2 = θ + ω2 .
11

If (i) E [ω1 |θ, ω2 ] = 0 and (ii) ω2 is independent from θ, then the density of θ can be expressed
in terms of observable quantities as:
pθ (θ) = (2π)

−L

Z

e−iχ·θ exp

Z
0

χ

!


E iW1 eiζ·W2
· dζ dχ,
E [eiζ·W2 ]

√
where in this expression i = −1, provided that all the requisite expectations exist and


E eiζ·W2 is nonvanishing. Note that the innermost integral is the integral of a vectorvalued field along a piecewise smooth path joining the origin and the point χ ∈ RL , while the
outermost integral is over the whole RL space. If θ does not admit a density with respect to the
Lebesgue measure, pθ (θ) can be interpreted within the context of the theory of distributions.
If some elements of θ are perfectly measured, one may simply set the corresponding elements
of W1 and W2 to be equal. In this way, the joint distribution of mismeasured and perfectly
measured variables is identified.
Proof. See Web Appendix, Part 3.1.16
The striking improvement in this analysis over the analysis of Cunha and Heckman (2008)
is that identification can be achieved under much weaker conditions regarding measurement
errors— far fewer independence assumptions are needed. The asymmetry in the analysis of
ω1 and ω2 generalizes previous analysis which treats these terms symmetrically. It gives the
analyst a more flexible toolkit for the analysis of factor models. For example, our analysis
allows analysts to accommodate heteroscedasticity in the distribution of ω1 that may depend
on ω2 and θ. It also allows for potential correlation of components within the vectors ω1 and
ω2 , thus permitting serial correlation within a given set of measurements.
The intuition for identification in this paper, as in all factor analyses, is that the signal is
common to multiple measurements but the noise is not. In order to extract the noise from the
signal, the disturbances have to satisfy some form of orthogonality with respect to the signal
and with respect to each other. These conditions are various uncorrelatedness assumptions,
conditional mean assumptions, or conditional independence assumptions. They are used in
various combinations in Theorem 1, in Theorem 2 below and in other results in this paper.

3.3

The Identification of a General Measurement Error Model

In this section, we extend the previous analysis for linear factor models to consider a measurement model of the general form
Zj = aj (θ, εj ) for j ∈ {1, . . . , M },
16

The results of Theorem 1 are sketched informally in Schennach (2004a, footnote 11).

12

(3.7)

where M ≥ 3 and where the indicator Zj is observed while the latent factor θ and the disturbance εj are not. The variables Zj , θ, and εj are assumed to be vectors of the same dimension.
In our application, the vector of observed indicators and corresponding disturbances is
Zj =



εj =



{Z1,C,t,j }Tt=1

, {Z1,N,t,j }Tt=1

, {Z2,C,t,j }Tt=1

0

, {Z2,N,t,j }Tt=1

, Z3,C,1,j , Z3,N,1,j
0
{ε1,C,t,j }Tt=1 , {ε1,N,t,j }Tt=1 , {ε2,C,t,j }Tt=1 , {ε2,N,t,j }Tt=1 , ε3,C,1,j , ε3,C,N,1,j

while the vector of unobserved latent factors is:
θ=



{θC,t }Tt=1

, {θN,t }Tt=1

, {IC,t }Tt=1

, {IN,t }Tt=1

, θC,P , θN,P

0

.

The functions aj (·, ·) for j ∈ {1, . . . , M } in Equations (3.7) are unknown. It is necessary to
normalize one of them (e.g., a1 (·, ·)) in some way to achieve identification, as established in
the following theorem.
Theorem 2 The distribution of θ in Equations (3.7) is identified under the following conditions:
1. The joint density of θ, Z1 , Z2 , Z3 is bounded and so are all their marginal and conditional densities.17
2. Z1 , Z2 , Z3 are mutually independent conditional on θ.
3. pZ1 |Z2 (Z1 | Z2 ) and pθ|Z1 (θ | Z1 ) form a bounded complete family of distributions indexed by Z2 and Z1 , respectively.


4. Whenever θ 6= θ̃, pZ3 |θ (Z3 | θ) and pZ3 |θ Z3 | θ̃ differ over a set of strictly positive
probability.
5. There exists a known functional Ψ, mapping a density to a vector, that has the property


that Ψ pZ1 |θ (· | θ) = θ.
Proof. See Web Appendix, Part 3.2.18
The proof of Theorem 2 proceeds by casting the analysis of identification as a linear
algebra problem analogous to matrix diagonalization. In contrast to the standard matrix
17

This is a density with respect to the product measure of the Lebesgue measure on RL × RL × RL and
some dominating measure µ. Hence θ, Z1 , Z2 must be continuously distributed while Z3 may be continuous
or discrete.
18
A vector of correctly measured variables C can trivially be added to the model by including C in the
list of conditioning variables for all densities in the statement of the theorem. Theorem 2 then implies that
pθ|C (θ|C) is identified. Since pC (C) is identified it follows that pθ,C (θ, C) = pθ|C (θ|C)pC (C) is also identified.

13

diagonalization used in linear factor analyses, we do not work with random vectors. Instead,
we work with their densities. This approach offers the advantage that the problem remains
linear even when the random vectors are related nonlinearly.
The conditional independence requirement of Assumption 2 is weaker than the full independence assumption traditionally made in standard linear factor models as it allows for
heteroscedasticity. Assumption 3 requires θ, Z1 , Z2 to be vectors of the same dimensions,
while Assumption 4 can be satisfied even if Z3 is a scalar. The minimum number of measurements needed for identification is therefore 2L + 1, which is exactly the same number of
measurements as in the linear, classical measurement error case.
Versions of Assumption 3 appear in the nonparametric instrumental variable literature
(e.g., Newey and Powell, 2003; Darolles et al., 2002). Intuitively, the requirement that
pZ1 |Z2 (Z1 |Z2 ) forms a bounded complete family requires that the density of Z1 vary sufficiently as Z2 varies (and similarly for pθ|Z1 (θ|Z1 )).19
Assumption 4 is automatically satisfied, for instance, if θ is univariate and a3 (θ, ε3 ) is
strictly increasing in θ. However, it holds much more generally. Since a3 (θ, ε3 ) is nonseparable, the distribution of Z3 conditional on θ can change with θ, thus making it possible for
Assumption 4 to be satisfied even if a3 (θ, ε3 ) is not strictly increasing in θ.
Assumption 5 specifies how the observed Z1 is used to determine the scale of the unobserved θ. The most common choices of the functional Ψ would be the mean, the mode,
the median, or any other well-defined measure of location. This specification allows for nonclassical measurement error. One way to satisfy this assumption is to normalize a1 (θ, ε1 ) to
be equal to θ + ε1 , where ε1 has zero mean, median or mode. The zero mode assumption
is particularly plausible for surveys where respondents face many possible wrong answers
but only one correct answer. Moving the mode of the answers away from zero would therefore require a majority of respondents to misreport in exactly the same way— an unlikely
scenario. Many other nonseparable functions can also satisfy this assumption. With the
distribution of pθ (θ) in hand, we can identify the technology using the analysis presented
below in Section 3.4.
Note that Theorem 2 does not claim that the distributions of the errors εj or that the
functions aj (·, ·) are identified. In fact, it is always possible to alter the distribution of εj and
the dependence of the function aj (·, ·) on its second argument in ways that cancel each other
out, as noted in the literature on nonseparable models.20 However, lack of identifiability of
19

In the case of classical measurement error, bounded completeness assumptions can be phrased in terms of
primitive conditions requiring nonvanishing characteristic functions of the distributions of the measurement
errors as in Mattner (1993). However, apart from this special case, very little is known about primitive
conditions for bounded completeness, and research is still ongoing on this topic. See d’Haultfoeuille (2006).
20
See Matzkin (2003, 2007).

14

these features of the model does not prevent identification of the distribution of θ.
Nevertheless, various normalizations ensuring that the functions aj (θ, εj ) are fully identified are available. For example, if each element of εj is normalized to be uniform (or any
other known distribution), the aj (θ, εj ) are fully identified. Other normalizations discussed
in Matzkin (2003, 2007) are also possible. Alternatively, one may assume that the aj (θ, εj )
are separable in εj with zero conditional mean of εj given θ.21 We invoke these assumptions
when we identify the policy function for investments in Section 3.6.2 below.
The conditions justifying Theorems 1 and 2 are not nested within each other. Their different assumptions represent different trade-offs best suited for different applications. While
Theorem 1 would suffice for the empirical analysis of this paper, the general result established
in Theorem 2 will likely be quite useful as larger sample sizes become available.
Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) present an analysis for nonseparable measurement
equations based on a separable latent index structure, but invoke strong independence and
“identification-at-infinity” assumptions. Our approach for identifying the distribution of θ
from general nonseparable measurement equations does not require these strong assumptions.
Note that it also allows the θ to determine all measurements and for the θ to be freely
correlated.

3.4

Nonparametric Identification of the Technology Function

Suppose that the shocks ηk,t are independent over time. Below, we analyze a more general
case that allows for serial dependence. Once the density of θ is known, one can identify
nonseparable technology function (2.1) for t ∈ {1, . . . , T }; k ∈ {C, N }; and s ∈ {1, . . . ., S}.
Even if (θt , It , θP ) were perfectly observed, one could not separately identify the distribution
of ηk,t and the function fk,s because, without further normalizations, a change in the density
of ηk,t can be undone by a change in the function fk,s .22
One solution to this problem is to assume that (2.1) is additively separable in ηk,t . Another way to avoid this ambiguity is to normalize ηk,t to have a uniform density on [0, 1].
Any of the normalizations suggested by Matzkin (2003, 2007) could be used. Assuming ηk,t
is uniform [0, 1] , we establish that fk,s is nonparametrically identified, by noting that, from
the knowledge of pθ we can calculate, for any θ̄ ∈ R,



Pr θk,t+1 ≤ θ̄|θt , Ik,t , θP ≡ G θ̄|θt , Ik,t , θP .
21

Observe that Theorem 2 covers the identifiability of the outcome (Qj ) functions (2.2) even if we supplement the model with errors εj , j ∈ {1, . . . , J} that satisfy the conditions of the theorem.
22
See, e.g, Matzkin (2003, 2007).

15

We identify technology (2.1) using the relationship
fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP , ηk,t ) = G−1 (ηk,t | θt , Ik,t , θP ) ,

where G−1 (ηk,t | θt , Ik,t , θP ) denotes the inverse of G θ̄ | θt , Ik,t , θP with respect to its first

argument (assuming it exists), i.e., the value θ̄ such that ηk,t = G θ̄ | θt , Ik,t , θP . By construction, this operation produces a function fk,s that generates outcomes θk,t+1 with the
appropriate distribution, because a continuously distributed random variable is mapped into
a uniformly distributed variable under the mapping defined by its own cdf.
The more traditional separable technology with zero mean disturbance, θk,t+1
= fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP ) + ηk,t , is covered by our analysis if we define
fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP ) ≡ E [θk,t+1 | θt , Ik,t , θP ] ,
where the expectation is taken under the density pθk,t+1 |θt ,Ik,t ,θP , which can be calculated from
pθ . The density of ηk,t conditional on all variables is identified from
pηk,t |θt ,Ik,t ,θP (ηk,t | θt , Ik,t , θP ) = pθk,t+1 |θt ,Ik,t ,θP (ηk,t + E [θk,t+1 | θt , Ik,t , θP ] | θt , Ik,t , θP ) ,
since pθk,t+1 |θt ,Ik,t ,θP is known once pθ is known. We now show how to anchor the scales of
θC,t+1 and θN,t+1 using measures of adult outcomes.

3.5

Anchoring Skills in an Interpretable Metric

It is common in the empirical literature on child schooling and investment to measure outcomes by test scores. However, test scores are arbitrarily scaled. To gain a better understanding of the relative importance of cognitive and noncognitive skills and their interactions
and the relative importance of investments at different stages of the life cycle, it is desirable
to anchor skills in a common scale. In what follows, we continue to keep the conditioning on
the regressors implicit.
We model the effect of period T + 1 cognitive and noncognitive skills on adult outcomes
Z4,j , for j ∈ {1, . . . , J}.23 Suppose that there are J1 observed outcomes that are linear
functions of cognitive and noncognitive skills at the end of childhood, i.e., in period T :
Z4,j = µ4,j + α4,C,j θC,T +1 + α4,N,j θN,T +1 + ε4,j , for j ∈ {1, . . . , J1 }.
When adult outcomes are linear and separable functions of skills, we define the anchoring
23

The Z4,j correspond to the Qj of Section 2.

16

functions to be:
gC,j (θC,T +1 ) = µ4,j + α4,C,j θC,T +1

(3.8)

gN,j (θN,T +1 ) = µ4,j + α4,N,j θN,T +1 .
We can also anchor using nonlinear functions. One example would be an outcome pro∗
, for j ∈ {J1 + 1, . . . , J}:
duced by a latent variable Z4,j
∗
Z4,j
= g̃j (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) − ε4,j .
∗
, but we observe the variable Z4,j which is defined as:
Note that we do not observe Z4,j

(
Z4,j =

1, if g̃j (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) − ε4,j ≥ 0
0, otherwise.

In this notation
Pr (Z4,j = 1| θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) = Pr [ ε4,j ≤ g̃j (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 )| θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ]
= Fε4,j [ g̃j (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 )| θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ]
= gj (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) .
Adult outcomes such as high school graduation, criminal activity, drug use, and teenage
pregnancy may be represented in this fashion.
To establish identification of gj (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) for j ∈ {J1 + 1, . . . , J}, we include the
dummy Z4,j in the vector θ. Assuming that the dummy Z4,j is measured without error, the
corresponding element of the two repeated measurement vectors W1 and W2 are identical
and equal to Z4,j . Theorem 1 implies that the joint density of Z4,j , θC,t and θN,t is identified.
Thus, it is possible to identify Pr [Z4,j = 1 | θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ].
We can extract two separate “anchors” gC,j (θC,T +1 ) and gN,j (θN,T +1 ) from the function
gj (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ), by integrating out the other variable, e.g.,
Z
gC,j (θC,T +1 ) ≡

gj (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) pθN,T +1 (θN,T +1 ) dθN,T +1 ,

(3.9)

Z
gN,j (θN,T +1 ) ≡

gj (θC,T +1 , θN,T +1 ) pθC,T +1 (θC,T +1 ) dθC,T +1 ,

where the marginal densities, pθj,T (θN,T +1 ), j ∈ {C, N } are identified by applying the preceding analysis. Both gC,j (θC,T +1 ) and gN,j (θN,T +1 ) are assumed to be strictly monotonic in

17

their arguments.
The “anchored” skills, denoted by θ̃j,k,t , are defined as
θ̃j,k,t = gk,j (θk,t ) , k ∈ {C, N }, t ∈ {1, . . . , T }.
The anchored skills inherit the subscript j because different anchors generally scale the same
latent variables differently.
We combine the identification of the anchoring functions with the identification of the
technology function fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP , ηk,t ) established in the previous section to prove
that the 

˜
technology function expressed in terms of the anchored skills — denoted by fk,s,j θ̃j,t , Ik,t , θP , ηk,t
— is also identified. To do so, redefine the technology function to be


f˜k,s,j θ̃j,C,t , θ̃j,N,t , Ik,t , θC,P , θN,P , ηk,t







−1
−1
≡ gk,j fk,s gC,j
θ̃j,C,t , gN,j
θ̃j,N,t , Ik,t , θC,P , θN,P , ηk,t , k ∈ {C, N }
−1
where gk,j
(·) denotes the inverse of the function gk,j (·). Invertibility follows from the assumed
monotonicity. It is straightforward to show that



f˜k,s,j θ̃j,C,t , θ̃j,N,t , Ik,t , θC,P , θN,P , ηk,t
= f˜k,s,j (gC,j (θC,t ) , gN,j (θN,t ) , Ik,t , θC,P , θN,P , ηk,t )
−1
−1
= gk,j fk,s gC,j
(gC,j (θC,t )) , gN,j
(gN,j (θN,t )) , Ik,t , θC,P , θN,P , ηk,t



= gk,j (fk,s (θC,t , θN,t , Ik,t , θC,P , θN,P , ηk,t ))
= gk,j (θk,t+1 ) = θ̃k,j,t+1 ,
as desired. Hence, f˜k,s,j is the equation of motion for the anchored skills θ̃k,j,t+1 that is
consistent with the equation of motion fk,s for the original skills θk,t .

3.6
3.6.1

Accounting for Endogeneity of Parental Investment
Allowing for Unobserved Time-Invariant Heterogeneity

Thus far, we have maintained the assumption that the error term ηk,t in the technology (2.1)
is independent of all the other inputs (θt , Ik,t , θP ) as well as η`,t , k 6= `. This implies that
variables not observed by the econometrician are not used by parents to make their decisions
regarding investments Ik,t . This is a very strong assumption. The availability of data on
adult outcomes can be exploited to relax this assumption and allow for endogeneity of the
inputs. This subsection develops an approach for a nonlinear model based on time-invariant
18

heterogeneity.
To see how this can be done, suppose that we observe at least three adult outcomes, so
that J ≥ 3. We can then write outcomes as functions of T + 1 skills as well as unobserved
(by the economist) time-invariant heterogeneity component, π, on which parents make their
investment decisions:
Z4,j = α4,C,j θC,T +1 + α4,N,j θN,T +1 + α4,π,j π + ε4,j , for j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , J}.
We can use the analysis of section 3.2, suitably extended to allow for measurements Z4,j ,
to secure identification of the factor loadings α4,C,j , α4,N,j , and α4,π,j . We can apply the
argument of section 3.4 to secure identification of the joint distribution of (θt , It , θP , π).24
Write ηk,t = (π, νk,t ). Extending the preceding analysis, we can identify a more general
version of the technology:
θk,t+1 = fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP , π, νk,t ) .
π is permitted to be correlated with the inputs (θt , It , θP ) and νk,t is assumed to be independent from the vector (θt , It , θP , π) as well as νl,t for l 6= k. The next subsection develops a
more general approach that allows π to vary over time.
3.6.2

More General Forms of Endogeneity

This subsection relaxes the invariant heterogeneity assumption by using exclusion restrictions
based on economic theory to identify the technology under more general conditions. πt
evolves over time and agents make investment decisions based on it. Define yt as family
resources in period t (e.g., income, assets, constraints).
As in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, we

assume that suitable multiple measurements of θP , {θt , IC,t , IN,t , yt }Tt=1 are available to
identify their (joint) distribution. In our application, we assume that yt is measured without
error25 We further assume that the error term ηk,t can be decomposed into two components:
(πt , νk,t ) so that we may write the technology as
θk,t+1 = fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP , πt , νk,t ) .

(3.10)

πt is assumed to be a scalar shock independent over people but not over time. It is a
common shock that affects all technologies, but its effect may differ across technologies.
The component νk,t is independent of θt , Ik,t , θP , yt and independent of νk,t0 for t0 6= t. Its
realization takes place at the end of period t, after investment choices have already been
24
25

We discuss the identification of the factor loadings in this case in Web Appendix 4.
Thus the “multiple measurements”on yt are all equal to each other in each period t.

19

made and implemented. The shock πt is realized before parents make investment choices, so
we expect Ik,t to respond to it.
We analyze a model of investment of the form
Ik,t = qk,t (θt , θP , yt , πt ) , k ∈ {C, N }, t ∈ {1, . . . , T }.

(3.11)

Equation (3.11) is the investment policy function that maps state variables for the parents,
(θt , θP , yt , πt ), to the control variables Ik,t for k ∈ {C, N }.26
Our analysis relies on the assumption that the disturbances πt and νk,t in Equation (3.10)
are both scalar, although all other variables may be vector-valued. If the disturbances πt are
i.i.d., identification is straightforward. To see this, impose an innocuous normalization (e.g.,
assume a specific marginal distribution for πt ). Then, the relationship Ik,t = qk,t (θt , θP , yt , πt )
can be identified along the lines of the argument of Section 3.2 or 3.3, provided, for instance,
that πt is independent from (θt , θP , yt ).
If πt is serially correlated, it is not plausible to assume independence between πt and θt ,
because past values of πt will have an impact on both current πt and on current θt (via the
effect of past πt on past Ik,t ). To address this problem, lagged values of income yt can be used
as instruments for θt (θP and yt could serve as their own instruments). This approach works
if πt is independent of θP as well as past and present values of yt . After normalization of
the distribution of the disturbance πt , the general nonseparable function qt can be identified
using quantile instrumental variable techniques (Chernozhukov et al., 2007), under standard
assumptions in that literature, including monotonicity and completeness.27
−1
Once the functions qk,t have been identified, one can obtain qk,t
(θt , θP , yt , Ik,t ), the inverse
of qk,t (θt , θP , yt , πt ) with respect to its last argument, provided qk,t (θt , θP , yt , πt ) is strictly
monotone in πt at all values of the arguments. We can then rewrite the technology function
(3.11) as:

−1
rf
θk,t+1 = fk,s θt , Ik,t , θP , qk,t
(θt , θP , yt , Ik,t ) , νk,t ≡ fk,s
(θt , Ik,t , θP , yt , νk,t ) .
Again using standard nonseparable identification techniques and normalizations, one can
show that the reduced form f rf is identified. Instruments are unnecessary here, because
the disturbance νk,t is assumed independent of all other variables. However, to identify
the technology fk,s , we need to disentangle the direct effect of θt , Ik,t , θP on θt+1 from their
26
The assumption of a common shock across technologies produces singularity across the investment
equations (3.11). This is not a serious problem because, as noted below in Section 4.2.5, we cannot distinguish
cognitive investment from noncognitive investment in our data. We assume a single common investment so
qk,t (·) = qt (·) for k ∈ {C, N }.
27
Complete regularity conditions along with a proof are presented in Web Appendix 3.3.

20

−1
indirect effect through πt = qk,t
(θt , θP , yt , Ik,t ). To accomplish this, we exploit our knowledge
−1
of qk,t
(θt , θP , yt , Ik,t ) to write:
rf
(θt , Ik,t , θP , yt , νk,t )|yt :q−1 (θt ,θP ,yt ,Ik,t )=πt
fk,s (θt , Ik,t , θP , πt , νk,t ) = fk,s
k,t

where, on the right-hand side, we set yt so that the corresponding implied value of πt matches
−1
its value on the left-hand side. This does not necessarily require qk,t
(θt , θP , yt , Ik,t ) to be
invertible with respect to yt , since we only need one suitable value of yt for each given
(θt , θP , Ik,t , πt ) and do not necessarily require a one-to-one mapping. By construction, the
support of the distribution of yt conditional on θt , θP , Ik,t , is sufficiently large to guarantee
the existence of at least one solution because, for a fixed θt , Ik,t , θP , variations in πt are
entirely due to yt . We present a more formal discussion of our identification strategy in
Section 3.3 of the Web appendix.
In our empirical analysis, we make further parametric assumptions regarding fk,s and qk,t ,
which open the way to a more convenient estimation strategy to account for endogeneity.
The idea is to assume that the function qk,t (θt , θP , yt , πt ) is parametrically specified and
additively separable in πt , so that its identification follows under standard instrumental
variables conditions. Next, we replace Ik,t by its value given by the policy function in the
technology
θk,t+1 = fk,s (θt , qk,t (θt , θP , yt , πt ) , θP , πt , νk,t ) .
Eliminating Ik,t solves the endogeneity problem because the two disturbances πt and νk,t are
now independent of all explanatory variables, by assumption if the πt are serially independent. Identification is secured by assuming that fk,s is parametric and additively separable
in νk,t (whose conditional mean is zero) and by assuming a parametric form for fπt (πt ), the
density of πt . We can then write:
Z
E [θk,t+1 |θt , θP , yt ] =

fk,s (θt , qk,t (θt , θP , yt , πt ) , θP , πt , 0) fπt (πt ) dπt ≡ f˜k,s (θt , θP , yt , β) .

The right-hand is now known up to a vector of parameters β which will be (at least) locally
identified if it happens that ∂ f˜k,s (θt , θP , yt , β) /∂β evaluated at the true value of β is a
vector function of θt , θP , yt that is linearly independent. Section 4.2.5 below describes the
specific functional forms used in our empirical analysis, and relaxes the assumption of serial
independence of the πt .

21

4

Estimating the Technology of Skill Formation

Technology (2.1) and the associated measurement systems are nonparametrically identified.
However, we use parametric maximum likelihood to estimate the model and do not estimate
it under the most general conditions. We do this for two reasons. First, a fully nonparametric
approach is too data hungry to apply to samples of the size that we have at our disposal,
because the convergence rates of nonparametric estimators are quite slow. Second, solving a
high-dimensional dynamic factor model is a computationally demanding task that can only
be made manageable by invoking parametric assumptions. Nonetheless, the analysis of this
paper shows that in principle the parametric structure used to secure the estimates reported
below is not strictly required to identify the technology. The likelihood function for the
model is presented in Web Appendix 5. Web Appendix 6 describes the nonlinear filtering
algorithm we use to estimate the technology. Web Appendix 7 discusses how we implement
anchoring. Section 8 of the Web Appendix reports a limited Monte Carlo study of a version
of the general estimation strategy discussed in Section 4.2.5 below.
We estimate the technology on a sample of 2207 firstborn white children from the Children
of the NLSY/79 (CNLSY/79) sample (see Center for Human Resource Research, 2004).
Starting in 1986, the children of the NLSY/1979 female respondents, ages 0-14, have been
assessed every two years. The assessments measure cognitive ability, temperament, motor
and social development, behavior problems, and self-competence of the children as well as
their home environments. Data are collected via direct assessment and maternal report
during home visits at every biannual wave. Section 9 of the Web Appendix discusses the
measurements used to proxy investment and output. Web Appendix Tables 9-1–9-3 present
summary statistics on the sample we use.28 We estimate a model for a single child and ignore
interactions among children and the allocation decisions of multiple child families.
To match the biennial data collection plan, in our empirical analysis, a period is equivalent
to two years. We have eight periods distributed over two stages of development.29 We report
estimates for a variety of specifications.
Dynamic factor models allow us to exploit the wealth of measures on investment and
28

While we have rich data on home inputs, the information on schooling inputs is not so rich. Consistent
with results reported in Todd and Wolpin (2005), we find that the poorly measured schooling inputs in the
CNLSY are estimated to have only weak and statistically insignificant effects on outputs. Even correcting
for measurement error, we find no evidence for important effects of schooling inputs on child outcomes. This
finding is consistent with the Coleman Report (1966) that finds weak effects of schooling inputs on child
outcomes once family characteristics are entered into an analysis. We do not report estimates of the model
which include schooling inputs.
29
The first period is age 0, the second period is ages 1-2, the third period covers ages 3-4, and so on until
the eighth period in which children are 13-14 years-old. The first stage of development starts at age 0 and
finishes at ages 5-6, while the second stage of development starts at ages 5-6 and finishes at ages 13-14.

22

outcomes available in the CNLSY data. They solve several problems in estimating skill
formation technologies. First, there are many proxies for parental investments in children’s
cognitive and noncognitive development. Using a dynamic factor model, we let the data
pick the best combinations of family input measures that predict levels and growth in test
scores. Measured inputs that are not very informative on family investment decisions will
have negligible estimated factor loadings. Second, our models help us solve the problem of
missing data. Assuming that the data are missing at random, we integrate out the missing
items from the sample likelihood.
In practice, we cannot empirically distinguish investments in cognitive skills from investments in noncognitive skills. Accordingly, we assume investment in period t is the same for
both skills although it may have different effects on those skills. Thus we assume IC,t = IN,t
and define it as It .

4.1

Empirical Specification

We use the separable measurement system (3.1). We estimate versions of the technology
(2.3)-(2.4) augmented to include shocks:
θk,t+1

h
i 1
φs,k
φs,k
φs,k
φs,k
φs,k φs,k ηk,t+1
e
,
= γs,k,1 θC,t + γs,k,2 θN,t + γs,k,3 It + γs,k,4 θC,P + γs,k,5 θN,P

(4.1)

P
where γs,k,l ≥ 0 and 5l=1 γs,k,l = 1, k ∈ {C, N }, t ∈ {1, 2}, s ∈ {1, 2}. We assume that

2
the innovations are normally distributed: ηk,t ∼ N 0, δη,s
. We further assume that the ηk,t
are serially independent over all t and are independent of η`,t for k 6= `. We assume that
measurements Za,k,t,j proxy the natural logarithms of the factors. In the text, we report only
anchored results.30 For example, for a = 1,
Z1,k,t,j = µ1,k,t,j + α1,k,t,j ln θk,t + ε1,k,t,j
j ∈ {1, . . . , Ma,k,t }, t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, k ∈ {C, N }.
We use the factors (and not their logarithms) as arguments of the technology.31 This keeps
the latent factors non-negative, as is required for the definition of technology (4.1). Collect
the ε terms for period t into a vector εt . We assume that εt ∼ N (0, Λt ), where Λt is a
diagonal matrix. We impose the condition that εt is independent from εt0 for t 6= t0 and all
30

Web Appendix 11.1 compares anchored and unanchored results.
We use five regressors (X) for every measurement equation: a constant, the age of the child at the
assessment date, the child’s gender, a dummy variable if the mother was less than 20 years-old at the time
of the first birth, and a cohort dummy (one if the child was born after 1987 and zero otherwise).
31

23

ηk,t+1 . Define the tth row of θ as θtr where r stands for row. Thus
ln θtr = (ln θC,t , ln θN,t , ln It , ln θC,P , ln θN,P , ln π) .
Identification of this model follows as a consequence of Theorems 1 and 2 and results in
Matzkin (2003, 2007). We estimate the model under different assumptions about the distribution of the factors. Under the first specification, ln θtr is normally distributed with mean
zero and variance-covariance matrix Σt . Under the second specification, ln θtr is distributed
as a mixture of T normals. Let φ (x; µt,τ , Σt,τ ) denote the density of a normal random variable with mean µt,τ and variance-covariance matrix Σt,τ . The mixture of normals writes the
density of ln θtr as
T
X
r
ωτ φ (ln θtr ; µt,τ , Σt,τ )
p (ln θt ) =
τ =1

PT

PT

subject to: τ =1 ωτ = 1 and τ =1 ωτ µt,τ = 0.
Our anchored results allow us to compare the productivity of investments and stocks of
different skills at different stages of the life cycle on the anchored outcome. In this paper,
we mainly use completed years of education by age 19, a continuous variable, as an anchor.

4.2

Empirical Estimates

This section presents results from an extensive empirical analysis that estimates the multistage technology of skill formation accounting for measurement error, non-normality of the
factors, endogeneity of inputs and family investment decisions. The plan of this section is as
follows. We first present baseline two stage models that anchor outcomes in terms of their
effects on schooling attainment, that correct for measurement errors, and that assume that
the factors are normally distributed. These models do not account for endogeneity of inputs
through unobserved heterogeneity components or family investment decisions. The baseline
model is far more general than what is presented in previous research on the formation of
child skills that uses unanchored test scores as outcome measures and does not account for
measurement error.32
We present evidence on the first order empirical importance of measurement error. When
we do not correct for it, the estimated technology suggests that there is no effect of early
investment on outcomes. Controlling for endogeneity of family inputs by accounting for
unobserved heterogeneity (π), and accounting explicitly for family investment decisions has
substantial effects on estimated parameters.
32

An example is the analysis of Fryer and Levitt (2004).

24

The following empirical regularities emerge across all models that account for measurement error.33 Self productivity of skills is greater in the second stage than in the first stage.
Noncognitive skills are cross productive for cognitive skills in the first stage of production.
The cross productivity effect is weaker and less precisely determined in the second stage.
There is no evidence for a cross productivity effect of cognitive skills on noncognitive skills at
either stage. The estimated elasticity of substitution for inputs in cognitive skill is substantially lower in the second stage of a child’s life cycle than in the first stage. For noncognitive
skills, the elasticity in the second period is slightly higher for models that control for unobserved heterogeneity (π). These estimates suggest that it is easier to redress endowment
deficits that determine cognition in the first stage of a child’s life cycle than in the second
stage. For socioemotional (noncognitive) skills, the opposite is true. For cognitive skills,
the productivity parameter associated with parental investment (γ1,C,3 ) is greater in the first
stage than in the second stage (γ2,C,3 ). For noncognitive skills, the pattern of estimates
for the productivity parameter across models is less clear cut, but there are not dramatic
differences across the stages. For both outputs, the parameter associated with the effect of
parental noncognitive skills on output is smaller at the second stage than the first stage.
Web Appendix 11 discusses the sensitivity of estimates of a one-stage two-skill model
to alternative anchors and to allowing for nonnormality of the factors. For these and other
estimated models which are not reported, allowing for nonnormality has only minor effects
on the estimates. However, anchoring affects the estimates.34 To facilitate computation, we
use years of schooling attained as the anchor in all of the models reported in this section of
the paper.35
4.2.1

The Baseline Specification

Table 1 presents evidence on our baseline two stage model of skill formation. Outcomes are
anchored in years of schooling attained. Factors are assumed to be normally distributed
and we ignore heterogeneity (π). The estimates show that for both skills, self productivity
increases in the second stage. Noncognitive skills foster cognitive skills in the first stage but
not in the second stage. Cognitive skills have no cross-productivity effect on noncognitive
skills at either stage.36 The productivity parameter for investment is greater in the first
period than the second period for either skill. The difference across stages in the estimated
33

Estimated parameters are reported in Web Appendix 10.
Cunha and Heckman (2008) show the sensitivity of the estimates to alternative anchors for a linear
model specification.
35
The normalizations for the factors are presented in Web Appendix 10.
36
Zero values of coefficients in this and other tables arise from the optimizer attaining a boundary of zero
in the parameter space.
34

25

parameters is dramatic for cognitive skills. The variability in the shocks is greater in the
second period than in the first period. The elasticity of substitution for cognitive skills is
much greater in the first period than in the second period. However, the estimated elasticity
of substitution is about the same in both stages of production.
For cognitive skill production, the parental cognitive skill parameter is about the same in
both stages. The opposite is true for parental noncognitive skills. In producing noncognitive
skills, parental cognitive skills play no role in the second stage. Parental noncognitive skills
play a strong role in stage 1 and a weaker role in stage 2.
4.2.2

The Empirical Importance of Measurement Error

Using our estimated factor model, we can investigate the extent of measurement error on
each measure of skill and investment in our data. To simplify the notation, we keep the
conditioning on the regressors implicit and, without loss of generality, consider the measurements on cognitive skills in period t. For linear measurement systems, the variance can be
decomposed as follows:
2
V ar (Z1,C,t,j ) = α1,C,t,j
V ar (ln θC,t ) + V ar (ε1,C,t,j ) .

The fractions of the variance of Z1,C,t,j due to measurement error, sε1,C,t,j , and true signal,
sθ1,C,t,j are, respectively,
sε1,C,t,j =

2
α1,C,t,j
V

V ar (ε1,C,t,j )
(noise)
ar (ln θC,t ) + V ar (ε1,C,t,j )

and
sθ1,C,t,j =

2
α1,C,t,j
V ar (ln θC,t )
(signal).
2
α1,C,t,j V ar (ln θC,t ) + V ar (ε1,C,t,j )

For each measure of skill and investment used in the estimation, we construct sε1,C,t,j and
sθ1,C,t,j which are reported in Table 2A. Note that the early proxies tend to have a higher
fraction of observed variance due to measurement error. For example, the measure that
contains the lowest true signal ratio is the MSD (Motor and Social Developments Score) at
year of birth, in which less than 5% of the observed variance is signal. The proxy with the
highest signal ratio is the PIAT Reading Recognition Scores at ages 5-6, for which almost
96% of the observed variance is due to the variance of the true signal. Overall, about 54%
of the observed variance is associated with the cognitive skill factors θC,t .
Table 2A also shows the same ratios for measures of childhood noncognitive skills. The
26

measures of noncognitive skills tend to be lower in informational content than their cognitive
counterparts. Overall, less than 40% of the observed variance is due to the variance associated
with the factors for noncognitive skills. The poorest measure for noncognitive skills is the
“Sociability” measure at ages 3-4, in which less than 1% of the observed variance is signal.
The richest is the “BPI Headstrong” score, in which almost 62% of the observed variance is
due to the variance of the signal.
Table 2A also presents the signal-noise ratio of measures of parental cognitive and noncognitive skills. Overall, measures of maternal cognitive skills tend to have a higher information
content than measures of noncognitive skills. While the poorest measurement on cognitive
skills has a signal ratio of almost 35%, the richest measurements on noncognitive skills are
slightly above 40%.
Analogous estimates of signal and noise for our investment measures are reported in
Table 2B. Investment measures are much noisier than either measure of skill. The measures
for investments at earlier stages tend to be noisier than the measures at later stages. It is
interesting to note that the measure “Number of Books” has a high signal-noise ratio at
early years, but not in later years. At earlier years, the measure “How Often Mom Reads to
the Child” has about the same informational content as “Number of Books.” In later years,
measures such as “How Often Child Goes to the Museum” and “How Often Child Goes to
Musical Shows” have higher signal-noise ratios.
These estimates suggest that it is likely to be empirically important to control for measurement error in estimating technologies of skill formation. A general pattern is that at early
ages compared to later ages, measures of skill tend to be riddled with measurement error,
while the reverse pattern is true for the measurement errors for the proxies for investment.
4.2.3

The Effect of Ignoring Measurement Error on the Estimated Technology

We now demonstrate the impact of neglecting measurement error on estimates of the technology. To make the most convincing case for the importance of measurement error, we use
the least error prone proxies as determined in our estimates of Table 2.37 We continue to
assume no heterogeneity.
Not accounting for measurement error has substantial effects on the estimated technology.
37
At birth we use Cognitive Skill: weight at birth, Noncognitive Skill: Temperament/Difficulty Scale,
Parental Investment: Number of books. At ages 1–2 we use Cognitive Skill: Body Parts, Noncognitive Skill:
Temperament/Difficulty Scale, Parental Investment: Number of books. At ages 3–4 we use Cognitive Skill:
PPVT, Noncognitive Skill: BPI Headstrong, Parental Investment: How often mother reads to the child. At
ages 5–6 to ages 13–14 we use Cognitive Skill: Reading Recognition, Noncognitive Skill: BPI Headstrong,
Parental Investment: How often child is taken to musical performances. Maternal Skills are time invariant:
For Maternal Cognitive Skill: ASVAB Arithmetic Reasoning, For Maternal Noncognitive Skill: Self-Esteem
Item: I am a failure.

27

Comparing the estimates in Table 3 with those in Table 1, the estimated first stage investment
effects are much less precisely estimated in a model that ignores measurement errors than
in a model that corrects for them. In the second stage, the estimated investment effects are
generally stronger. Unlike all of the specifications that control for measurement error, we
estimate strong cross productivity effects of cognitive skills on noncognitive skill production.
As in Table 1, there are cross productivity effects of noncognitive skills on cognitive skills
at both stages although the estimated productivity parameters are somewhat smaller. The
estimated elasticities of substitution for cognitive skills at both stages are comparable across
the two specifications. The elasticities of substitution for noncognitive skills are substantially
lower at both stages in the specification that does not control for measurement error. The
error variances of the shocks are substantially larger. Parental cognitive skills are estimated
to have substantial effects on childhood cognitive skills but not their noncognitive skills.
This contrasts with the estimates reported in Table 1 that show strong effects of parental
noncognitive skills on childhood cognitive skills in both stages, and on noncognitive skills in
the first stage.
4.2.4

Controlling for Time-Invariant Unobserved Heterogeneity in the Estimated Technology

We next consider the effect of controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in the model, with
estimates reported in Table 1. We follow the method discussed in Section 3.6.1. Doing so
allows for endogeneity of the inputs. We break the error term for the technology into two
parts: a time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity factor π that is correlated with the vector
(θt , It , θP ) and an i.i.d. error term νk,t that is assumed to be uncorrelated with all other
variables.
Table 4 shows that correcting for heterogeneity, the estimated coefficients for parental
investments have a greater impact on cognitive skills at the first stage. The coefficient on
parental investment in the first stage is γ1,C,3 ∼
= 0.16, while in the second stage γ2,C,3 ∼
= 0.04.
1
∼
The elasticity of substitution in the first stage is well above one, σ1,C = 1−0.31 = 1.45,
1
∼
and in the second stage it is well below one, σ2,C ∼
= 0.44. These estimates are
= 1+1.24
statistically significantly different from each other and from the estimates of the elasticities
of substitution σ1,N and σ2,N .38 These results suggest that early investments are important
in producing cognitive skills. Consistent with the estimates reported in Table 1, noncognitive
skills increase cognitive skills in the first stage, but not in the second stage. Parental cognitive
and noncognitive skills affect the accumulation of childhood cognitive skills.
38

See Table 10-5 in Web Appendix 10.

28

Panel B of Table 4 presents estimates of the technology of noncognitive skills. Note that,
contrary to the estimates reported for the technology for cognitive skills, the elasticity of
substitution increases slightly from the first stage to the second stage. For the early stage,
σ1,N ∼
= 0.62 while for the late stage, σ2,N ∼
= 0.65. The elasticity is about 50% higher for
investments in noncognitive skills for the late stage in comparison to the elasticity for investments in cognitive skills. The estimates of σ1,N and σ2,N are not statistically significantly
different from each other, however.39 The impact of parental investments is about the same
at early and late stages (γ1,N,3 ∼
= 0.06 vs. γ2,N,3 ∼
= 0.05). Parental noncognitive skills affect
the accumulation of a child’s noncognitive skills both in early and late periods, but parental
cognitive skills have no effect on noncognitive skills at either stage. The estimates in Table 4 show a strong effect of parental cognitive skills at both stages of the production of
noncognitive skills.
4.2.5

A More General Approach to Solving the Problem of the Endogeneity of
Inputs

This section relaxes the invariant heterogeneity assumption and reports empirical results
from a more general model of time-varying heterogeneity. Our approach to estimation is
motivated by the general analysis of Section 3.6.2, but, in the interest of computational
tractability, we make parametric and distributional assumptions.
We augment the measurement system (3.1)–(3.3) by investment equation (3.11), which
is motivated by economic theory. Our investment equation is
It = kC θC,t + kN θN,t + kC,P θC,P + kN,P θN,P + ky yt + πt .40

(4.2)

We substitute (4.2) into equations (3.2) and (3.10). We specify the income process as
ln yt = ρy ln yt−1 + νy,t ,

(4.3)

and the equation of motion for πt as
πt = ρπ πt−1 + νπ,t .

(4.4)

We assume that νy,t ⊥⊥ (θt0 , νy,t0 ) for all t0 6= t and νy,t ⊥
⊥ (yt0 , νk,t , θP ), t > t0 , k ∈ {C, N },
where “⊥
⊥” means independence. We further assume that νπ,t ⊥
⊥ (θt0 , θp , νk,t0 ) and that
39
40

See Table 10-5 in Web Appendix 10.
The intercept of the equation is absorbed into the intercept of the measurement equation.

29


(θ1 , y1 ) ⊥
⊥ π.41 In addition, νy,t ∼ N 0, σy2 and νπ,t ∼ N (0, σπ2 ). In Web Appendix 8, we
report favorable results from a Monte Carlo study of the estimator based on these assumptions.
Table 5 reports estimates of this model.42 Allowing for time-varying heterogeneity does
not greatly affect the estimates from the model that assumes fixed heterogeneity reported
in Table 4. In the results that we describe below, we allow the innovation πt to follow
an AR(1) process and estimate the investment equation qk,t along with all of the other
parameters estimated in the model reported in Table 4.43 Estimates of the parameters of
equation (4.2) are presented in Web Appendix 10. We also report estimates of the anchoring
equation and other outcome equations in that appendix.44 When we introduce an equation
for investment, the impact of early investments on the production of cognitive skill increases
from γ1,C,3 ∼
= 0.17 (see Table 4, Panel A) to γ1,C,3 ∼
= 0.26 (see Table 5, Panel A). At the
same time, the estimated first stage elasticity of substitution for cognitive skills increases
from σ1,C = 1−φ11,C ∼
= 1.5 to σ1,C = 1−φ11,C ∼
= 2.4. Note that for this specification the
impact of late investments in producing cognitive skills remains largely unchanged at γ2,C,3
∼
= 0.045 (compare Table 4, Panel A with Table 5, Panel A). The estimate of the elasticity of
substitution for cognitive skill technology is about the same as σ2,C = 1−φ12,C ∼
= 0.44 (Table
4, Panel A) and σ2,C = 1−φ12,C ∼
= 0.45 (see Table 5, Panel A).
We obtain comparable changes in our estimates of the technology for producing noncognitive skills. The estimated impact of early investments increases from γ1,N,3 ∼
= 0.065 (see
∼
Table 4, Panel B) to γ1,N,3 = 0.209 (in Table 5, Panel B). The elasticity of substitution
for noncognitive skills in the early period rises, changing from σ1,N = 1−φ11,N ∼
= 0.62 to
1
∼
σ1,N = 1−φ1,N = 0.68 (in Table 5, Panel B). The estimated share parameter for late investments in producing noncognitive skills increases from γ2,N,3 ∼
= 0.05 to γ2,N,3 ∼
= 0.10. Compare
Table 4, Panel B with Table 5, Panel B. When we include an equation for investments, the
estimated elasticity of substitution for noncognitive skills slightly increases at the later stage,
from σ2,N = 1−φ12,N ∼
= 0.645 (in Table 4, Panel B) to σ2,N = 1−φ12,N ∼
= 0.66 (in Table 5, Panel
B), but this difference is not statistically significant. Thus, the estimated elasticities of substitution from the more general procedure show roughly the same pattern as those obtained
from the procedure that assumes time-invariant heterogeneity.45
41

This assumption enables us to identify the parameters of equation (4.2).
Table 10-6 in Web Appendix 10 reports estimates of the parameters of the investment equation (4.2).
43
We model q as time invariant, linear and separable in its arguments, although this is not a necessary
assumption in our identification, but certainly helps to save on computation time and to obtain tighter
standard errors for the policy function and the production function parameters. Notice that under our
assumption IC,t = IN,t = It , and time invariance of the investment function, it follows that qk,t = qt = q for
all t.
44
We also report the covariance matrix for the initial conditions of the model in the appendix.
45
We cannot reject the null hypothesis that σ1,N = σ2,N but we reject the null hypothesis that σ1,C = σ2,C
42

30

The general pattern of decreasing substitution possibilities across stages for cognitive
skills and roughly constant or slightly increasing substitution possibilities for noncognitive
skills is consistent with the literature on the evolution of cognitive and personality traits
(see Borghans et al., 2008; Shiner, 1998; Shiner and Caspi, 2003). Cognitive skills stabilize
early in the life cycle and are difficult to change later on. Noncognitive traits flourish, i.e.,
more traits are exhibited at later ages of childhood, and there are more possibilities (more
margins to invest in) for compensation of disadvantage. For a more extensive discussion, see
Web Appendix 1.2.
4.2.6

A Model Based Only on Cognitive Skills

Most of the empirical literature on skill production focuses on cognitive skills as the output
of family investment (see, e.g., Todd and Wolpin, 2005, 2007, and the references they cite).
It is of interest to estimate a more traditional model that ignores noncognitive skills and the
synergism between cognitive and noncognitive skills and between investment and noncognitive skills in production. Web Appendix Table 14.1 reports estimates of a version of the
model in Table 4, based on a model with time-invariant heterogeneity, where noncognitive
skills are excluded from the analysis.
The estimated self-productivity effect increases from the first stage to the second stage, as
occurs with the estimates found for all other specifications estimated in this paper. However,
the estimated first period elasticity of substitution is much smaller than the corresponding
parameter in Table 4. The estimated second period elasticity is slightly higher. The estimated productivity parameters for investment are substantially higher in both stages of
the model reported in Web Appendix Table 14.1, as are the productivity parameters for
parental cognitive skills. We note in the next section that the policy implications from a
cognitive-skill-only model are very different from the policy implications for a model with
cognitive and noncognitive skills.

4.3

Interpreting the Estimates

The major findings from our analysis of models with two skills that control for measurement error and endogeneity of inputs are: (a) Self-productivity becomes stronger as children
become older, for both cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. (b) Complementarity
between cognitive skills and investment becomes stronger as children become older. The
elasticity of substitution for cognition is smaller in second stage production. It is more difficult to compensate for the effects of adverse environments on cognitive endowments at later
and that the elasticities of different skills are equal. See Table 10-7 in Web Appendix 10.

31

ages than it is at earlier ages.46 This pattern of the estimates helps to explain the evidence on
ineffective cognitive remediation strategies for disadvantaged adolescents reported in Cunha,
Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006). (c) Complementarity between noncognitive skills
and investments becomes slightly weaker as children become older, but the estimated effects
are not that different across stages of the life cycle. The elasticity of substitution between
investment and current endowments increases slightly between the first stage and the second stage in the production of noncognitive skills. It is somewhat easier at later stages of
childhood to remediate early disadvantage using investments in noncognitive skills.
Using the estimates present in Table 4, we find that 34% of the variation in educational
attainment in the sample is explained by the measures of cognitive and noncognitive capabilities that we use. 16% is due to adolescent cognitive capabilities. 12% is due to adolescent
noncognitive capabilities.47 Measured parental investments account for 15% of the variation in educational attainment. These estimates suggest that the measures of cognitive and
noncognitive capabilities that we use are powerful, but not exclusive, determinants of educational attainment and that other factors, besides the measures of family investment that
we use, are at work in explaining variation in educational attainment.
To examine the implications of these estimates, we analyze a standard social planning
problem that can be solved solely from knowledge of the technology of skill formation and
without knowledge of parental preferences and parental access to lending markets. We
determine optimal allocations of investments from a fixed budget to maximize aggregate
schooling for a cohort of children. We also consider a second social planning problem that
minimizes aggregate crime. Our analysis assumes that the state has full control over family
investment decisions. We do not model parental investment responses to the policy. These
simulations produce a measure of the investment that is needed from whatever source to
achieve the specified target.
Suppose that there are H children indexed by h ∈ {1, . . . , H}. Let (θC,1,h , θN,1,h ) denote the initial cognitive and noncognitive skills of child h. She has parents with cognitive
and noncognitive skills denoted by θC,P,h and θN,P,h , respectively. Let πh denote additional
unobserved determinants of outcomes. Denote θ1,h = (θC,1,h , θN,1,h , θC,P,h , θN,P,h , πh ) and let
F (θ1,h ) denote its distribution. We draw H people from the estimated initial distribution
F (θ1,h ). We use the estimates reported in Table 4 in this simulation. The key substitution
parameters are basically the same in this model and the more general model with estimates
reported in Table 5.48 The price of investment is assumed to be the same in each period.
46

This is true even in a model that omits noncognitive skills.
The skills are correlated so the marginal contributions of each skill do not add up to 34%. The decomposition used to produce these estimates is discussed in Web Appendix 12.
48
Simulation from the model of Section 3.6.2 (with estimates reported in Section 4.2.5) that has time47

32

The social planner maximizes aggregate human capital subject to a budget constraint
B = 2H, so that the per capita budget is 2 units of investment. We draw H children from
the initial distribution F (θ1,h ), and solve the problem of how to allocate finite resources 2H
to maximize the average education of the cohort. Formally, the social planner maximizes
aggregate schooling
H
1 X
S (θC,3,h , θN,3,h , πh ) ,
max S̄ =
H h=1
subject to the aggregate budget constraint,
H
X

(I1,h + I2,h ) = 2H,

(4.5)

h=1

the technology constraint,
θk,t+1,h = fk,t (θC,t,h , θN,t,h , θC,P,h , θN,P,h , πh ) for k ∈ {C, N } and t ∈ {1, 2},
and the initial endowments of the child and her family. We assume no discounting. Solving
this problem, we obtain optimal early and late investments, I1,h and I2,h , respectively, for
each child h. An analogous social planning problem is used to minimize crime.
Figures 2 (for the child’s personal endowments) and 3 (for maternal endowments) show
the profiles of early (left-hand side graph) and late (right-hand side graph) investment as
a function of child and maternal endowments (lighter shading corresponds to higher values
of investment). Endowments are measured in units of standard deviations from the means.
In each figure, the endowments not plotted are fixed at sample mean values. The optimal
policy is to invest relatively more in the disadvantaged compared to the advantaged in the
early years. Moon (2010) shows that, in actuality, society and family together invest much
more in the early years of the advantaged compared to the disadvantaged. The decline in
investment by level of advantage is dramatic for early investment. Second period investment
profiles are much flatter and slightly favor relatively more investment in more advantaged
children. A similar profile emerges for investments to reduce aggregate crime, which for the
sake of brevity, we do not display.
Figures 4 and 5 reveal that the ratio of optimal early-to-late investment as a function of
the child’s personal endowments declines with advantage whether the social planner seeks to
maximize educational attainment (left hand side) or to minimize aggregate crime (right hand
side). A somewhat similar pattern emerges for the optimal ratio of early-to-late investment
varying child quality is considerably more complicated because of the high dimensionality of the state space.
We leave this for another occasion.

33

as a function of maternal endowments with one interesting twist. The optimal investment
ratio is non-monotonic in the mother’s cognitive skill for each level of her noncognitive skills.
At very low or very high levels of maternal cognitive skills, it is better to invest relatively
more in the second period than if the mother’s cognitive endowment is at the mean.
The optimal ratio of early-to-late investment depends on the desired outcome, the endowments of children and the budget. Figure 6 plots the density of the optimal ratio of
early-to-late investment for education and crime.49 For both outcomes and for most initial
endowments, it is optimal to invest relatively more in the first stage. Crime is more intensive
in noncognitive skills than educational attainment, which depends much more strongly on
cognitive skills. Because compensation for adversity in cognitive skills is much more costly
in the second stage than in the first stage, it is efficient to invest relatively more in cognitive
traits in the first stage relative to the second stage to promote education. Because crime is
more intensive in noncognitive skills and for such skills the increase in second stage compensation costs is less steep, the optimal policy for preventing crime is relatively less intensive
in first stage investment.
These simulations suggest that the timing and level of optimal interventions for disadvantaged children depend on the conditions of disadvantage and the nature of desired
outcomes. Targeted strategies are likely to be effective especially for different targets that
weight cognitive and noncognitive traits differently.50
4.3.1

Some Economic Intuition that Explains the Simulation Results

This subsection provides an intuition for the simulation results just discussed. Given the
(weak) complementarity implicit in technology (2.3) and (2.4), how is it possible to obtain our
result that it is optimal to invest relatively more in the early years of the most disadvantaged?
The answer hinges on the interaction between different measures of disadvantage.
Consider the following example where individuals have a single capability, θ. Suppose
that there are two children, A and B, born with initial skills θ1A and θ1B , respectively. Let θPA
and θPB denote the skills of the parents A and B, respectively. Suppose that there are two
periods for investment, which we denote by periods 1 (early) and 2 (late). For each period,
there is a different technology that produces skills. Assume that the technology for period
49
The optimal policy is not identical for each h and depends on θ1,h , which varies in the population. The
education outcome is the number of years of schooling attainment. The crime outcome is whether or not the
individual has been on probation. Estimates of the coefficients of the outcome equations including those for
crime are reported in Web Appendix 10.
50
Web Appendix 13 presents additional simulations of the model for an extreme egalitarian criterion that
equalizes educational attainment across all children. We reach the same qualitative conclusions about the
optimality of differentially greater investment in the early years for disadvantaged children.

34

one is:
θ2 = γ1 θ1 + γ2 I1 + (1 − γ1 − γ2 ) θP .
For period two it is:
θ3 = min {θ2 , I2 , θP } .
These patterns of complementarity are polar cases that represent, in extreme form, the
empirical pattern found for cognitive skill accumulation: that substitution possibilities are
greater early in life compared to later in life.
The problem of society is to choose how much to invest in child A and child B in periods
1 and 2 to maximize total aggregate skills, θ3A + θ3B , subject to the resource constraint
I1A + I2A + I1B + I2B ≤ M , where M is total resources available for investment. Formally, the
problem is
"
max

#

min γ1 θ1A + γ2 I1A + (1 − γ1 − γ2 ) θPA , I2A , θPA +

min γ1 θ1B + γ2 I1B + (1 − γ1 − γ2 ) θPB , I2B , θPB
subject to: I1A + I2A + I1B + I2B ≤ M

(4.6)

When the resource constraint in (4.6) does not bind, which it does not if M is above a
certain threshold (determined by θP ), optimal investments are
I1A =

(γ1 + γ2 ) θPA − γ1 θ1A
γ2

I1B =

I2A = θPA

(θ1A

(γ1 + γ2 ) θPB − γ1 θ1B
γ2

I2B = θPB

Notice that if child A is disadvantaged compared to B on both measures of disadvantage,
< θ1B and θPA < θPB ), it can happen that
I1A > I1B , but I2A < I2B

if
θPA − θPB >


γ1
θ1A − θ1B .
γ1 + γ2

Thus, if parental endowment differences are less negative than child endowment differences
1
(scaled by γ1γ+γ
), it is optimal to invest more in the early years for the disadvantaged and
2
less in the later years. Notice that since (1 − γ1 − γ2 ) = γP is the productivity parameter on
γ1
θP in the first period technology, we can rewrite this condition as (θPA − θPB ) > 1−γ
(θ1A − θ1B ).
P
The higher the self-productivity (γ1 ) and the higher the parental environment productivity,
γP , the more likely will this inequality be satisfied for any fixed level of disparity.
35

4.4

Implications of a One Cognitive Skill Model

Web Appendix 14.1 considers the policy implications of the social planner’s problem from
our estimates of a model formulated solely in terms of cognitive skills. This is the traditional
focus in the analysis of educational production functions. (See, e.g., Todd and Wolpin, 2003,
2007 and Hanushek and Woessmann, 2008.) The optimal policy is to invest relatively more
in the early years of the initially advantaged. Our estimates of two-stage and one-stage
models based solely on cognitive skills would indicate that it is optimal to perpetuate initial
inequality, and not to invest relatively more in disadvantaged young children.

5

Conclusion

This paper formulates and estimates a multistage model of the evolution of children’s cognitive and noncognitive skills as determined by parental investments at different stages of
the life cycle of children. We estimate the elasticity of substitution between contemporaneous investment and stocks of skills inherited from previous periods and determine the
substitutability between early and late investments. We also determine the quantitative importance of early endowments and later investments in determining schooling attainment.
We account for the proxy nature of the measures of parental inputs and of outputs and
find evidence for substantial measurement error which, if not accounted for, leads to badly
distorted characterizations of the technology of skill formation. We establish nonparametric
identification of a wide class of nonlinear factor models which enables us to determine the
technology of skill formation. We present an analysis of the identification of production technologies with endogenous missing inputs that is more general than the replacement function
analysis of Olley and Pakes (1996) and allows for measurement error in the proxy variables.51
A by-product of our approach is a framework for the evaluation of childhood interventions
that avoids reliance on arbitrarily scaled test scores. We develop a nonparametric approach
to this problem by anchoring test scores in adult outcomes with interpretable scales.
Using measures of parental investment and children’s outcomes from the Children of the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, we estimate the parameters governing the substitutability between early and late investments in cognitive and noncognitive skills. In our
preferred empirical specification, we find much less evidence of malleability and substitutability for cognitive skills in later stages of a child’s life cycle, while malleability for noncognitive
skills is about the same at both stages. These estimates are consistent with the evidence
reported in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006).
51

See Heckman and Robb (1985), Heckman and Vytlacil (2007) and Matzkin (2007) for a discussion of
replacement functions.

36

These estimates imply that successful adolescent remediation strategies for disadvantaged
children should focus on fostering noncognitive skills. Investments in the early years are
important for the formation of adult cognitive skills. Furthermore, policy simulations from
the model suggest that there is no tradeoff between equity and efficiency. The optimal
investment strategy to maximize aggregate schooling attainment or to minimize aggregate
crime is to target the most disadvantaged at younger ages.
Accounting for both cognitive and noncognitive skills makes a difference. An empirical
model that ignores the impact of noncognitive skills on productivity and outcomes yields the
opposite conclusion that an economically efficient policy that maximizes aggregate schooling
would perpetuate initial advantages.

37

References
Amemiya, Y. and I. Yalcin (2001). Nonlinear factor analysis as a statistical method. Statistical Science 16 (3), 275–294.
Anderson, T. and H. Rubin (1956). Statistical inference in factor analysis. In J. Neyman
(Ed.), Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 5, pp. 111–150. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1986, July). Human capital and the rise and fall of families.
Journal of Labor Economics 4 (3, Part 2), S1–S39.
Ben-Porath, Y. (1967, August). The production of human capital and the life cycle of
earnings. Journal of Political Economy 75 (4, Part 1), 352–365.
Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2008, Fall). The economics
and psychology of personality traits. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 972–1059.
Carneiro, P., K. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003, May). Estimating distributions of treatment effects with an application to the returns to schooling and measurement of the effects
of uncertainty on college choice. International Economic Review 44 (2), 361–422.
Cawley, J., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (1999, November). On policies to reward the
value added by educators. Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (4), 720–727.
Cawley, J., J. J. Heckman, and E. J. Vytlacil (2001, September). Three observations on
wages and measured cognitive ability. Labour Economics 8 (4), 419–442.
Center for Human Resource Research (Ed.) (2004). NLSY79 Child and Young Adult Data
User’s Guide. Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
Chernozhukov, V., G. W. Imbens, and W. K. Newey (2007, July). Nonparametric identification and estimation of non-separable models. Journal of Econometrics 139 (1), 1–3.
Coleman, J. S. (1966). Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S. Dept.
of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. American
Economic Review 97 (2), 31–47.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008, Fall). Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4),
738–782.
38

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2009, April). The economics and psychology of inequality
and human development. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2-3), 320–364.
Presented as the Marshall Lecture, European Economics Association, Milan, Italy, August
29, 2008.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the
evidence on life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook
of the Economics of Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Darolles, S., J.-P. Florens, and E. Renault (2002). Nonparametric instrumental regression.
Working Paper 05-2002, Centre interuniversitaire de recherche en économie quantitative,
CIREQ.
d’Haultfoeuille, X. (2006). On the completeness condition in nonparametric instrumental
problems. Working Paper, ENSAE, CREST-INSEE and Université de Paris I.
Durbin, J., A. C. Harvey, S. J. Koopman, and N. Shephard (2004). State Space and Unobserved Component Models: Theory and Applications: Proceedings of a Conference in
Honour of James Durbin. New York NY: Cambridge University Press.
Fryer, R. and S. Levitt (2004, May). Understanding the black-white test score gap in the
first two years of school. Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2), 447–464.
Hanushek, E. and L. Woessmann (2008, September). The role of cognitive skills in economic
development. Journal of Economic Literature 46 (3), 607–668.
Heckman, J. J. (2008, July). Schools, skills and synapses. Economic Inquiry 46 (3), 289–324.
Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998, January). Explaining rising wage
inequality: Explorations with a dynamic general equilibrium model of labor earnings with
heterogeneous agents. Review of Economic Dynamics 1 (1), 1–58.
Heckman, J. J., L. Malofeeva, R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2010). Understanding the
mechanisms through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010a, February). The rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public
Economics 94 (1-2), 114–128.

39

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010b). A reanalysis
of the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. First draft, September, 2006. Forthcoming,
Quantitative Economics.
Heckman, J. J. and R. Robb (1985). Alternative methods for evaluating the impact of
interventions. In J. Heckman and B. Singer (Eds.), Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market
Data, Volume 10, pp. 156–245. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzua (2006, July). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3), 411–482.
Heckman, J. J. and E. J. Vytlacil (2007). Econometric evaluation of social programs, part
II: Using the marginal treatment effect to organize alternative economic estimators to
evaluate social programs and to forecast their effects in new environments. In J. Heckman
and E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6B, pp. 4875–5144. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Herrnstein, R. J. and C. A. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure
in American Life. New York: Free Press.
Hu, Y. and S. M. Schennach (2008, January). Instrumental variable treatment of nonclassical
measurement error models. Econometrica 76 (1), 195–216.
Kniesner, T. J. and B. ter Weel (2008, Fall). Special issue on noncognitive skills and their
development. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 729–1059.
Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff (2006, July). Economic,
neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155–10162.
Levitt, P. (2003, October). Structural and functional maturation of the developing primate
brain. Journal of Pediatrics 143 (4, Supplement), S35–S45.
Mattner, L. (1993, December). Some incomplete but boundedly complete location families.
Annals of Statistics 21 (4), 2158–2162.
Matzkin, R. L. (2003, September). Nonparametric estimation of nonadditive random functions. Econometrica 71 (5), 1339–1375.
Matzkin, R. L. (2007). Nonparametric identification. In J. Heckman and E. Leamer (Eds.),
Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6B. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
40

Moon, S. H. (2010). Multi-dimensional human skill formation with multi-dimensional
parental investment. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Murnane, R. J., J. B. Willett, and F. Levy (1995, May). The growing importance of cognitive
skills in wage determination. Review of Economics and Statistics 77 (2), 251–266.
Newey, W. K. and J. L. Powell (2003, September). Instrumental variable estimation of
nonparametric models. Econometrica 71 (5), 1565–1578.
Olds, D. L. (2002, September). Prenatal and infancy home visiting by nurses: From randomized trials to community replication. Prevention Science 3 (2), 153–172.
Olley, G. S. and A. Pakes (1996, November). The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry. Econometrica 64 (6), 1263–1297.
Reynolds, A. J. and J. A. Temple (2009). Economic returns of investments in preschool
education. In E. Zigler, W. Gilliam, and S. Jones (Eds.), A Vision For Universal Preschool
Education, pp. 37–68. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schennach, S. M. (2004a, January). Estimation of nonlinear models with measurement error.
Econometrica 72 (1), 33–75.
Schennach, S. M. (2004b). Nonparametric estimation in the presence of measurement error.
Econometric Theory 20, 1046–1093.
Shiner, R. and A. Caspi (2003, January). Personality differences in childhood and adolescence: Measurement, development, and consequences. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry 44 (1), 2–32.
Shiner, R. L. (1998, November). How shall we speak of children’s personalities in middle
childhood? A preliminary taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin 124 (3), 308–332.
Shumway, R. H. and D. S. Stoffer (1982, May). An approach to time series smoothing and
forecasting using the em algorithm. Journal of Time Series Analysis 3 (3), 253–264.
Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin (2003, February). On the specification and estimation of the
production function for cognitive achievement. Economic Journal 113 (485), F3–33.
Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin (2005). The production of cognitive achievement in children:
Home, school and racial test score gaps. Working paper, Penn Institute for Economic
Research, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
41

Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin (2007, Winter). The production of cognitive achievement
in children: Home, school, and racial test score gaps. Journal of Human Capital 1 (1),
91–136.
Watson, M. W. and R. F. Engle (1983, December). Alternative algorithms for the estimation of dynamic factor, mimic and varying coefficient regression models. Journal of
Econometrics 23 (3), 385–400.

42

Table 1
Using the Factor Model to Correct for Measurement Error
Linear Anchoring on Educational Attainment (Years of Schooling)
No Unobserved Heterogeneity (π), Factors Normally Distributed
The Technology of Cognitive Skill Formation
First Stage
Parameters
Current Period Cognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,C,1

0.487

Second Stage
Parameters

γ2,C,1

(0.030)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,C,2

0.083

(0.014)

γ2,C,2

(0.026)

γ1,C,3

Current Period Investments

0.231

γ1,C,4

0.050

γ2,C,3

γ1,C,5

0.148

γ2,C,4

φ1,C

0.611

γ2,C,5

Variance of Shocks ηc,t

0.020
(0.010)

φ2,C

(0.240)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution

0.047
(0.008)

(0.030)

Complementarity Parameter

0.020
(0.006)

(0.013)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

0.011
(0.005)

(0.024)

Parental Cognitive Skills

0.902

-1.373
(0.168)

1/(1−φ1,C)

2.569

1/(1−φ2,C)

0.421

δ21,C

0.165

δ22,C

0.097

(0.007)

(0.003)

The Technology of Noncognitive Skill Formation

Current Period Cognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,N,1

First Stage
Parameters
0.000

γ2,N,1

(0.025)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,N,2

0.649

0.010

γ2,N,2

(0.034)

Current Period Investments

γ1,N,3

0.146

γ1,N,4

0.022

γ2,N,3

γ1,N,5

0.183

γ2,N,4

φ1,N

-0.674

γ2,N,5

Variance of Shocks ηn,t

1/(1−φ1,N)
2

δ

1,N

0.597
0.189
(0.012)

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis

0.069
0.017

φ2,N

(0.324)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution

0.000
0.007

(0.031)

Complementarity Parameter

0.055
0.013

(0.011)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

0.868
0.011

(0.027)

Parental Cognitive Skills

Second Stage
Parameters
0.008

-0.695
0.274

1/(1−φ2,N)
2

δ

2,N

0.590
0.103
0.004

Table 2A
Percentage of Total Variance in Measurements due to Signal and Noise
Measurement of Child's Cognitive Skills

%Signal

%Noise

Gestation Length

0.501

0.499

Weight at Birth

0.557

Motor-Social Development at Birth

0.045

Motor-Social Development at Ages 1-2

0.275

Measurement of Child's Noncognitive Skills

%Signal

%Noise

Difficulty at Birth

0.151

0.849

0.443

Friendliness at Birth

0.165

0.835

0.955

Compliance at Ages 1-2

0.232

0.768

0.725

Insecure at Ages 1-2

0.080

0.920

Body Parts at Ages 1-2

0.308

0.692

Sociability at Ages 1-2

0.075

0.925

Memory for Locations at Ages 1-2

0.160

0.840

Difficulty at Ages 1-2

0.382

0.618

Motor-Social Development at Ages 3-4

0.410

0.590

Friendliness at Ages 1-2

0.189

0.811

Picture Vocabulary at Ages 3-4

0.431

0.569

Compliance at Ages 3-4

0.133

0.867

Picture Vocabulary at Ages 5-6

0.225

0.775

Insecure at Ages 3-4

0.122

0.878

PIAT-Mathematics at Ages 5-6

0.314

0.686

Sociability at Ages 3-4

0.008

0.992

PIAT-Reading Recognition at Ages 5-6

0.958

0.042

Behavior Problem Index Antisocial at Ages 3-4

0.405

0.595

PIAT-Reading Comprehension at Ages 5-6

0.938

0.062

Behavior Problem Index Anxiety at Ages 3-4

0.427

0.573

PIAT-Mathematics at Ages 7-8

0.465

0.535

Behavior Problem Index Headstrong at Ages 3-4

0.518

0.482

PIAT-Reading Recognition at Ages 7-8

0.869

0.131

Behavior Problem Index Hyperactive at Ages 3-4

0.358

0.642

PIAT-Reading Comprehension at Ages 7-8

0.797

0.203

Behavior Problem Index Conflict at Ages 3-4

0.336

0.664

PIAT-Mathematics at Ages 9-10

0.492

0.508

Behavior Problem Index Antisocial at Ages 5-6

0.435

0.565

PIAT-Reading Recognition at Ages 9-10

0.817

0.183

Behavior Problem Index Anxiety at Ages 5-6

0.409

0.591

PIAT-Reading Comprehension at Ages 9-10

0.666

0.334

Behavior Problem Index Headstrong at Ages 5-6

0.611

0.389

PIAT-Mathematics at Ages 11-12

0.516

0.484

Behavior Problem Index Hyperactive at Ages 5-6

0.481

0.519

PIAT-Reading Recognition at Ages 11-12

0.781

0.219

Behavior Problem Index Conflict at Ages 5-6

0.290

0.710

PIAT-Reading Comprehension at Ages 11-12

0.614

0.386

Behavior Problem Index Antisocial Ages 7-8

0.446

0.554

PIAT-Mathematics at Ages 13-14

0.537

0.463

Behavior Problem Index Anxiety Ages 7-8

0.475

0.525

PIAT-Reading Recognition at Ages 13-14

0.735

0.265

Behavior Problem Index Headstrong Ages 7-8

0.605

0.395

PIAT-Reading Comprehension at Ages 13-14

0.549

0.451

Behavior Problem Index Hyperactive Ages 7-8

0.497

0.503

Behavior Problem Index Conflict Ages 7-8

0.327

0.673

ASVAB Arithmetic Reasoning

0.728

0.272

Behavior Problem Index Antisocial Ages 9-10

0.503

0.497

ASVAB Word Knowledge

0.625

0.375

Behavior Problem Index Anxiety Ages 9-10

0.472

0.528

ASVAB Paragraph Composition

0.576

0.424

Behavior Problem Index Headstrong Ages 9-10

0.577

0.423

ASVAB Numerical Operations

0.461

0.539

Behavior Problem Index Hyperactive Ages 9-10

0.463

0.537

ASVAB Coding Speed

0.353

0.647

Behavior Problem Index Conflict Ages 9-10

0.369

0.631

ASVAB Mathematical Knowledge

0.662

0.338

Measurement of Maternal Cognitive Skills

Measurement of Maternal Noncognitive Skills
Self-Esteem "I am a person of worth"

0.277

0.723

Behavior Problem Index Antisocial Ages 11-12

0.514

0.486

Behavior Problem Index Anxiety Ages 11-12

0.500

0.500

Behavior Problem Index Headstrong Ages 11-12

0.603

0.397

Self-Esteem " I have good qualities"

0.349

0.651

Behavior Problem Index Hyperactive Ages 11-12

0.505

0.495

Self-Esteem "I am a failure"

0.444

0.556

Behavior Problem Index Conflict Ages 11-12

0.370

0.630

Self-Esteem "I have nothing to be proud of"

0.375

0.625

Behavior Problem Index Antisocial Ages 13-14

0.494

0.506

Self-Esteem "I have a positive attitude"

0.406

0.594

Behavior Problem Index Anxiety Ages 13-14

0.546

0.454

Self-Esteem "I wish I had more self-respect"

0.341

0.659

Behavior Problem Index Headstrong Ages 13-14

0.595

0.405

Self-Esteem "I feel useless at times"

0.293

0.707

Behavior Problem Index Hyperactive Ages 13-14

0.525

0.475

Self-Esteem "I sometimes think I am no good"

0.375

0.625

Behavior Problem Index Conflict Ages 13-14

0.414

0.586

Locus of Control "I have no control"

0.047

0.953

Locus of Control "I make no plans for the future"

0.064

0.936

Locus of Control "Luck is big factor in life"

0.041

0.959

Locus of Control "Luck plays big role in my life"

0.020

0.980

Table 2B
Percentage of Total Variance in Measurements due to Signal and Noise
Measurements of Parental Investments

%Signal

%Noise Measurements of Parental Investments

%Signal

%Noise

How Often Child Goes on Outings during Year of Birth

0.329

0.671

Child Has Musical Instruments Ages 7-8

0.022

0.978

Number of Books Child Has during Year of Birth

0.209

0.791

Family Subscribes to Daily Newspapers Ages 7-8

0.023

0.977

How Often Mom Reads to Child during Year of Birth

0.484

0.516

Child Has Special Lessons Ages 7-8

0.018

0.982

Number of Soft Toys Child Has during Year of Birth

0.126

0.874

How Often Child Goes to Musical Shows Ages 7-8

0.266

0.734

Number of Push/Pull Toys Child Has during Year of Birth

0.019

0.981

How Often Child Attends Family Gatherings Ages 7-8

0.125

0.875

How Often Child Eats with Mom/Dad during Year of Birth

0.511

0.489

How Often Child is Praised Ages 7-8

0.046

0.954

How Often Mom Calls from Work during Year of Birth

0.119

0.881

How Often Child Gets Positive Encouragement Ages 7-8

0.053

0.947

How Often Child Goes on Outings at Ages 1-2

0.148

0.852

Number of Books Child Has Ages 9-10

0.013

0.987

Number of Books Child Has Ages 1-2

0.055

0.945

Mom Reads to Child Ages 9-10

0.137

0.863

How Often Mom Reads to Child Ages 1-2

0.186

0.814

Eats with Mom/Dad Ages 9-10

0.162

0.838

Number of Soft Toys Child Has Ages 1-2

0.240

0.760

How Often Child Goes to Museum Ages 9-10

0.219

0.781

Number of Push/Pull Toys Child Has Ages 1-2

0.046

0.954

Child Has Musical Instruments Ages 9-10

0.019

0.981

How Often Child Eats with Mom/Dad Ages 1-2

0.194

0.806

Family Subscribes to Daily Newspapers Ages 9-10

0.019

0.981

Mom Calls from Work Ages 1-2

0.070

0.930

Child Has Special Lessons Ages 9-10

0.015

0.985

How Often Child Goes on Outings Ages 3-4

0.123

0.877

How Often Child Goes to Musical Shows Ages 9-10

0.242

0.758

Number of Books Child Has Ages 3-4

0.012

0.988

How Often Child Attends Family Gatherings Ages 9-10

0.115

0.885

How Often Mom Reads to Child Ages 3-4

0.088

0.912

How Often Child is Praised Ages 9-10

0.036

0.964

How Often Child Eats with Mom/Dad Ages 3-4

0.170

0.830

How Often Child Gets Positive Encouragement Ages 9-10

0.041

0.959

Number of Magazines at Home Ages 3-4

0.193

0.807

Number of Books Child Has Ages 11-12

0.016

0.984

Child Has a CD player Ages 3-4

0.021

0.979

Eats with Mom/Dad Ages 11-12

0.153

0.847

How Often Child Goes on Outings Ages 5-6

0.100

0.900

How Often Child Goes to Museum Ages 11-12

0.217

0.783

Number of Books Child Has Ages 5-6

0.009

0.991

Child Has Musical Instruments Ages 11-12

0.016

0.984

How Often Mom Reads to Child Ages 5-6

0.086

0.914

Family Subscribes to Daily Newspapers Ages 11-12

0.018

0.982

How Often Child Eats with Mom/Dad Ages 5-6

0.173

0.827

Child Has Special Lessons Ages 11-12

0.013

0.987

Number of Magazines at Home Ages 5-6

0.164

0.836

How Often Child Goes to Musical Shows Ages 11-12

0.225

0.775

Child Has CD player Ages 5-6

0.015

0.985

How Often Child Attends Family Gatherings Ages 11-12

0.103

0.897

How Often Child Goes to Museum Ages 5-6

0.296

0.704

How Often Child is Praised Ages 11-12

0.026

0.974

Child Has Musical Instruments Ages 5-6

0.026

0.974

How Often Child Gets Positive Encouragement Ages 11-12

0.037

0.963

Family Subscribes to Daily Newspapers Ages 5-6

0.025

0.975

Number of Books Child Has Ages 13-14

0.023

0.977

Child Has Special Lessons Ages 5-6

0.020

0.980

Eats with Mom/Dad Ages 13-14

0.152

0.848
0.799

How Often Child Goes to Musical Shows Ages 5-6

0.304

0.696

How Often Child Goes to Museum Ages 13-14

0.201

How Often Child Attends Family Gatherings Ages 5-6

0.141

0.859

Child Has Musical Instruments Ages 13-14

0.015

0.985

How Often Child is Praised Ages 5-6

0.056

0.944

Family Subscribes to Daily Newspapers Ages 13-14

0.017

0.983

How Often Child Gets Positive Encouragement Ages 5-6

0.081

0.919

Child Has Special Lessons Ages 13-14

0.012

0.988

Number of Books Child Has Ages 7-8

0.007

0.993

How Often Child Goes to Musical Shows Ages 13-14

0.224

0.776

How Often Mom Reads to Child Ages 7-8

0.113

0.887

How Often Child Attends Family Gatherings Ages 13-14

0.099

0.901

How Often Child Eats with Mom/Dad Ages 7-8

0.166

0.834

How Often Child is Praised Ages 13-14

0.031

0.969

How Often Child Goes to Museum Ages 7-8

0.240

0.760

How Often Child Gets Positive Encouragement Ages 13-14

0.032

0.968

Table 3
The Technology for Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation
Not Correcting for Measurement Error
Linear Anchoring on Educational Attainment (Years of Schooling)
No Unobserved Heterogeneity (π), Factors Normally Distributed
Panel A: Technology of Cognitive Skill Formation (Next Period Cognitive Skills)

Current Period Cognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,C,1

First Stage
Parameters
0.403

γ2,C,1

Second Stage
Parameters
0.657

(0.058)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,C,2

0.218

(0.013)

γ2,C,2

0.009

(0.105)

Current Period Investments

γ1,C,3

0.067

(0.005)

γ2,C,3

0.167

(0.090)

Parental Cognitive Skills

γ1,C,4

0.268

(0.018)

γ2,C,4

0.047

(0.078)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

γ1,C,5

0.044

(0.009)

γ2,C,5

0.119

(0.050)

Complementarity Parameter

φ1,C

0.375

(0.150)

φ2,C

-0.827

(0.294)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution
Variance of Shocks ηC,t

(0.093)

1/(1−φ1,C)

1.601

1/(1−φ2,C)

0.547

δ21,C

0.941

δ22,C

0.358

(0.048)

(0.006)

Panel B: Technology of Noncognitive Skill Formation (Next Period Noncognitive Skills)

Current Period Cognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,N,1

First Stage
Parameters
0.193

γ2,N,1

(0.095)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,N,2

0.594

(0.014)

γ2,N,2

(0.090)

Current Period Investments

γ1,N,3

0.099

γ1,N,4

0.114

γ2,N,3

γ1,N,5

0.000

γ2,N,4

φ1,N

-0.723

γ2,N,5

Variance of Shocks ηN,t

φ2,N

-0.716
(0.127)

1/(1−φ1,N)

0.580

1/(1−φ2,N)

0.583

δ21,N

0.767

δ22,N

0.597

(0.076)

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis

0.000
(0.203)

(0.441)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution

0.065
(0.015)

(0.821)

Complementarity Parameter

0.239
(0.031)

(0.055)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

0.638
(0.020)

(0.296)

Parental Cognitive Skills

Second Stage
Parameters
0.058

(0.017)

Table 4
The Technology for Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation
Linear Anchoring on Educational Attainment (Years of Schooling)
Allowing for Unobserved Heterogeneity (π), Factors Normally Distributed
Panel A: Technology of Cognitive Skill Formation (Next Period Cognitive Skills)

Current Period Cognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,C,1

First Stage
Parameters
0.479

γ2,C,1

Second Stage
Parameters
0.831

(0.026)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,C,2

0.070

(0.011)

γ2,C,2

0.001

(0.024)

Current Period Investments

γ1,C,3

0.161

(0.005)

γ2,C,3

0.044

(0.015)

Parental Cognitive Skills

γ1,C,4

0.031

(0.006)

γ2,C,4

0.073

(0.013)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

γ1,C,5

0.258

(0.008)

γ2,C,5

0.051

(0.029)

Complementarity Parameter

φ1,C

0.313

(0.014)

φ2,C

-1.243

(0.134)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution
Variance of Shocks ηC,t

(0.125)

1/(1−φ1,C)

1.457

1/(1−φ2,C)

0.446

δ21,C

0.176

δ22,C

0.087

(0.007)

(0.003)

Panel B: Technology of Noncognitive Skill Formation (Next Period Noncognitive Skills)

Current Period Cognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,N,1

First Stage
Parameters
0.000

γ2,N,1

(0.026)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,N,2

0.585

(0.010)

γ2,N,2

(0.032)

Current Period Investments

γ1,N,3

0.065

γ1,N,4

0.017

γ2,N,3

γ1,N,5

0.333

γ2,N,4

φ1,N

-0.610

γ2,N,5

Variance of Shocks ηN,t

φ2,N

-0.551
(0.169)

1/(1−φ1,N)

0.621

1/(1−φ2,N)

0.645

δ21,N

0.222

δ22,N

0.101

(0.013)

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis

0.133
(0.017)

(0.215)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution

0.000
(0.008)

(0.034)

Complementarity Parameter

0.051
(0.006)

(0.013)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

0.816
(0.013)

(0.021)

Parental Cognitive Skills

Second Stage
Parameters
0.000

(0.004)

Table 5
The Technology for Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation
Estimated Along with Investment Equation with
Linear Anchoring on Educational Attainment (Years of Schooling), Factors Normally Distributed
Panel A: Technology of Cognitive Skill Formation (Next Period Cognitive Skills)

Current Period Cognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,C,1

First Stage
Parameters
0.485

γ2,C,1

Second Stage
Parameters
0.884

(0.031)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,C,2

0.062

(0.013)

γ2,C,2

0.011

(0.026)

Current Period Investments

γ1,C,3

0.261

(0.005)

γ2,C,3

0.044

(0.026)

Parental Cognitive Skills

γ1,C,4

0.035

(0.011)

γ2,C,4

0.051

(0.015)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

γ1,C,5

0.157

(0.008)

γ2,C,5

0.011

(0.033)

Complementarity Parameter

φ1,C

0.585

(0.012)

φ2,C

-1.220

(0.225)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution
Variance of Shocks ηC,t

(0.149)

1/(1−φ1,C)

2.410

1/(1−φ2,C)

0.450

δ21,C

0.165

δ22,C

0.098

(0.007)

(0.003)

Panel B: Technology of Noncognitive Skill Formation (Next Period Noncognitive Skills)

Current Period Cognitive Skills (Cross-Productivity)

γ1,N,1

First Stage
Parameters
0.000

γ2,N,1

(0.028)

Current Period Noncognitive Skills (Self-Productivity)

γ1,N,2

0.602

(0.011)

γ2,N,2

(0.034)

Current Period Investments

γ1,N,3

0.209

γ1,N,4

0.014

γ2,N,3

γ1,N,5

0.175

γ2,N,4

φ1,N

-0.464

γ2,N,5

Variance of Shocks ηN,t

φ2,N

-0.522
(0.214)

1/(1−φ1,N)

0.683

1/(1−φ2,N)

0.657

δ21,N

0.203

δ22,N

0.102

(0.012)

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis

0.037
(0.021)

(0.263)

Implied Elasticity of Substitution

0.000
(0.008)

(0.033)

Complementarity Parameter

0.104
(0.022)

(0.013)

Parental Noncognitive Skills

0.857
(0.011)

(0.031)

Parental Cognitive Skills

Second Stage
Parameters
0.002

(0.003)

Figure 1: Ratio of early to late investment in human capital
as a function of the ratio of first period to second period investment productivity
for different values of the complementarity parameter
4

3.5

3

Perfect Substitutes
Leontief
φ = -0.5
CobbDouglas
φ = 0.5

Perfect
Substitutes

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

Perfect
Complements
(Leontief)

0
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Skill Multiplier (γ)
Note: Assumes r = 0.
Source: Cunha and Heckman (2007).

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 2
Optimal Early (Left) and Late (Right) Investments by
Child Initial Conditions of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills
Maximizing Aggregate Education
(Other Endowments Held At Mean Levels)
1.3

1.04
1.02

1.25

1
1.2

0.98

1.15

0.96
0.94

1.1

0.92

1.05
-1

0.9
-1
-0.5

-0.5
-1
0

Child Initial
Cognitive Skill

Child Initial
Cognitive Skill

-1
0

-0.5
0

0.5
0.5
1 1

Child Initial
Noncognitive Skill

-0.5
Child Initial
Noncognitive
Skill
0

0.5
0.5
1 1

Figure 3
Optimal Early (Left) and Late (Right) Investments by
Maternal Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills
Maximizing Aggregate Education
(Other Endowments Held At Mean Levels)

1.26

1.06

1.24

1.04
-1

1.22

-0.8

1.2

-0.6

-1

1.02

-0.8

1

-0.6

0.98

-0.4

1.18

-0.4
0.96

-0.2

1.16
0
1.14
0.2
0.4
-1

0.6

-0.5
0

Maternal
Cognitive Skill

0.8
0.5
1

1

-0.2

0.94
Maternal
Noncognitive Skill 0.92

0
0.2

0.9

0.4

-1

0.6

-0.5
0
Maternal
Cognitive Skill

0.8
0.5
1

1

Maternal
Noncognitive Skill

Figure 4
Ratio of Early to Late Investments by
Child Initial Condtions of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills
Maximizing Aggregate Education (Left) and Minimizing Aggregate Crime (Right)
(Other Endowments Held At Mean Levels)
1.65
1.6

1.4

1.55

1.35

1.5
1.3
1.45
1.25
1.4
1.2

1.35

-1
-0.5

-1

1.3
-1

-0.5
-0.5
0
Child Initial
Cognitive Skill

0
0.5

0.5
1 1

Child Initial
Noncognitive Skill

1.15
-1

0
-0.5
Child Initial
Cognitive Skill

0

0.5
0.5
1 1

Child Initial
Noncognitive Skill

Figure 5
Ratio of Early to Late Investments by Maternal Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills
Maximizing Aggregate Education (Left) and Minimizing Aggregate Crime (Right)
(Other Endowments Held At Mean Levels)

1.5

1.3
1.29

1.48
1.28
1.46

1.27
1.26

1.44
1.25
1.42

1.24
1.23
-1

1.4

-1
1.22

-0.5
1.38
-1

0

Mother
Noncognitive Skill

-0.5
0
Mother
Cognitive Skill

0.5
0.5
1 1

-0.5
1.21
-1

0

Mother
Noncognitive Skill

-0.5
0
Mother
Cognitive Skill

0.5
0.5
1 1

3.5

Figure 6
Densities of Ratio of Early to Late Investments
Maximizing Aggregate Education Versus Minimizing Aggregate Crime
Education
Crime

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.5

1

1.5

Ratio Early to Late Investment

2

2.5

