                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DID FREDERICK BRODIE DISCOVER THE WORLD'S FIRST ENVIRONMENTAL
    KUZNETS CURVE? COAL SMOKE AND THE RISE AND FALL OF THE LONDON
                                 FOG

                                            Karen Clay
                                          Werner Troesken

                                        Working Paper 15669
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15669


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




We thank Maureen Cropper and Melissa Thomasson, our discussants, for their insights and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Karen Clay and Werner Troesken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Did Frederick Brodie Discover the World's First Environmental Kuznets Curve? Coal Smoke
and the Rise and Fall of the London Fog
Karen Clay and Werner Troesken
NBER Working Paper No. 15669
January 2010
JEL No. N13,N3,N5,Q0,Q38,Q53,Q54,Q58

                                               ABSTRACT

In a paper presented to the Royal Meteorological Society, Brodie (1905) presented a data series that
presaged the modern Environmental Kuznets Curve: in the decades leading up to 1890, the number
of foggy days in London rose steadily, but after 1891, the fogs began to subside. Brodie attributed
the rise and fall of the London fog to variation in emissions of coal smoke, arguing that before 1890
Londoners burned excessive amounts of soft coal, while in the years following, a series of legal, demographic,
and technological changes mitigated the production of coal smoke. This paper asks two questions.
First, are Brodie’s underlying data trustworthy? Do other, independent sources of evidence same
patterns Brodie identified? Was London’s atmosphere becoming more polluted and foggy for most
of the nineteenth century, only to improve around 1890? Second, if so, is Brodie’s interpretation of
the data correct? Can the changes in London’s atmosphere be attributed to changes in the production
of coal smoke, or were they the result of some broader meteorological phenomenon. The evidence
we present here is consistent Brodie’s data and interpretation.


Karen Clay
Heinz School of Public Policy
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu

Werner Troesken
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
and NBER
troesken@pitt.edu
0. Introduction

       In 1903, at a meeting of the Royal Meteorological Society, a British climatologist named

Frederick J. Brodie presented a deceptively simple paper. Using data from the Brixton weather

station in London, Brodie graphed the number foggy days per year between 1871 and 1903.

His data, reproduced here in figure 1, revealed an inverted U-shaped pattern: the annual

number of foggy days in London rose during the 1870s and 1880s; reversed trend sometime

around 1888 or 1889; and then fell steadily during the 1890s and early 1900s. Brodie attributed

the rise and fall of the London fog to variation in the production of coal smoke. During the

1870s and 80s, Brodie claimed, London businesses and homeowners burned coal with reckless

abandon, filling the atmosphere with soot and giving rise to dense and dark fogs. After 1890,

however, technological, legal, and social changes enabled, or forced, homeowners and

businesses to burn coal more efficiently and cleanly. In particular, the expansion of gas for

heating and cooking, and electricity for lighting curtailed domestic sources of smoke; and the

London Coal Smoke Abatement Society lobbied local authorities to enforce the Public Health

Acts which required manufacturers to adopt low-smoke technologies (Brodie 1905, pp. 15-20).

       The criticisms of Brodie’s paper were many. Multiple observers argued that the series

Brodie had assembled was not believable because it focused on a single weather station, and

fog data were based on subjective, non-instrumental observations. Brodie himself did not

define what exactly was meant when a day was recorded as “foggy.”1 Were other weather



       1
         According to Brazell (1968, p. 102), meteorologists did not construct a standardized
definition of fog “until the development of aviation after the First World War.”

                                                1
stations in London revealing the same trend? Were other, more objective measures consistent

with the reported decline in fog? If not, one could not even believe the underlying pattern

Brodie was trying to explain, let alone his contentious interpretation. Other critics argued that

changing wind speeds and directions could account for the rise and fall of the fog, in part

because fog does not usually form in windy environments. H.L. Mill focused on the changing

relationship between rainfall and fogs during the 1880s and on variation in atmospheric

conditions over time. Another discussant wondered how the environs of London could

possibly have been becoming less smokey over time, given the rapid growth in the city’s

population and manufacturing base. J.E. Clark believed one could ascribe at least part of the

pattern observed by Brodie to the eruption of Krakatoa in Java in 1883, which had significant

and lasting meteorological effects all over the globe. Clark seemed to suggest that Krakatoa

might account for the increase in atmospheric haze in the immediate aftermath of the eruption,

and also explain the decline in haze as the effects dissipated (Brodie 1905, pp. 21-27).

       In this paper, we reconsider Brodie’s data and his interpretation of those data.

Specifically, we want to ask whether independent sources of evidence indicate smoke-induced

changes in London’s atmosphere over the course of the nineteenth and early twentieth century.

Besides Brixton, do other London weather stations record a similar rise and fall in foggy days

per annum? Do other measures of atmospheric conditions, such as hours of bright sunlight,

also indicate improvement in London after 1890? Similarly, if London’s air were becoming less

polluted with coal smoke after 1890, this would have manifested itself in effects on human

health, particularly deaths from respiratory diseases. To the extent that other sources of


                                                 2
evidence corroborate Brodie’s basic finding—that the incidence of fog and smoke in London

was rising before 1890 and declining thereafter—we need to turn to Brodie’s interpretation of

that finding and ask why the atmosphere changed over time.

       Four sorts of evidence will be considered. First, if smoke abatement efforts really were

causing Londoners to burn coal more efficiently and adopt (relatively) smokeless technologies

such as gas and electricity, this should be observable in data on coal consumption per capita

and in data on gas and electricity production. Second, using a procedure we describe as a

reverse-event study, we use large and unusual spikes in weekly mortality data to identify the

frequency and severity fog-related events. Fog-related events were severe and persistent

episodes of fog that culminated in spikes in mortality, particularly from respiratory diseases.

The reverse event study is a center-piece of the paper, and the most novel part of our analysis.

Third, we will construct a crude panel of cities and ask whether smoke abatement

interventions in those cities also reduced pollution levels as manifested in deaths from

respiratory diseases. Fourth, we will present a brief history of smoke abatement technologies

and the enforcement of pollution control laws during the Victorian and Edwardian eras. This

history will help establish a circumstantial case, for or against, the proposition that such actions

helped make London a less smoky place.2



       2
         Ideally, we would like to get data on wind speed and direction, as well as the
occurrence of anticyclones, a condition of extreme stillness that often produced fog,
independent of the level of smoke in the air. Unfortunately, after much search, we have been
unable to find such data. Nevertheless, some of the data and evidence we present below will
provide indirect and qualitative information on the evolution of wind speed and the formation
of fog in London.

                                                 3
       The ostensible rise and fall of the London fog should interest economists and economic

historians on at least two levels. First, the debate surrounding Brodie’s paper prefigures

current debates about the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC). Indeed, if Brodie’s data and

interpretations prove sound, he identified an archaic EKC. The construction of this early EKC

might suggest pathways for studying the long-term evolution of the environment and

environmental regulation. Other than a few metrics of water quality (e.g., bacteria counts and

nitrate concentrations), governments before 1950 did not usually measure and report data on

greenhouse gas emissions, air quality, or any of the inorganic environmental pollutants that

interest us today.3 One solution to this problem is to search for data that might serve as a

proxy for environmental pollution. This paper provides, as far as we are aware, the first

systematic attempt to implement and evaluate such proxies, in this case data on fogs and death

rates. Along the same lines, when economists estimate the shape of the EKC, they must rely on

cross-sections or very short time series from the late-twentieth century. While there is a

venerable tradition of inferring the time series from cross-sectional relationships, recent

empirical work suggests that such exercises are problematic in the context of the EKC (e.g.,

Deacon and Norman 2006; and De Bruyn 1997). A true historical time series would therefore

be desirable. Documenting efforts by Western governments at an early stage of development

to regulate coal smoke, this paper provides the beginnings of such a time series and helps to

resolve some fundamental questions about the meaning of the EKC.



       3
       See, however, List and Gallet (1999) who employ data on sulphur emissions in
American states back to 1929.

                                                4
       Second, the basic question Brodie raised and attempted to answer is of no small

historical moment: how could there have been a meaningful environmental movement in

Victorian England? It seems a stretch. Smoke abatement technologies strike most of us as a

distinctly late-twentieth century invention. Aside from a wholesale switch from coal to natural

gas (which did not happen), what could be done in 1890 to reduce coal smoke? Whatever the

available technology, surely it must have been much less efficient and more costly than today’s

abatement methods. How could a country that in 1890 was not much more wealthy than

Mexico today, afford such an investment? The politics too seems all wrong. We tend to think

of Victorian Britain as a place where the expedience of cholera and child labor trumped the

expense of clean water and a decent wage, as a place where environmental and social

degradation served as the handmaidens of avarice and economic development. Yet Brodie’s

paper suggests something quite different, as does even a cursory look at the political and

economic history of smoke abatement. How can one reconcile all of this? There is, in short,

much history to write and revise if Brodie turns out to be right, even partially right.4

1. What Was the London Fog?

       The immediate causes of the London fog were evocatively described by the renowned

nineteenth-century scientist Rollo Russell. According to Russell, the London fog began early in

the morning around 6 a.m., when the city, or parts of the city, were enveloped by an “ordinary

thick white fog.” Soon after this, the city would awaken by lighting “about a million fires.”


       4
        This paper spans the Victorian (1837-1901) and Edwardian (1901-1910) eras. As we
show later, however, most of the interesting activity in terms of regulations, climate, and
technology were products of the Victorian period.

                                                 5
These fires charged the atmosphere with “carbonaceous particles,” which upon cooling,

attached themselves to the spheres of water that constituted the fog. Ordinarily the warmth of

the sun would have quickly dissipated the fog, but the smoke and an oily tar that surrounded

the spheres of water impaired this process. In these conditions, city residents would not have

sunlight until noon.5 In an article in Nature, W.J. Russell (1891, p. 11) developed a similar line

of thought, arguing that coal and sulphur particles induced the formation of fog by offering

gaseous water a surface on which to condensate.6 Late twentieth century scientists concur. For

example, Brazell (1968, p. 102) writes: “London fogs are particularly obnoxious because the fog

droplets tend to form on minute particles of atmospheric pollution which are usually produced

by the combustion of coal, oil, and petrol.”

       While most of us use the word smog to describe the “cocktail of motor exhaust gases

catalysed by sunlight and typically found over Los Angeles,” the word is actually the product

of nineteenth-century thinking about the unholy merger of smoke and fog. The person who

first coined the term, or at least claimed credit for doing so, was H.A. Des Voeux, the Treasurer

of the London Coal Smoke Abatement Society. In a letter to the Times (Dec. 27, 1904, p. 11), Des

Voeux wrote that he wished to call London’s fog problem by the name “smog” to show that it


       5
        This passage quoting Russell is from Hann’s (1903) Handbook of Climatology , p. 78. A
similar description is offered in Russell (1906).

       6
        Russell (1891, p. 11) wrote: “The dust always present in the atmosphere offers this free
surface to the gaseous water, and thus induces its condensation. This specific action of dust
varies very considerably, first with regards to its composition, and second with regard to the
size and abundance of the particles present. Sulphur burnt in the air is a most active fog
producer, so is salt.” For a similar statement regarding the origins and persistence of smoke-
laden fogs, see Frankland (1882).

                                                 6
consisted “more of smoke than of true fog.” Des Voeux believed that ordinary fogs were

caused by the condensation moisture and that nothing could be done to eliminate them. Smog,

on the other hand, was a different matter entirely. “Fog,” Des Voeux wrote, was “incurable

and infrequent” while “smog” was “curable and frequent.” Brodie (1905, p. 20) expressed the

same sentiment when he wrote colorfully about the benefits of an atmosphere purged of

smoke: “With cleaner air . . . there is little doubt that fogs would diminish in frequency, and

even when they did arise, the vapour particles would not be impregnated, as they are now, by

the pestilential products arising from an imperfect and wasteful consumption of fuel.”7

       With or without the coal smoke, though, London would have been subjected to much

ordinary fog. Describing London as “incorrigible” from a “meteorological point of view,”

Brodie argued that the city’s geography and proximity to a large river made it “eminently

favorable to the development of fog and mist.” Two government reports issued in the early

1900s showed that the formation of fog in London was correlated with temperature, humidity,

and wind-speed. Fogs were much more likely when the temperature in the city was below 40

degrees (no dense fog was observed when temperature was above 40), when humidity was

high, and when the winds were calm. London fogs, these reports concluded, were of

indigenous origin; they were not blown in from the countryside or nearby marshes, as many

suggested (Nature, Jan. 12, 1905, p. 259). There was also a surprising inversion of temperatures

during the most intense fogs. An article in Nature (April 9, 1903, p. 549) explained: “On March


       7
        Martin (1906) presented data showing that London air contained higher carbon dioxide
levels during fogs than during days without fog; per unit of air, carbon dioxide levels were 75
to 150 percent higher during “black fogs” than during clear moments.

                                                7
7, during fog, the temperature in the streets of London was nearly 10° F. below that on the roof

of the Meteorological Office, the elevated stations, and the surrounding country on the

southern and western sides.”

       Britain’s “latitudinal and continental position” was of special importance, because it left

the whole country in the path of sequences of “migratory depressions” and anticyclones

(Chandler 1965, p. 35). Anticyclones, and the temperature inversions that accompanied them,

played a central role in the propagation of a certain kind of London fog. A short article in the

journal Notes and Queries (March 2, 1878, p. 178) provides the clearest contemporary statement

we have found on the significance of anticyclones. We quote it in full:

           These fogs are not caused by the rarefaction of the air, or by the
           consumption of gas, nor yet by the hills on the north, nor by the river.
           The peculiar atmospheric condition termed an anti-cyclone is the real
           cause of these annoying visitations; the wind is then blowing round a
           well defined circle, in the centre of which the air is tranquil, and
           consequently the smoke, condensed vapours, & c., cannot escape as they
           do when there is a direct onward movement of the wind. The pressure
           of the atmosphere at such times is almost invariably greatly in excess of
           the average in the midst of the anti-cyclone, which, by preventing the
           rise of the smoke, & c., increases the intensity of the fog. Whenever,
           therefore, an anti-cyclone occurs with London at or near the centre, there
           must necessarily be a `London fog,’ the density of which will be in
           proportion to the smoke evolved at the time. The same phenomenon
           may be observed in other places within the anticyclonic circle, but of
           course in a less degree of density.

The most extreme and malignant forms of the London fog were those associated with

anticyclones. In section 3, we will describe these fogs more fully and discuss their effects on

human health. An econometric analysis of the excess deaths caused by such fogs will help us

construct a measure of pollution that is independent of Brodie’s fog counts.


                                                8
2. Do Other Sources of Evidence Suggest a Decline in Fog?

       In 1910, the Times of London published a short article entitled, “A Purified London

Air.” Although part of the article appears to have been based on Brodie’s original paper, other

parts of the article provide independent corroboration of Brodie’s findings about the incidence

of fogs and their connection to smoke. The opening paragraph began with the reporter’s own

assessment of the situation, an assessment he clearly believed was unassailable:

           The decrease in recent years, not only in the frequency but in the
           intensity of London fog, is a matter which admits no serious question.
           Persons who have reached middle age well remember the time when
           dense smoke fogs of the worst possible description were a common
           feature of the winter season, and lasted not infrequently for a week or
           more at a stretch.

In contrast to these earlier periods, “visitations” of smoke-laden fogs were “rare” by 1910, and

“seldom” continued “without intermission for more than two or three days.” The same article

also presented data on the hours of bright sunshine in London, which presumably would have

been inversely correlated with the incidence of fog. Sunshine, in contrast to fog, was measured

instrumentally using a device known as the “Campbell Stokes Sunshine Recorder.” The

recorder consisted of a clear ball that magnified bright sunlight and gradually burned away a

piece of cardboard. The sunshine data found in the Times are broadly consistent Brodie’s data

on the fog; they suggest that improvements in London’s air began five to ten years earlier,

during the early to mid 1880s as opposed to the early 1890s (Times, Dec. 27, 1910, p. 11).8


       8
        This was not the first time that the Times argued that London’s atmosphere was
becoming cleaner. In an editorial published a few months before Brodie’s paper, the Times
(Dec. 24, 1904) wrote: “we think no one whose experience of London extends over many years
can entertain the slightest doubt that the fogs of the present day, even the worst of them, are

                                                 9
        In a paper read before an international conference sponsored by the Coal Smoke

Abatement Society in 1912, Rollo Russell presented a paper entitled, “Smoke and Fog.” Russell

echoed much of the Times report. Like the Times article, Russell began his paper by observing

that London had become much less foggy in recent years. This was no mere impression; it was,

he argued based on observations from London weather stations. While Russell and the Times

agreed that London was becoming less smoky and foggy, they disagreed as to why. The paper

subscribed to Brodie’s view:

            The diminution of smoke which has taken place within recent years may
            be attributed in a large measure to a more vigorous enforcement of the
            smoke prevention clauses of the Public Health Act, but it has in all
            probability been materially aided by the increased use of gas fires for
            both heating and cooking purposes, and also by improved methods of
            lighting (Times, Dec. 27, 1910, p. 11).

Russell, in contrast, emphasized London’s changing geography and broader weather patterns

that were affecting the entire south of England.9 For Russell, the declining incidence of fog was


definitely less filthy and less opaque than those of the early or middle Victorian period. The
change is commonly, and perhaps right, attributed to the extent to which the production of
smoke in the metropolis has been diminished by legislation.” See also, Schlicht (1907, p. 685),
who in an article published in the Journal of the Society of Arts, wrote: “It must be said . . . that in
recent years, thanks to admirable efforts of the Coal Smoke Abatement Society, and the
exploitation of gas as a substitute for coal by the gas companies, the atmosphere of London is
much less offensive than it was twenty-five or thirty years ago.”

        9
         Russell, it should be noted, did not entirely dismiss the possible roles of technological
change and environmental activism, but he did assign them a clearly secondary role. Toward
the end of his paper, he wrote: “Another influence tending to reduce the worst fogs is the
increased use of gas. . . . Further, there are improved grates and kitcheners, and some
extension of radiators and central heating, which reduces the smoke product per head. The
efforts of the Coal Smoke Abatement Society have brought about an improvement in stoking,
which is one of the most important of all factors, and a reduction in the emission of black
smoke (Russell 1912, p. 22).”

                                                   10
not unique to London fog, but common to all cities and towns in the region.10 This claim cuts to

the heart of Brodie’s argument and we will come back to it as our narrative proceeds.

       Presenting a paper at the same conference, R.G.K. Lempfert introduced evidence

inconsistent with the argument that London’s atmosphere was improving solely because of

broader, region-wide weather patterns. Lempfert was an accomplished climate scientist, and

the Superintendent of the Forecast Division of the Royal Meteorological Office. Lempfert

(1912, p. 23) described his paper as an empirical exercise. “It is my object,” he wrote, “to

examine the statistics of bright sunshine for London and other large towns to see whether they

afford evidence of progressive amelioration or the reverse of the smoke nuisance.” Lempfert’s

identification strategy was simple. If London’s atmosphere was becoming more sunny because

of purely meteorological phenomena, those same phenomena would have affected

surrounding rural areas as well. If, however, London’s atmosphere was improving because of

innovations (both regulatory and technological) unique to metropolitan areas, London would

have become increasingly sunny relative to the neighboring control areas. Furthermore,

because far more coal was burnt during the winter months than the summer, if reductions in

coal smoke were driving the improvement in London’s atmosphere, one should observe


       10
         Russell (1912, p. 21) wrote: “The last ten years have been remarkably free from dense
fogs, not only in London but in the south of England generally. Meteorological conditions have
been such that occasions for the development of dense ground fogs have been unusually few.
This is not mere impression, but is derived from an examination of the Greenwich, Kew,
Oxford, and other records. So rare have been the days and nights of calm, great cold, and
dense fog, that we cannot know how the worst kind of London fog of the present would
compare with one of thirty years ago. There can, I think, be little doubt that it would be
somewhat less intense or less dark. It was not a very uncommon thing in the early eighties to
be unable to see across a street.”

                                                11
greater relative improvement when we restrict the sample to the winter (Lempfert 1912).11

       Table 1 reproduces the data from Lempfert’s paper. In first two columns of data, the

table expresses the duration of bright sunshine at two London weather stations (Westminster

and Bunhill Row) as a proportion of the duration at four nearby “country” stations (Oxford;

Cambridge; Marlboro; and Geldeston). Notice that for the first five year interval, 1881-85,

London in the winter enjoys only 17 percent of the sunshine experienced in the control areas;

by the last five year interval, 1906-10, London’s relative sunshine rate has more than doubled,

to 38 percent. There is evidence of improvement during the summer—the relative sunshine

rate grows from 83 to 92 percent—but the improvement is much less pronounced than that

observed during the winter months. The third and forth columns of data perform the same

experiment for the weather station at Kew Gardens as the (placebo) treatment. The Kew

station resided on the western edge of London (today, about ten miles directly east of

Heathrow airport) and was relatively immune from the smoke problems that plagued the rest

of the metropolis.12 Kew shows little relative improvement in the duration of sunshine, in

either winter or summer. The final two columns of data compare sunshine at the city stations

to that observed at the Kew station. As when the country stations were used as controls, there


       11
        Lempfert’s argument—that if fogs (or a lack of sunshine) were generated by coal
smoke, they would be more frequent and more severe during the winter months—was
commonly made by climate scientists of the time. We will exploit this logic later in the paper.

       12
         The word relative is important. Kew was not entirely immune from the effects of
London smoke and there is a small literature that documents how the gardens were adversely
affected by the city’s production of coal smoke. See, for example, J.W. Bean’s article, “A Note
on Recent Observations of the Smoke Nuisance at Kew Gardens,” presented at Coal Smoke
Abatement Conference in 1912.

                                               12
is evidence that the city stations became increasingly sunny relative to the station at Kew.

Again the improvement is concentrated in the winter months, with the relative sunshine rate

rising from 20 to 46 percent during the winter, and from 84 to 92 percent during the summer.13

       The final part of Lempfert’s paper contains data on fogs at the following weather

stations in and around London: Greenwich; Kew; Tottenham; Camden Square; Westminster;

and West Norwood. Figure 2 plots Lempfert’s data from 1904 through 1911. Only one series

(Greenwich) does not exhibit a secular downward trend in the number of foggy days per

year;14 the remaining five series all trend downward. Expanding on Lempfert’s data, figure 3

juxtaposes a fog series for the West Norwood station with Brodie’s original series for Brixton.

The Brixton station was five miles south of the Thames; West Norwood was another ten miles

south. Comparing the Brixton and West Norwood series suggests that Brodie was providing, if

anything, a picture that understated the changes taking place in London’s atmosphere. From

peak to trough, Brixton falls from 80 days of fog per year to around 35; West Norwood falls

from nearly 200 days of fog per year to around 45. Taken together, figures 2 and 3 call into

question the argument that Brodie’s data are unreliable because they were based on only a



       13
         Lempfert (1912, pp. 27-28) offered a caveat regarding instrumental measures of bright
sunlight. The glass-balls employed in the Campbell-Stokes recorders began to yellow and
became less sensitive to sunlight with time. Lempfert argued that this would lead observers to
understate increases in the incidence of bright sunlight in London. Unfortunately, it would
also have had the same effect in the control counties. Lempfert suggested that, whatever the
bias, these effects would have been small, and that officials took steps to minimize the resulting
measurement errors. Nevertheless, the caution should be noted.

       14
       If the sample is restricted so that it covers only fog during the winter months,
Greenwich does exhibit a downward trend, as do all of the other London stations.

                                                13
single weather station. One might still argue that all fog data are unreliable because they were

based on subjective (non-instrumental) observations. The difficulty with this line of thought is

that the data on bright sunshine (which as explained above, were measured instrumentally) tell

the same basic story.

3. Fog-Related Events: Identification, History, and Health Effects

       Imagine London in the late nineteenth century. Although it is noon, the city is as dark

as night. People must uses torches just to see a few yards ahead of them. Horse drawn

carriages cannot move; trains crawl at a snail’s pace, and in some instances, cease operating.

The fog is so thick, justice must take a holiday. The courts cancel trials because witnesses

cannot find their way. Thieves, on the other hand, enjoy the protection of a new found night.

The fog even manages to penetrate inside buildings. At theater actors and audiences have

difficulty seeing one another and shows have to be cancelled. In offices, workers have trouble

concentrating and feel nervous and irritable because the “stinking fog.” On the Thames, boat

traffic is brought to a halt because of the darkness. Those who continue to move run into one

another and fall from sidewalks, piers, and railway stops; others are thrown from their taxis,

boats, and barges down to the curb or into the river. On one sad occasion, a young woman

becomes disorientated and falls into the ice-cold Thames. She drowns before anyone can find

her. On another, a railroad worker falls from a train and cracks his skull.

       People described the darkness as fog because it was wet and heavy, and because it

almost always occurred during unusually cold and calm conditions when fog was otherwise

common. But it was also more than just fog. The darkness burned the eyes and throat. Deaths


                                                14
from all causes, but especially bronchitis and other acute respiratory diseases, spiked during

such dense fogs and immediately after they lifted. First hand observes blamed the coal smoke

trapped in the fog: “There was nothing more irritating than the unburnt carbon floating in the

air; it fell on the air tubes of the human system, and formed that dark expectoration which was

so injurious to the constitution; it gathered on the lungs and there accumulated (Times, Feb. 7,

1882, p. 10).” Another observer wrote (Medical Times, March 11, 1882, p. 395): “After a fog the

nostrils are like chimneys, and are lined with a layer of black smut. The expectoration is black

from the amount of carbon arrested in the mucus of the air passages. For a day or two after

exposure to a smut-laden atmosphere, black phlegm is brought up.” During a cattle show in

1873, the fog was so thick that the Queen’s prize bull dropped dead, as did several other large

animals. If all this were not enough, imagine too that the fog went on for days at a time, and in

some extraordinary cases, weeks. Although a composite of several of the most famous London

fogs, these images convey what it was like to experience the most dense and persistent ones.15

       After a severe fog in early February of 1882, the Times (Feb. 13, 1882, p. 10) published




       15
          This composite is based heavily on a report in the Times, Feb. 6, 1882, p. 7. The
quotation is from a talk by Dr. J.M. Fothergill recorded in the Times, Feb. 7, 1882, p. 10. Other
articles in the Times that corroborate this picture, include: Jan. 21, 1861, p. 9; Nov. 19, 1862, p. 6;
and Nov. 26, 1858, p. 10. That the Queen’s prize bull was killed raises the question about how
the monarchy and elite groups responded to the fog. Centuries before the Public Health Act
was passed in 1891, the King had barred the burning of coal in London, and wealthy elites
were at the forefront of smoke eradication; poorer groups were less concerned or opposed.
This cross-sectional pattern is consistent the modern EKC, and in a political economy sense
sounds plausible. To the extent that the costs of smoke eradication were born
disproportionately by the poor, one would expect that the wealthy segments of society to have
been the primary advocates environmental improvements.

                                                  15
the results of the coroner’s inquest into several fog-related deaths. The results provide a

window into the physiological mechanisms that made some fogs so deadly. James Smith, aged

60, was a wheelwright. According to his wife Ann, Smith “had been suffering from chest

affection some time past.” Although Ann “begged him” not go out in the fog, he went out

anyway. The air was “highly charged with the fumes from numberless naphtha lamps used by

the market people.” When he returned, he was “very ill” and spent the next day in bed,

coughing and vomiting. He tried to resume working, but died a few days later. The coroner

ruled that “the fog had hastened his death very materially, increasing and developing

bronchitis to an alarming extent.” Alice Wright, aged 66, was married to a copper-plate

printer. She went out when the “fog was the thickest, to fetch her mangling.” Twenty-minutes

later, a passerby found her lying in a passage and ran into the home to search out her daughter.

Finding Wright unconscious, the daughter brought her inside and called for a doctor, “who

found the poor creature dead.” The post-mortem “showed that the fog had brought on effusion

on the brain.” William Henry Pepper, aged three months, was the son of a blacksmith.

Although he had been a healthy baby, he took ill after he and his mother had ventured into the

fog. The coroner concluded that “the child’s lungs” were “to weak to resist the poison which

had filtered into them.” “Bronchial pneumonia” set in and “death resulted.”

       For convenience, we refer to extreme conditions like those just described as a “fog-

related event.” Fog-related events were an extreme form of smog. The available evidence

indicates that they were associated with anticyclones and temperature inversions (Brodie 1891;

Scott 1896; Times, Dec. 13, 1873, p. 7; Wise 2001, pp. 15-18). London’s most famous fog-related


                                                16
event occurred in December 1952, and is documented in William Wise’s popular book, Killer

Smog: The World’s Worst Air Pollution Disaster. The fog began on December 5, and did not lift

for five days. Government officials estimated that there were roughly 4,000 excess deaths

because of the fog, mostly due to respiratory complaints such as asthma and bronchitis.

Although we might know this event best, that does not necessarily mean it was the worst.

Earlier fogs lasted longer, and there is evidence that they took a heavier death toll. For

example, the aforementioned cattle-show fog of 1873 lasted a week (Brazell 1968, p. 111). The

December fog of 1879 lasted nearly two weeks, darkening London’s skies from December 3

through December 27 (Brazell 1968, p. 111; Scott 1896). There was also the aptly named

“anticyclonic winter” of 1890-1891, a two month interval of almost uninterrupted fog (Brodie

1891). Estimates presented below suggest that this event generated 7,405 excess deaths, nearly

twice the number of excess deaths observed during the winter of 1952.

       As the discussion above suggests, a defining features of a fog-related event is an

unusually large number of deaths, especially from acute respiratory diseases. One the clearest

contemporary statements on the spike in death rates that accompanied for-related events

comes from a short article in the British Medical Journal (BMJ). The article described an event

that occurred in February of 1880 (Feb. 14, 1880, p. 254):

           If one or two weeks during the cholera epidemic of 1849 and 1854 be
           excepted, the recorded mortality in London last week was higher than it
           has been at any time during the past forty years of civil registration. No
           fewer than 3,376 deaths were registered within the metropolis during the
           week ending Saturday, showing an excess of 1,657 upon the average
           number in the corresponding week of the last ten years.



                                                17
Of these deaths, most were attributable to respiratory diseases, particularly bronchitis:

           The excess of mortality was mainly referred to diseases of the respiratory
           organs, which caused 1,557 deaths last week, against 559 and 757 in the
           two preceding two weeks, showing an excess of 1,118 upon the corrected
           weekly average. The fatal cases of bronchitis, which had been 531 in the
           previous week, rose to 1,223 last week.

The last time the weekly death rate in the metropolis had approached these levels was during

the cattle-show fog of 1873. The BMJ called on scientists to isolate the factors that generated

such unusual and unhealthy fogs:

           The terrible slaughter caused by these London fogs, and registered last
           week, should suggest a scientific inquiry as to how far the poisonous and
           suffocating qualities of these fogs are different from most fogs out of
           London—arise from causes which should be, if they are not, within the
           control of efficient sanitory authorities.

The article concluded by identifying smoke as the ultimate culprit and asking whether

something could be done to minimize this nuisance: “It is smoke that makes the London fog so

mischievous; and bearing in mind the disaster last week, it is worth inquiring whether

anything cannot be done to mitigate the main cause of this remarkable mortality.”

       Ideally, we would like to have a complete history of all of the fog-related events in

London during the late-nineteenth and early twentieth century. If we possessed such a history,

and that history was independent of Brodie’s fog observations, we could look at the frequency

and severity of fog-related events before and after 1890. If Brodie’s data were correct, we

would expect to observe increasing frequency and severity in the years leading up to 1890, and

decreasing frequency and severity in the years following. The difficultly, however, is that

there is no formal history of fog-related events in London that claims to be comprehensive in


                                                18
any sense. The question, then, is how to construct such a history. One approach might be to

return to the records of the Royal Meteorological Office (which Brodie used) and search for

extended periods of dense fog. This approach is problematic because it is not fully

independent of Brodie’s data and because it would replicate much of the evidence already

presented in section 2. More importantly, it would be much too crude: there were periods of

persistent and dense fog in London that were not associated with unusually high mortality and

would not fall under our definition of a fog-related event. As an alternative strategy, one

might scour the Times of London and other contemporary news outlets for articles that

described phenomena consistent with fog-related events. Besides the high search costs and

subjectivity of this approach, one could never be certain of identifying all relevant events.

       The BMJ article discussed above suggests an econometric strategy for identifying

events. The article observed that deaths spiked during the weeks associated with fog-related

events, and that these spikes were large and uncommon. Our identification strategy is an

event study in reverse: we use spikes in the data to predict events, as opposed to using events

to predict spikes in the data. To implement this strategy, we proceed as follows. We first

collect weekly data on deaths in London during the late nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries and calculate the weekly crude death rate. Using a simple regression framework—

the weekly crude death rate is regressed against a few control variables—we then estimate a

predicted death rate for the each of the weeks in our sample. From there, it is a simple matter

to calculate a residual death rate for each week. The value of the residual establishes a

necessary, but not a sufficient, condition to qualify as an event week. In particular, to be coded


                                                19
as an event week, the week must satisfy the following three conditions:

            (c.1) The residual death rate for the week must exceed .1. The choice of
            .1 as a threshold is not entirely arbitrary. Residuals above .1 are rare—
            they are 1.1 percent of the total sample—and as shown below, they are
            probably generated by a different set of forces than those below the
            threshold.

            (c.2) There must be supporting qualitative evidence in the Times
            indicating the presence of unusually dense and persistent fog during the
            week or sometime in the preceding week.

            (c.3) The preponderance of evidence must suggest that the spike of was
            not caused by something other than fog, such as an epidemic disease
            like cholera or influenza. If the weight of the evidence suggests an
            epidemic disease was present and important, the week is coded as a
            non-event week.16 The on-line catalogues of the BMJ (at PubMed
            Central) and the Times are searched for such evidence.

As reported below, there are 32 weeks out of the sample that satisfy all three of these

requirements and are coded as event weeks.

       Before turning to the results of this exercise, a few points of clarification are in order.

The data on deaths per week are gathered from the Weekly Returns of the Registrar General,

which recorded deaths for several of England’s largest cities including London. For years

when the published volumes of the Registrar General are unavailable, the Times is consulted.

After 1888, the Times regularly summarized the weekly returns of the Registrar General.17

Death rates are calculated as deaths per 1,000 persons and are constructed using interpolated



       16
        This happens only once in the early 1890s. If we re-coded the event and treated it as
generated by a fog, the results and conclusions below would be unchanged.

       17
        England’s death registration system began in 1836, and included provisions that fined
those who failed to report deaths.

                                                 20
population data from Mitchell (1988, p. 673). Note that we calculate and report a true weekly

death rate, not an annualized weekly death rate. The sample period covers the 55 year interval

extending from 1855 to 1910, yielding a maximum possible sample size of 2,860 (52 × 55). There

are, however, 25 weeks for which data are unavailable. Dropping these from the sample, 2,835

observations remain. Regressing the crude death rate against week and year dummies and an

overall time trend, we estimate the following model:

        (1)     dkt = " + wk $ 1 + yt $ 2 + $3 N + ekt,

where dkt is the overall death rate in London in week k (k = 1, 2, . . . , 52) and year t (t = 1, 2, . . . ,

55); wk is a vector of week dummies; yt is a vector of year dummies; N is an overall time trend

(N = 1, 2, . . ., 2,860); and ekt is a random error term.18

        The model has an adjusted-R2 of .788. Even after including the week and year

dummies, the time trend is significant at the .001 level. All of our results are identical when the

time trend is excluded from the regression. We include the trend because there exists steep

downward trend in the London death rate over the entire sample period, 1855 to 1910. (See

figure 8.) In addition, the results reported below are robust to changes in our criteria that

define event weeks. If, for example, we drop conditions (c.2) and (c.3) the same basic patterns

and substantive conclusions emerge. The results are also unchanged if we lower or raise the



        18
         Ideally, it would be desirable to analyze data on cause-specific death rates for
respiratory ailments such as bronchitis and pneumonia. Although we believe these data are
available, the source in which they are reported is not easily obtained. We hope to acquire this
source and analyze cause-specific death rates in subsequent research. Nevertheless, the
anecdotal evidence presented elsewhere in the paper indicates that spikes in mortality were
driven by respiratory diseases.

                                                          21
residual threshold by a modest amount. Our main results follow in a table and a series of

figures.

       Table 2 identifies the 32 weeks in the 1855-1910 interval that satisfy the conditions

necessary to be designated as an event week. The first two columns indicate the year, and the

week of the year in which the event took place. The final column, labeled documentation,

provides citations to the month, day, and page of the Times corroborating the presence of a fog-

related event. If the event has already been described in the secondary literature on the

London fog, citations to representative secondary sources are provided. The third column,

labeled “known,” indicates whether the secondary literature already describes the weeks as

involving fog-related events. Of the 32 event weeks, 22 are part of a sequence of continuous

weeks. Events 1 and 2 involve the 4th and 5th weeks of 1855; events 3 and 4 involve the 47th and

48th weeks of 1858; and so on. The longest sequences are five weeks (events 22-26), and four

weeks (events 29-32). The last event occurs in the second week of 1900. After that time, fog-

related events cease for the period covered by our sample, which as said above ends in 1910.

       It is notable how few of the event weeks we identify have been identified by the extant

literature. For the period between 1855 and 1872, the reverse event study yields ten previously

unknown events. The descriptions of these events found in the Times suggest the procedure is

onto something. Describing events 6 and 7, the Times (Jan. 21, 1861, p. 9) observed:

           Last Thursday week, when the whole of the metropolis was enveloped in
           a dense fog, large numbers of person [sic] were stuck down as if shot.
           Dr. Lotheby, in his report to the city . . . says `the quantity of organic
           vapour, sulphate of ammonia, and finely divided soot in the atmosphere
           was unprecedented.’


                                               22
The Times (Nov. 19, 1862, p. 6) characterized the fogs associated with event 8 this way: “There

was a dense fog on Tuesday night, and on Thursday afternoon fog prevailed of a density that

has not been equaled for several years.” Of events 3 and 4, the Times (Nov. 26, 1858, p. 10) said,

“it has been several years since we have seen so dense a fog.” Events 12 through 15 are also

missed by the current literature. Occurring one year after the cattle show fog, these events

might have been overshadowed by their immediate predecessor, but newspaper accounts

suggest an anticyclone and a series of dense and persistent fogs extending over weeks.19 Of the

previously unidentified fog of 1882 (event 19), the Times (Feb. 6, 1882, p. 7) wrote:

            By general consent the fog which prevailed over a great part of the
            metropolis during Saturday and Saturday night was one of the densest
            ever experienced. It was attended with all the usual inconvenience and
            incidents, intensified to an unprecedented degree. Trains were delayed,
            fog signals were heard in rapid succession on the railways, street lamps
            were lighted, street traffic was impeded and gradually suspended, many
            tramcars ceased to run, and businesses everywhere carried on by
            artificial light. In the streets, torches and lamps did not much expedite
            locomotion. Market carts failed to reach Covenant garden until many
            hours after they were due.

Lastly, it is important to point out that our procedure misses no fog-related event suggested by

the existing secondary literature.

       Figure 4 plots the residuals for event and non-event weeks. Event week residuals are

given by black triangles; non-event week residuals by small, empty circles. To calculate the

residuals, we estimate equation (1) using only non-event weeks. The difference between the


       19
         On the Dec. 2, 1874, the Times quoted one observer as saying, “the most dense fog I
ever saw in this locality.” An editorial in the Times (Jan. 8, 1875) attributed the large number of
deaths in the metropolis to cold and variable temperatures, but this observation, combined
with the numerous reports of dense fog over a long period, suggest an anticyclone.

                                                23
predicted and observed death rate equals the residual. The triangles are consonant with

Brodie’s data on the incidence of fog. The size of the residuals increase in the years leading up

to 1891, and are more frequent before 1891 than after. There is a large and unusual spike in the

non-event week residuals in the 8th, 9th, 10th, and 11th weeks of 1895. This is the result of an

influenza epidemic (Times, March 9, 1895, p. 5). Note that the non-event residuals fall below

!.100 only twice, when they reach !.111 and !.103. To the extent that we expect symmetry in

the structure of the error term, one might plausibly argue that any residual greater than .1 is

generated by a different process than that which produces the non-event residuals.

       One objection to figure 4 is that the crude death in London falls by 50 percent over the

course of the sample period. (See figure 9.) Given such a large reduction in the baseline death

rate, one might argue that it is misleading to look at absolute deviations from trend; relative

deviations could be preferable. Accordingly, figure 5 plots a measure of relative deviation, the

residual death rate divided by the predicted rate. This change does not alter the basic pattern

observed in figure 4: increasing severity before 1891, and more fog-related events before 1891

than after. Figure 5 does, however, provide a clearer picture of the effects of fog-related events

on weekly death rates. The least severe events increased weekly death rates by 25 to 30

percent. The most severe events could double death rates, increasing them by 75 to 100

percent. Figure 6 provides a second look at the absolute effects of fog-related events. Plotting

the excess number of deaths associated with event weeks, figure 6 again shows increasing

severity before 1891, and declining severity and frequency thereafter. The excess deaths

associated with the fog-related events of the 1850s and 1860s numbered around 500, but by


                                                 24
1891, these deaths neared 2,000. As in figures 3 and 4, it is significant that fog-related events

cease after 1900.

       Taken together, the results in table 2 and in figures 4-6 support Brodie’s contention that

London’s atmosphere was worsening before 1890 and improving thereafter. These results,

however, do not help us resolve the debate surrounding his interpretation. Perhaps fog-related

events declined in frequency and severity after 1900 because there was a decline in anticyclonic

activity; or, perhaps fog-related events disappeared, or became much less severe, because of

smoke abatement efforts. Without additional evidence, we cannot be sure.

       As an indicator of mortality, there is a concern with figures 4 through 6. Demographers

call it “harvesting” and it occurs when adverse events strike heavily among the most

vulnerable parts of the population. In the case of fog-related events, suppose that fogs killed

only the frailest and most sickly individuals, people who would have died within a few days or

weeks of the fog, whether or not the fog had ever occurred. If so, the data above would

overstate the significance of fog-related events. There is anecdotal evidence to support this

hypothesis. Witness, for example, the coroner inquests of James Smith, Alice Wright, and

William Henry Pepper, discussed above.

       To address this concern, we estimate the following variant of equation (1) using the full

sample of event and non-event weeks:

       (2)     dkt = " + wk $ 1 + yt $ 2 + $3 N + R 0 F0 + R 1 F1 + R 2 F2 + . . . + R 12 F12 + ekt,

where, F0 is a dummy variable that assumes a value of one for all event weeks, and zero

otherwise; F1 is a dummy variable that assumes a value of one for the week immediately


                                                        25
following an event week, and zero otherwise; F2 is a dummy variable that assumes a value of

one for two weeks after an event week, and zero otherwise; and so on down to F12 , which

assumes a value of one for twelve weeks after an event week, and zero otherwise. All other

variables in equation (2) have the same definitions as in equation (1).

       Figure 7 plots the estimated coefficients on F0 through F12 . The black diamonds indicate

a statistically significant coefficient at the 1 percent level; the empty circles indicate

insignificant coefficients. The average fog-related event increased the weekly death rate by a

statistically-significant .16 points. In the first and second weeks after the event, the death rate

remained a statistically-significant .02 to .03 points above normal. Except for week four, all

subsequent weeks are indistinguishably different from zero in terms of statistical significance.

As for magnitudes, the point estimates are usually positive and are always very close to zero.

Only weeks 5, 9, and 11 fall below zero, to !.002, !.003, and !.007, respectively. These

patterns are inconsistent with the hypothesis that fog-related events merely rearranged deaths,

only causing people to die a few weeks or days earlier than they otherwise would have.

       Another concern is we do not control for rainfall and temperature in equation (1). To

the extent that fogs were associated with low temperatures, and low temperatures were

associated with excess deaths, this estimating procedure imparts an upward bias to the effects

of fogs. Although we have not been able to code and analyze the weather data that would

allow us to expressly control for such concerns,20 we have located anecdotal evidence to



       20
        It is our intention to use these data in subsequent research, but compiling the weather
data and merging it the mortality data we use here is beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                  26
suggest that, absent dense fogs, extremely low temperatures did not have the same large effects

on mortality. Intense cold alone raised the death rate, but not by the magnitudes we estimate

for fogs and cold (Times: Jan. 16, 1867, p. 6; Dec. 14, 1897, p. 11; and Feb. 4, 1879, p. 3). Also, for

variation in temperatures to explain the inverted U-shaped pattern we find in fog-related

events reported in figures 4-6, temperatures in England and London would have had to follow

that same pattern. We have examined temperature data for the whole of Central England from

a variety of sources (e.g., Manley 1974) and find little evidence of this.

        Finally, in those cases where fog and cold struck London simultaneously, the fog was

unique to London but the cold was not; the latter affected surrounding areas as well. If it had

been the cold causing the excess deaths, the spike in death rates would have occurred for all

areas with cold. But when we consult the Weekly Reports of the Registrar General, and various

accounts in the Times, both sources indicate that while the cold was a general event (affecting

all cities and towns around London), the fogs and the spikes in mortality were not; they

occurred only in London. Consider the following description of the role that cold temperatures

played during the terrible fog of February, 1880, as highlighted by events 16-18 in table 2 :

        The weather was cold, and fogs had been dense and continuous. Cold alone
        does not account for the disaster, since in several of the English towns the cold
        was equally, and even more severe than in the metropolis, and yet their death
        rate was not unduly increased. The mischief appears to have been mainly
        wrought by fogs, heavily charged with the `London smoke,’ or carbon in a
        minutely divided form, the properties of which are intensely irritant to the
        respiratory passages. (Proceedings of the Medical Society of the County of Kings, July
        1880, p. 185.)

Similarly, in his study of the relationship between temperatures and the death rate in London,



                                                  27
Dines (1894) argued that one should not be quick to attribute increased mortality during the

winter quarter to reduced temperatures, but rather to increased crowding and a heavily

polluted atmosphere.

4. A Kuznets Curve Too Far

       A simple way to explore Brodie’s hypothesis is to look at the annual death rate from

bronchitis, which as explained above was highly responsive to fog-related events and

presumably to smog in general. To the extent that the air of London was becoming more or

less polluted, one expects that the death rate from bronchitis would have been positively

correlated with such changes. For example, in a paper published in the Journal of the Royal

Sanitary Institute in 1907, Louis Ascher presented fragmentary evidence linking the rise and fall

of bronchitis and acute pulmonary diseases in the United States and Prussia to changes in

exposure to coal smoke. Ascher also collected data for Manchester, England, which showed

that between 1896 and 1905, the number of foggy days fell by 36 percent, while over the same

period, the death rate from acute respiratory diseases fell by 18 percent. Ascher (1907, p. 89)

hypothesized that both reductions might have resulted from smoke control: “From these

statistics we see that the number of fog days has decreased, and we find a corresponding

decrease in mortality from acute pulmonary diseases . . . . This decrease may, perhaps, be due

to coal smoke abatement, which in Manchester is classical.” While Ascher was clearly justified

in his tentativeness, the hypothesis is intriguing, as was his suggestion that broad national

changes in respiratory death rates in the U.S. and Prussia were driven by changes in coal

smoke emissions. Schaefer (1907) presents evidence along these lines for Kansas City and St.


                                                28
Louis.

         Figure 8 plots the annual death rate from bronchitis in London from 1850 through 1920.

The figure also plots the death rate from three respiratory diseases combined: bronchitis;

pneumonia; and tuberculosis. Of the two series, we believe the bronchitis series is superior

because bronchitis is more closely correlated with fog and inorganic pathogens. Pneumonia

and tuberculosis, which have bacterial and viral origins, have weaker connections (Lawther

1959; Schaefer 1907; White and Shuey 1914). We include the latter series only because one

might question the ability of nineteenth century physicians to distinguish among the three

diseases. The bronchitis rate trends upward between 1850 and 1880, increasing by 67 percent,

from around 150 deaths per 100,000 persons to 250. Notice that in 1880 the bronchitis rate

spikes to 300, double the rate observed at the start of the series. This is the result of a fog-

related event in February of 1880 (events 16 and 17 in table 2). After this event, however, the

bronchitis rate reverses trend, and over the next three decades is more than halved, falling

from 250 to 100. The death rate for respiratory diseases in general does not reveal the same

sharp reversal in trend. Rather, the respiratory-disease death rate is flat between 1850 and

1880, and then begins a steep downward trend that parallels the trend for bronchitis. These

patterns are an uneasy fit with Brodie’s data. The bronchitis death rate maps out an inverted

U-shape that is broadly consistent with the rise and fall of the London fog, but the inflection

point occurs almost a decade before the inflection point observed in the fog data.

         Are there interventions other than coal smoke abatement that might explain the sharp

reversal in trend in the bronchitis death rate? One contentious line of thought attributes the


                                                  29
decline in respiratory diseases (specifically tuberculosis) observed during this period to a rising

standard of living, which resulted in better housing and improved nutrition (Wilson 2005). It is

true that nutrition and wages were rising during the late nineteenth century, but to explain the

break in trend observed here, they would have had to have been declining up to 1880 and then

suddenly have started to improve. We are aware of no evidence to support such a conjecture.

       A more plausible hypothesis builds on the idea that bronchitis might have been a

common sequella to some other disease that experienced a highly effective intervention. The

most logical candidate here is water. The Mills-Reincke phenomenon, identified

independently by scientists in Massachusetts and Germany, posited that for every one death

from typhoid fever there were four or more deaths from some other cause (not directly

waterborne) that was the sequella of typhoid (Sedgwick and MacNutt 1910). Hence when

cities began filtering water supplies, they not only reduced deaths from waterborne diseases

like cholera and typhoid, they also reduced deaths from non-waterborne diseases like

pneumonia, tuberculosis, kidney disease, and heart disease. There are two problems with this

line of thought. In an econometric analysis of the Mills-Reincke phenomenon, Ferrie and

Troesken (2008) find no evidence that bronchitis commonly followed typhoid (or enteric fever

as it was called in England). And even if bronchitis had been a common sequella to typhoid,

London began cleaning up its water supply long before 1880 (Tynan 2002).

       Another possibility, akin to the sequella hypothesis, is that the rise and fall of bronchitis

was part of a larger mortality transition taking place in London, a transition that saw a broad

swath of diseases rise and fall between 1850 and 1910. This is not consistent with figure 9,


                                                30
which shows the crude death rate in London declining over the entire period after 1865. Before

that time, the overall death rate is stagnant, except for two large spikes caused by cholera.

       The final two hypotheses are the most plausible, but they also raise more questions than

they answer. Consider figure 10, which plots the bronchitis death rate in London relative to

the death rates in England and Wales in general. These data suggest that bronchitis rates were

improving in the country as a whole, not just in London. One interpretation of this result is

that there was some intervention other than smoke abatement that was common to all areas of

England and Wales that caused death rates to start falling. The problem here is that we are no

closer to understanding the ultimate cause of the change in trend. What exactly was this

unidentified intervention? All we have done is push the question back to a higher level of

aggregation.21

       Another interpretation, for which there is supporting evidence, is that London was not

alone in pursuing efforts to limit smoke emissions. All major cities in the England and Wales

were pursuing these efforts and were subject to many of the same laws as was London (BMJ,

Aug. 20, 1908, p. 615). We are not the first to suggest this possibility. More than one hundred

years ago, Ascher (1907, p. 89) observed that bronchitis and pneumonia rates throughout



       21
         One plausible hypothesis that we have not fully considered is that there was a
nationwide shift in how physicians in England and Wales diagnosed bronchitis. We searched
multiple online databases for articles in the history of medicine as well as contemporary
journals such as the Lancet and the BMJ for evidence of such a shift, but found none. Moreover,
even when we aggregated respiratory diseases (similar to what was done in figure 7, only for
the whole of England and Wales) we found evidence of a change in trend taking place around
1880. This seems inconsistent with a story about physicians mistaking one respiratory disease
for another.

                                                31
England and Wales rose during the mid-1800s and then fell during the later part of the century.

At the time Ascher suggested that “it would be a valuable work to examine whether” this

pattern was the result of “coal smoke abatement.”22

       Ideally, we would like to construct a panel of British cities, some of which were subject

to smoke abatement efforts, and some of which were not. With such a data set we could

perform a more formal and standard fixed-effects estimation of the effects of smoke control on

respiratory diseases. While we have identified a data source that would enable us to construct

such a panel, we are unable at this stage compile and analyze the data. That is left for a later

paper. Nevertheless, we can offer some preliminary observations. Though crude and subject

to many caveats, these observations are suggestive and indicate that something was happening

to bronchitis and respiratory disease rates in Britain and elsewhere, and that it is not

implausible to believe that that something was caused by a reduction in coal smoke.23

       In this preliminary context, we turn to the experiences of Glasgow in particular, and



       22
        Ascher’s data do not agree with ours, though both came from the identical source, The
Annual Reports of the Registrar General. Ascher (1908) suggests bronchitis and pneumonia rates
in England and Wales were rising between 1866 and 1895, and fell thereafter. As already
shown, our data suggest an earlier turning point.

       23
        We have examined bronchitis rates in five American cities and one state (Chicago,
Milwaukee, New Orleans, New York, Washington DC, and New Hampshire). Although we do
not report these plots here, we found that in all of these places a sharp change in trend in
bronchitis rates took place around 1890, ten years after the change observed in England and
Wales. Several of these cities enacted smoke control ordinances during the 1890s. On smoke
abatement efforts in Chicago, which closely paralleled those in London, see Bird (1911). For an
overview of smoke abatement in Pittsburgh, see Meller (1926). Stradling and Thorsheim (1999)
provide a nice overview of smoke abatement efforts in both America and Britain between 1860
and 1914.

                                                32
Scotland in general. Glasgow was much like London. It too was a foggy place that sometimes

experienced unusually dense and persistent fogs, apparently as a result of anticyclones and

temperature inversions. For example, the British Medical Journal reported that during the first

week of January 1875, the death rate in Glasgow rose 150 percent above its normal level for the

week (Jan. 30, 1875, p. 153):

           Those who lived in Glasgow during the last three weeks of 1874 will
           hardly be surprised at the enormous death rate. There was a fog of no
           ordinary character. A fog is bad enough, but this one . . . could not only
           be seen, but tasted and smelt. The moisture was evidently impregnated
           with soot and chemical fumes in the highest degree.

Nor was this first time Glasgow had been enveloped by such a fog. Quoting a local physician,

the BMJ explained that “every Glasgow citizen” had “of late” found themselves “in the midst

of choking fogs.” The BMJ concluded by observing that during Glasgow fogs, brass and metal

plates on doors or any other exposed surface quickly oxidized. If this is what the fog did to

polished metal, what, the journal wondered, did it do to an individual’s bronchial passages?

           It is well known that when the wind blows from the east, it is almost
           impossible to keep the handles of doors, door-bells, or any polished
           metal from becoming quickly oxidised. And during the late fog it
           needed only an hour or two to darken the most brilliantly polished door-
           plate. The air was evidently impregnated with active chemical gases,
           and these, no doubt, acted on delicate bronchial tubes as well as the more
           enduring brass.

       Describing a much later fog, the Medical Press (Feb. 22, 1899) observed: “On account of

the dense fog in Glasgow a few days ago the death rate made a lead upward to 35 per 1,000 of

the population, placing Glasgow in the unenviable position of having the largest death rate of

any town in the United Kingdom.” The last time death rates rose so high was five years prior,


                                               33
“when the frost and fog were intense.” “Even then,” however, “the same suffocating and

throttling effect was not experienced as on the present occasion, when several instances of

giddiness and vomiting in the street came under immediate notice.” Offering a more general

characterization, Kirkwood’s Dictionary of Glasgow and Vicinity (1884, p. 60) wrote: “Although

Glasgow fogs do not equal those of London . . . in the depth of winter, when the intensity of the

frost prevents the lifting of smoke which always hangs over the city, the visitor or resident will

doubtless consider them bad enough.” The Dictionary lamented the fact that attempts “to force

the public works to consumer their own smoke had “been in vain,” but offered the following

advice in consolation: “go out-of-doors as little as possible, and . . . keep the mouth as much as

possible closed. Few things can be more hurtful than to take into the lungs and air-passages

the exhalations and half-consumed floating carbon which, together, constitute a Glasgow fog.”

       Figure 11 plots bronchitis rates in Glasgow and Scotland from 1855 through 1905. The

patterns are similar to those observed for London and for England and Wales. For Scotland as

a whole, the bronchitis rate rises by a factor of 2.5 between 1855 and 1878, and then initiates a

sharp downward trend, falling back to its original level by 1905. The data for Glasgow are not

available before 1880, but after that date, they exhibit an even sharper downward trend. The

death rate from bronchitis falls from a high of 400 deaths per 100,000 to just over 100, a

reduction of nearly 75 percent. What distinguishes Glasgow’s experience from London’s,

however, is the strong evidence of relative improvement. In 1880, Glasgow’s death rate was

roughly 60 percent greater than the death for the whole of Scotland; by 1905, the Glasgow

bronchitis penalty vanished, and the city’s death rate equaled that of the rest of the country.


                                                34
       Although we can not treat Glasgow’s smoke abatement movement with the same level

of detail that we will treat London’s (see section 5), two observations can be made here. First,

laws regulating coal smoke in Glasgow were passed in 1866, 1867, and 1892. There is evidence

that the earlier laws were actively enforced by the late 1880s (Thomson 1894-95). Could these

laws, and variation in their enforcement, account for the patterns we observe in bronchitis rates

and fogs? Evidence presented below for London suggests this is a possibility.

       Second, there are the short but remarkably perceptive letters written by William

Tennant Gairdner, a prominent and widely-published Glasgow physician. Writing to the

Edinburgh Medical Journal in January of 1875, Gairdner made an eloquent case that the only way

to eliminate Glasgow’s high fog-related mortality was to disperse the population and

manufacturers over a broader area so that their smoke and noxious vapors became less

concentrated.24 After describing a December fog as bringing “Egyptian darkness into our

houses at noonday,” Gairdner plead his case:

            Hence the practical lesson to be derived from the late inordinate rate of
            mortality, is the necessity of diminishing the permanent rate; and this, I
            apprehend, can only be done by the gradual dispersion of the town over a
            larger area, thereby diminishing at once the concentration of noxious
            vapours, and the dangerously excessive density of the resident
            population [emphasis original].

Later in same letter, Gairdner made reference to Glasgow’s Improvement Trust, which during


       24
        Specifically, Gairdner published two consecutive letters. The first appeared under the
heading, “Chemical Vapours, Fog, and the Death Rate,” and was published on pp. 866-67 of the
Edinburgh Medical Journal, Volume 20, Part 2, January-June 1875. The second appeared under
the heading, “The Death-Rate in Glasgow—The Debate at the Police Board,” and was
published on pp. 867-68. The quotations below (with one brief exception) are from the second
letter.

                                                35
the late nineteenth century destroyed privately-owned tenement housing and replaced it with

municipally-owned housing. These references are notable because they suggest the city had

within its power the ability to use its police powers to force suburbanization, the very thing

Gairdner advocated:

            The operations of the Improvement Trust have been very successful in
            clearing out some of the most densely peopled spots in the centre of the
            city, with great benefit alike to the health and morals of their immediate
            neighbourhood. . . . But the persons displaced by the City Improvement
            Act have not in all probability found their way to any extent into the
            suburbs—in other words, the Improvement Act, although greatly
            improving the spots which it affects, has not to any considerable extent
            decentralized Glasgow. And this is what we must aim at doing—gradually
            of course—if we are ever to have a purer atmosphere, a less
            overcrowded population, and a lower death rate [emphasis original].

Implicit in Gairdner’s advocacy and analysis are the beginnings of an hypothesis: might

suburbanization, a process that not only redistributed people but also smoke, help explain the

rise and fall in bronchitis throughout the United Kingdom, as well as fogs in London? Data

and evidence presented in section 5 will allow us to explore this possibility.

5. Victorian Environmentalism: Theory, History, and Evidence

       Figure 12 plots two data series, one for fog and one for coal. The first series, given by

the small hollow circles, is the number of foggy days in London from 1730 to 1910. A trend line

is also plotted for this series.25 The second series, given by the small black circles, is coal


       25
          To create this series, we splice together three different data series on fog in London.
The longest series is from Mossmann (1897), who gathered non-instrumental readings of
London weather from 1713 through 1896 and then published his results in the Quarterly Journal
of the Royal Meteorological Society. The next series is foggy days at the Brixton weather station,
the series Brodie (1905) used. The third series is foggy days at the West Norwood Station. Part
of this series is found in the discussion following Brodie’s paper, and the other part of the

                                                  36
consumption per capita. We proxy consumption with imports of coal into London. Nearly all

coal imported into London was consumed there. Before 1800 and the industrial revolution, the

number of foggy days in London is stagnant, hovering around 12 days per year. Coal

consumption per head shows only slight growth during the same period. After 1800 and the

onset of industrialization, both series begin to rise, and after 1850 the growth is exponential.

The foggy days measure rises threefold between 1850 and 1890, increasing from around 25 to

more than 75 days per annum. Similarly, annual coal consumption rises by a factor of 2.5, from

one ton per head in 1850 to 2.5 tons in 1890. Things change abruptly for both series around

1890. Foggy days per annum reverses trend, and plummets by around 85 percent within a

twenty year interval. Although coal consumption does not reverse trend, it stagnates, showing

no growth over the next thirty years.

       Figure 13 plots a measure of total coal consumption over time, the natural log of tons of

coal imported into London. The observed log is plotted by the empty circles. A vertical

reference line is plotted at the year 1890 to indicate the inflection point in the fog series from

figure 12. Figure 13 also includes several trend lines that identify changes in slope over

different historical intervals. The flattest trend line indicates the growth rate in total coal

consumption between 1700 and 1750; the next line indicates the growth rate between 1750 and

1800; the next to steepest line indicates the growth rate between 1800 and 1840; and the steepest

line the growth rate between 1840 and 1880. As in figure 12, these lines show that over time,




series is from Lempfert (1912). Although it does not change the picture much, we use simple
regression techniques to make the separate series comparable over time.

                                                 37
the growth rate in coal consumption steadily increases. Not until sometime after 1890 does this

pattern of increasing growth cease. There is clear evidence that after this point, for the next

thirty years, coal consumption is well below trend.

       At first blush, the patterns in figures 12 (and 13) seem broadly consistent with Brodie’s

explanation of the rise and fall of the London fog. When coal consumption in England grew

slowly, and in some absolute sense, was not large, London fogs were much less frequent than

they would later prove to be. Because it will be useful later in the analysis, we formalize this

observation by saying that smoke-associated fogs will not emerge as long as the concentration

or density of smoke, Sd , does not exceed some threshold, T. With the onset of industrialization

in 1800, coal consumption continued to increase, and eventually, the concentration of smoke in

London rose above the threshold T. At this point, the environment began to degrade,

manifesting itself in a slow but observable increase in the number of foggy days per year.

When coal consumption exploded after 1850, so too did the number of foggy days. Only when

coal consumption stabilized around 1890 did the fogs begin to decline.

       There is a problem here, however. How could stabilization in the per capita

consumption of coal initiate a decline in fog? If increases in coal consumption per capita drove

the increase in fog, the converse—that a decline in coal consumption in per capita drove the

decrease in fog—would also have to be true, would it not? Moreover, to the extent that smoke

density was determined solely by the amount of coal consumed, one should not even bother

looking at coal consumption per head; all that should matter is total consumption of coal. By

this logic, a reduction in smoke required a reduction in the total amount of coal consumed.


                                                38
Without such a reduction there is no way we (or Brodie) could use smoke abatement to explain

the demise of the London fog. And we know from figure 13 that total coal consumption did

not fall. Its rate of growth slowed, but it did not reverse trend and begin to decline.

          We think that this formulation misses three points. The first point builds on Gairdner’s

argument that Glasgow could have made its atmosphere cleaner by dispersing people and

smoke over a larger area, in effect, diluting the smoke. The second point appeals to a weak

version of Porter’s conjecture that in the quest to abate pollution firms might discover new

technologies and operating procedures that make them more productive.26 The third point is

that not all coals are equal; some create much more smoke than others. To make these points

more clearly, we construct a simple model of smoke density, (Sd ) in and around the area known

as London, or more formally, as Greater London. After constructing the model, we engage in a

crude calibration exercise. Using historical observation and some limited data, we give the

model a plausible structure. In the context of that structured model, we argue that a policy

change observed in 1891 could account for the patterns Brodie documented.

          Before turning to the model, however, we need to more clearly define what is meant by

the geographic descriptor “London.” Today, London proper covers only 1.2 square miles;

Greater London covers nearly 660 square miles. Thus far, all of our references to London have

actually been to Greater London. We will continue this practice, but will also draw the

distinction when appropriate. We did not raise this fine point of urban geography earlier



          26
               For empirical evidence consistent with the Porter hypothesis, see Berman and Bui
(2001).

                                                    39
because it was not relevant until now.

       Let smoke density in any year t in Greater London be determined by a simple function:

       (3)     Sd = (( C)/A,

where A is a measure of the geographic area covered by Greater London in year t; C is the

amount of coal consumed or burned in year t; and ( is a scalar, ( 0 (0,1). The scalar ( is the

fraction of coal that is unburnt and escapes as soot and tar into the atmosphere during the

firing and stoking process. The product of ( × C is smoke. Today, when we think about smoke

abatement, we typically think about reducing ( through the installation of some sort of

scrubber technology; or we might think about reducing C by switching from coal to some other

fuel such as natural gas, solar, or nuclear power. Most people in the nineteenth and early

twentieth century thought in a similar way. Nevertheless, one could also reduce Sd by

increasing A. We explain these different mechanisms by giving the elements of equation (3)

more structure.

       Both A and C are strictly increasing functions of population. As population increases,

the amount of coal consumed rises, which in turn increases the absolute amount of smoke and

smoke density. But there is also a countervailing effect. As population increases, so too does

the area of the city. New migrants do not only move to previously settled areas of the city; they

also take up residence in outlying areas that were previously unsettled. This increases in A.

One might even conceive of a world where population density in the central areas of the

metropolis fall as residents of those areas move to less densely populated areas on the edge of

the city, perhaps spurred by other migrants locating there. Redistributing population from a


                                               40
densely populated core to a less densely populated periphery would also change the

distribution of smoke.

          Under the right set of conditions, the redistribution of population and smoke might

generate a reduction in smoke-associated fogs without any reduction in coal consumption,

relative or absolute. In the simplest case, divide London into two parts, an old part that is

densely populated, very smoky, and prone to smoke-associated fogs; and a new part that is

sparsely populated, not smoky at all, and not prone to fog. Smoke density in the old part of the

city is given by So, where So > T. (T recall is the fog threshold). Smoke density in the new part

is given by Sn , where Sn < T. Let Ro = (So - T) and Rn = (T - Sn ). Suppose the migration of

households from the old part of the city to the new reduces smoke in the old area by Ro and

increases smoke in the new area by the same amount. As long as Ro # Rn , the reduction in

smoke in the old area would eliminate fogs there, while the associated increase in smoke in the

new area would not be sufficiently large to generate fogs there. Smoke-related fogs would

disappear. To the extent that population increases are associated with expansions in territory,

and a dilution in the density of smoke, it seems appropriate to look at coal consumption per

capita.

          Better than coal consumption per capita, though, would be time series data on the

distribution of London’s population between the dense core and the sparse periphery. Figure

14 provides those data, plotting population density in London proper (the core) and the whole

of Greater London from 1811 through 2001. Population density in London proper starts the

series at a remarkable 400 persons per hectare and holds steady there until 1861, when it


                                                 41
implodes. By 1911, population density in London proper falls to 103.6. Population density for

Greater London rises from .6 persons per hectare in 1811 to 1.44 in 1861, after which it begins a

more rapid ascent. By 1911, population density in Greater London rises to 3.5. These data

suggest that one path to solving London’s smoke problem began to emerge three decades

before Brodie’s inflection point around 1890. Poore (1893) indicated that it was not just London

proper that experienced an outflow of people. The combined population of all five of London’s

central districts—Holborn; the Strand; St. Martins; St. Giles; and the city proper—dropped from

a peak of 334,369 in 1861 to 247,140 in 1891.27

       By driving people out of the center of the metropolis, the dense, smoky fogs of central

London might have contained the seeds of their own demise. An article published in Science

more than a century ago explained. Asking why the population density of Paris was so much

higher than that of London, the unnamed author wrote (Feb. 19, 1886, pp. 173-74):

            The average density of Paris is more than double that of London, and yet
            the streets are brighter and cleaner. The question probably turns more
            upon the prevention of smoke than any thing else. If the fog and gloom
            could be removed, and free access provided for the sunlight, there is no
            pleasanter [sic] or healthier place to live than the west end of London;
            and many who now endure, morning and evening, forty minutes’
            journey through choking tunnels, and walk long distances to railway
            termini, would stay in town if they could be relieved from the depression
            which is the accompaniment of a murky atmosphere.

The idea that central London was, in a relative sense, an unhealthy place to live because of fog

receives support from the available data on death rates. Figure 15 plots the trend in the crude



       27
         Poore (1893), it should be noted, believed that the increase in the area of the city was a
cause of fogs.

                                                  42
death rate for London as a whole, and the observed crude death rate for London’s five central

districts. The death rate in London as a whole falls by around 25 percent between 1860 and

1890; the death rate in the central district remains flat.

       While the data in figures 14 and 15 bear-out aspects of the suburbanization/smoke

redistribution story, this story can not explain the sudden stagnation in the growth of coal

consumption per capita observed in figure 12. Nor would it seem to do a very good job

accounting for the sudden reversal in trend we observe for foggy days around 1890. The other

components of equation (3), however, do provide a framework for explaining why foggy days

started to trend down at the same time that coal consumption per capita stagnated. Recall the

smoke term, ( C. Advocates of smoke control suggested that ( and C were not independent of

one another. On the contrary, as explained below, there was a large literature that claimed to

demonstrate that as firms adopted technologies and operating procedures that mitigated

smoke emissions, they would conserve on coal consumption because dense emissions of coal

smoke contained a large amount of unburnt and unexploited coal. We formalize this idea by

characterizing C as a weakly increasing function of ( :

       (4)     C = c(( ) and C( $ 0.

       In a sense, ( is also a function of C. More precisely, firms and households in the

nineteenth century had a choice between two types of coal, soft (bituminous) or hard

(anthracite). The amount of smoke generated by coal depended upon which type was used.

Soft coal, Cs, generated much more smoke than hard coal , Ch . Let h denote the proportion of

coal used in London that was anthracite:


                                                  43
       (5)     h = (Ch )/(C),

where C = (Cs + Ch ). The proportion of burned coal that escaped into the atmosphere was a

negative function of how much of that coal was anthracite. We formalize this idea by

characterizing ( as a strictly decreasing function of h:

       (6)     ( = g(h) and (h < 0.

Barr (1900, pp. 9-48) provides a clear scientific explanation for this assumption. In London, two

types of so-called “smokeless coals” were used. These were Welsh anthracite and Welsh steam

coal, both of which contained more carbon and fewer volatile components than ordinary

bituminous coal, though ash content was similar across all three types of coal.28

       This set up give us a framework for understanding what happened in 1891. First we

quickly summarize what we believe happened without providing any evidence; then we offer

a longer historical discussion with evidence. In 1891, the British government passed the Public

Health Act. This law empowered police in metropolitan London to fine manufacturers

throughout the area for dense smoke emissions. Enforcement of this law encouraged firms to

conserve on soft coal, setting in motion processes that drove up h, drove down ( , and at least

put downward pressure on Cs. Although the absolute amount of coal (C) in London did not

fall as a result of these processes, the relative amount stabilized as actors worked to economize




       28
         In particular, Welsh steam coals were between 70 and 87 percent carbon, 12 to 20
percent volatile matter, and 1 to 4 percent ash; Welsh anthracite was 91 to 96 percent carbon, 3
to 8 percent volatile matter, and 1.5 percent ash. Ordinary bituminous coal from England was
around 60 percent carbon, 38 percent volatile matter, and 4 percent ash. See Taylor and
Haldeman (1855), p. 71.

                                                44
on their use of soft coal. Complementing the actions of manufacturers, London homeowners

also became more cognizant of ways to conserve on coal, and adopted gas for cooking and

heating or purchased grates and boilers designed to minimize smoke emissions and wasted

fuel. It is important to emphasize that none of this need to have been rational or profit-

maximizing from a given firm’s perspective. Logic suggests it must have cost firms more to

economize on soft coal than the coal was worth, otherwise they would have adopted smoke

abatement technologies and practices without the impetus of the Public Health Act.29

        Although London had a long history of anti-smoke agitation (see Brimblecombe 1987,

pp. 10-18, and 90-107), the movement began in earnest in 1880 with the creation of the National

Smoke Abatement Institution (NSAI). A private institution located mainly in London but with

ties throughout the United Kingdom, the NSAI organized exhibitions for inventors and

manufacturers to display heating and cooking grates, stoves, steam boilers, smokeless fuels,

and other devices designed to mitigate emissions of coal smoke. The group offered prizes for

inventions deemed especially promising and created venues through which it sought to

instruct manufacturers and homeowners in ways to conserve on coal. It also worked to dispel

the widespread notion that coal smoke had disinfectant properties that destroyed airborne

pathogens that would have otherwise carried diseases like tuberculosis and influenza (Report of

the Smoke Abatement Committee, 1883, p. 183; and Nature, Feb. 9, 1888, pp. 356-68; Transactions of

the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain, 1887-88, pp. 301-45).


        29
       See also Booth (1898) for an informal discussion of the tendency for engineers in
London to install bituminous-coal fired heaters rather than ones that used smokeless Welsh
coals.

                                                   45
       The members of the NSAI, like most participants in the late-nineteenth-century smoke

abatement movement, embraced an early incarnation of the Porter hypothesis, the idea that

environmental regulations and controls might spur productivity advances. The NSAI believed

that the technologies it recognized and helped introduce to the world would not only make

nineteenth-century cities cleaner and less polluted, they would make businesses more efficient

and profitable. Arguing that dense smoke represented imperfect combustion and wasted fuel,

the advocates of this early Porterism claimed that proper stoking methods, specially-designed

coal grates, stoking machines, and various types of smoke consumers would enable

manufacturers to conserve on coal (e.g., Report from the Select Committee on Smoke Prevention

1843; Report of the Smoke Abatement Committee, 1883, p. 183; BMJ, Aug. 20, 1908, p. 615).

       Whether or not one is convinced by the claim that smoke abatement would make firms

more profitable, participants in the smoke-control movement made a strong case that,

whatever the cost of abatement, it would simultaneously economize on coal and reduce smoke.

In his paper, “Wasteful Power Production: With Special Reference to Waste Due to Smoke,”

John S. Owens (1912, p. 93) explained:

           The production of dense smoke means that the burning gases are being
           extinguished, form some cause, before combustion is complete. This is
           often due to insufficient air supply to the combustion chamber while the
           gases are being distilled off and burnt. Insufficient air means not only
           smoke but the escape of unconsumed gases, and these are a source of
           considerable loss.

According to Owens, the simplest and easiest way to assure adequate air-flow was by stoking

the coals properly:



                                                46
           It is a very curious thing that so little effort is made to ensure a
           knowledge of the first principles of their calling in the men whose
           business it is to feed the fuel to a furnace. It has been shown that a bad
           stoker may burn 15 or 20 percent more fuel than a good one to get the
           same effect; and while doing so he usually produces a great deal more
           smoke than necessary. If fact, it is well known that smoke production
           and wasteful combustion go hand in hand. And although it might not
           pay a manufacturer to educate his stokers, or employ more skilled
           labour, in order to save the proportion of the fuel which is lost in soot
           alone; it would certainly pay him to see that the method of stoking is
           such as will give the best economy of fuel and the most perfect
           combustion.

This logic suggests that proper stoking reduced smoke, Sd , through two mechanism, one direct,

the other indirect. The direct mechanism was that proper stoking itself reduced smoke. The

indirect mechanism is that proper stoking also reduced coal consumption.

       The idea that proper stoking prevented smoke and saved coal has a long history and

was widely accepted, even among producers and manufacturers who were otherwise resistant

to smoke abatement. In a paper read before the Royal Sanitary Institute, Caborne (1906)

expressed the identical argument. Twenty year earlier in front of the same venue, Fletcher

(1887-88) claimed to have stated the obvious when he discussed the efficacy of proper stoking.

A survey conducted by the London Coal Smoke Abatement Society in the early 1900s also

supports the idea that factory owners believed Owens’s central message. Surveying 63 London

factories who had not been cited for excessive smoke in the last six months of 1904, the society

elicited 35 useful responses. Of the respondents, just over half (13) ascribed “their success in

preventing the emission of smoke to careful stoking (Rideal 1906, p. 149).” The argument that

proper stoking economized on coal by producing more heat from a given stock of coal lays an



                                                47
empirical and historical foundation for the assumption, C( $ 0.

       Arguably the most important factor driving down ( in the aftermath of the Public

Health Act was the direct effect of having producers switch from soft coal to different varieties

of hard coal. In the context of figure 11, the data on coal consumption per capita are for the

consumption of all kinds of coal not just soft coal. We have found no data source that would

allow us to construct separate times series for hard and soft coal. However, of the 35 firms

responding to the aforementioned survey of the smoke abatement society, all but one used

some variety of coke or anthracite. Seventeen firms used Welsh coal, a variety of anthracite

(Rideal 1906). When miners in the south of Wales struck during the late 1890s, London

factories that had been using Welsh coal were forced to use bituminous. Their furnaces ill-

equipped for bituminous coal and unable to stoke their fires properly, the factory owners were

“hauled up before sundry magistrates to show cause why they should not abate the smoke

nuisance they [were] making (Booth 1898, p. 1064; Public Health, Aug. 15, 1898, p. 373).”

       In the absence of legislation punishing smoke emissions, it is difficult to imagine that

manufacturers would have switched from soft to hard coal, which all reports indicate was

“much dearer” than soft coal and harder to light, though once lit it “was a splendid article”

(Medical Times, March 11, 1882, p. 395; Booth 1898; Saward 1914, p. 156; Reynolds 1882, pp. 167-

80). Figure 17 plots the relative price of Welsh steam coal and ordinary (Newcastle)

bituminous coal over the course of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century. The

underlying price series are based on the supply prices at the mine, not delivered prices in

London. Over the long-term, the relative price of Welsh coal sold at a 20 percent premium


                                                48
throughout the period. This pattern rules out the possibility that the switch from soft to

English coal to “smokeless” Welsh coal was driven by a reduction in the relative price of Welsh

coal. On the contrary, the trend line indicates a non-trivial uptick in the relative price of Welsh

coal sometime after 1885. This pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that demand for

smokeless coals increased relative to the demand for ordinary bituminous coal as a result of

regulatory or political pressures.

       As manufacturers switched from soft coal to hard, they also indirectly helped reduce

overall coal consumption. Once again, Owens (1912, pp. 93-94) provides a useful explanation

of this mechanism. Because soot was a “very bad conductor of heat,” when boiler plates

became covered in soot, “the rate of heat transfer [was] reduced.” Owens conducted a series of

experiments to measure the amount of heat that might have been lost when factory owners and

operatives allowed soot to build up on boiler plates. He found that a layer of soot 1/20 of an

inch thick, reduced the transfer of heat by 15 percent. One way manufacturers could prevent

the development of coal soot on boiler plate was to use hard coal intermittently or mixed with

the bituminous coal. Because Welsh and anthracite coals generated less soot and tar than

bituminous coal, even their intermittent use delayed the formation of soot on boiler plates and

enabled workers to generate more heat than they otherwise would have when they used

bituminous coal alone. It was not uncommon for manufacturers in turn-of-the-century London

to use a mixtures of smokeless coal and bituminous coal (Rideal 1906). This pathway suggests

another justification for the assumption, C( $ 0.

       Aside from the switch from bituminous to Welsh coal among manufacturers, there was


                                                49
also a more voluntary transition taking among consumers. An observer who placed heavy

emphasis on the voluntary adoption of new technologies was Sir George Livesey, an officer of

a large London gas company and leader of the city’s smoke abatement movement. In a paper

presented to the Royal Sanitary Institute, Livesey argued that London had become a less smoky

place because more and more consumers, especially those among the working classes, were

using gas stoves rather than coal for cooking. The spread of gas cookers among the poor was

the result of two pricing strategies adopted by London gas companies: one was the practice of

renting stoves to customers; the other was the coin-in-the-slot method of paying for gas. Of the

834,000 households in London that purchased gas from the city’s three major gas companies, 70

percent used gas stoves for cooking, and that number would have been even higher if homes

and apartments had had sufficient space for a gas stove and opposition from landlords had not

been so strong (Livesey 1906). While one might dismiss Livesey’s arguments and opposition to

coal smoke as patently self-serving, ten years before he published his paper, the British Medical

Journal (Aug. 22, 1896, p. 465) published data and evidence very much in keeping with his

otherwise partisan observations. Surprisingly the BMJ suggested that it was the wealthy, not

the poor, who were slow to adopt gas for cooking.30


       30
          The BMJ (Aug. 22, 1896, p. 465) wrote: “A new and unexpected agency is having a
most beneficial effect in contributing to the abatement of the smoke nuisance in London. The
relative clearness of the London atmosphere within the last twelve months has been plainly
apparent, and the smoke cloud which obscures the London atmosphere appears to be
progressively lightening. Mr. Ernest Hart, Chairman of the Smoke Abatement Exhibition in
London, frequently pointed out that the greatest contributors to the smoke cloud of London
were the small grates of the enormous number of houses of the poor, and a great deal of
ingenuity had been exhausted with relatively little success in endeavoring to abate this
nuisance. The use of gas fires was urgently recommended, but had hitherto been difficult,

                                               50
6. Concluding Remarks

       We motivated this paper with the simple question: did Frederick Brodie discover the

world’s first Environmental Kuznets Curve? The evidence presented above, though not

conclusive, suggests that he did. The strongest single piece of evidence is the reverse event

study, which shows that fog-related events—defined as unexplained spikes in weekly

mortality rates—rose steadily in frequency and severity in the years leading up to 1891, and

declined in frequency and severity thereafter. Furthermore, if one looks at sunshine measures,

which in contrast to fog was measured instrumentally, there is evidence that sunshine rates in

London were in decline relative to neighboring areas before 1891, and in ascension in the years

following. In addition, qualitative evidence in the form of first-hand testimonials are presented

throughout the paper to indicate that contemporary observers believed that London’s

atmosphere grew cleaner and more breathable in the wake of the Public Health Act. There is




owing to its cost and want of suitable apparatus. The rapid and very extensive growth of the
use of gas for cooking as well as lighting purposes by the working classes, due to the
introduction of the `penny in the slot’ system, is working a great revolution in the London
atmosphere. During the last four years, the South London Gas Company alone has fixed 50,000
slot meters, and nearly 38,000 small gas cooking stoves in the houses of the working man. This
movement is still making great progress, and we hope means may be found to extend it to the
houses of the more comfortable classes. The enormous improvement in the London
atmosphere, and the clearing away of a smoke pall which hangs over London, may then be
anticipated.” See also Ackermann (1906) who pleaded with London officials to promote the
spread of producer gas (a cheap, low-grade type of coal gas appropriate for heating and
cooking but not lighting) to replace coal. Martin (1906) presented data to indicate the threshold
price at which it would be economical for households to switch from coal to producer gas.
Fifteen years before the article in the BMJ, Aflred Carpenter, an independent scientist,
proposed heavily taxing coal use in London, thereby encouraging homeowners and
manufacturers to adopt gas for lighting, heating, cooking, and mechanical propulsion. See
Carpenter (1880).

                                               51
also some noisy evidence to suggest that annual bronchitis rates in London rose and fell with

the incidence of fogs. Although we do not yet have the capacity to perform a full-blown

analysis of panel data, evidence from other cities, particularly Glasgow, suggests that what was

happening London was not unique: bronchitis rates grew increasingly frequent and severe

with the rise of coal, and subsided only with reductions in coal smoke.

       There are at least three plausible mechanisms through which Londoners might have

successfully curtailed their production of coal smoke, or at least dissipated the smoke. First,

the data above indicate the population of Greater London redistributed itself, as central

districts became less densely populated and outlying districts more so. If smokey fogs formed

only when smoke density rose above a certain threshold, redistributing population might have

reduced the number of fogs experienced by the metropolis as a whole. (See sections 4 and 5.)

Second, with passage of the Public Health Act in 1891, businesses were fined for failing to

consumer their own smoke, or otherwise generating excess amounts of smoke. In response,

manufacturers switched from bituminous coal from Newcastle and elsewhere in England to

Welsh steam coal, a harder coal that generated much less smoke, though it was about 20

percent more expensive than ordinary soft coal. Businesses also adopted more efficient stoking

and firing procedures so that they economized on coal and minimized emissions of unburnt

soot and tar. Third, the expansion of gas for cooking and heating helped undermine demand

for coal among homeowners, who otherwise burned much of the coal in London.

       If one were to plot real wages for unskilled laborers in London against foggy days per

annum the typical EKC would emerge. At low levels of development, pollution (as proxied by


                                                52
fog) rose with real wages, but at some real-wage threshold, the correlation reversed itself and

rising wages were associated with reductions in foggy days per year. It is difficult to say what

the EKC means in this context. Perhaps it reflects an income effect, or perhaps the correlation

between income and pollution is spurious, the result of a threshold effect for pollution.

Ordinary citizens and voters tolerate pollution as long as it is below some level, but begin

actively lobbying for improvement once it crosses some threshold. The difficulty with the

latter interpretation is that smoke abatements efforts in London had a long history, going back

hundreds of years—though it was eventually repealed, the first statute prohibiting the burning

of bituminous of coal in London was passed in 1273 (Martin 1906). It seems more likely that

the metropolis had to reach some level income and technological advancement before it had

the capacity to effectively deal with the coal smoke problem. This, however, is mere

speculation. Fully resolving this question, and the other issues raised above, we leave for

future research.




                                               53
References

Ackermann, A.S.E. 1906. “The Distribution of Producer Gas as a Means of Alleviating the
      Smoke Nuisance,” The Journal of the Royal Society for the Promotion of Health, 27:80-84.

Ascher, Louis. 1907. “Coal Smoke Abatement in England,” Journal of the Royal Sanitary
       Institute, 28:88-93.

Barr, William M. 1900. A Catechism on the Combustion of Coal and the Prevention of Smoke: A
       Practical Treatise. New York: Norman W. Henley & Company.

Berman, Eli and Linda T. Bui. 2001. “Environmental Regulation and Productivity: Evidence
      from Oil Refineries,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83:498-510.

Bird, Paul P. 1911. “Smoke Prevention,” Transactions of the American Society of Heating and
       Ventilating Engineers, 17:216-34.

Booth, W.H. 1898. “Smoke Prevention,” Journal of the American Society of Naval Engineers,
       10:1064-68.

Brazell, J.H. 1968. London Weather. London: Her Majesty’s Stationary Office.

Brimblecombe, Peter T. 1971. The Big Smoke: A History of Air Pollution in London Since Medieval
      Times. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Brodie, Frederick J. 1891. “Some Remarkable Features in the Winter of 1890-91,” Quarterly
       Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 17:155-67.

Brodie, Frederick J. 1905. “Decrease of Fog in London During Recent Years,” Quarterly Journal
       of the Royal Meteorological Society, 31:15-28.

Caborne, W.F. 1906. “Stoking and Smoke Abatement,” Journal of the Royal Sanitary Institute,
      27:142-48.

Carpenter, Alfred. 1882. “Town Smoke and Town Fog,” Westminster Review, LXI:136-57.

Chandler, T.J. 1965. The Climate of London. London: Hutchinson of London.

de Bruyn, Sander M. 1997. “Explaining the Environmental Kuznets Curve: Structural Change
       and International Agreements in Reducing Sulphur Emissions,” Environment and
       Development Economics, 2:485-503.

                                                54
Deacon, Robert T. and Catherine S. Norman. 2006. “Does the Environmental Kuznets Curve
      Describe How Individual Countries Behave?” Land Economics, 82:291-315.

Dines, W.H. 1894. “On the Relation Between the Mean Quarterly Temperature and the Death
       Rate,” Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 20:173-79.

Ferrie, Joseph P. and Werner Troesken. 2008. “Water and Chicago’s Mortality Transition,
        1850-1925,” Explorations in Economic History, 45:1-17.

Frankland, E. 1882. “Climate in Town and Country,” Nature, Aug. 17, 1882, pp. 380-83.

Great Britain. Board of Trade. 1903. Report on Wholesale and Retail Prices in the United Kingdom
       in 1902, with Comparative Statistical Tables for a Series of Years. Ordered by The House of
       Commons. London: HMSO.

Hann, Julius. 1903. Handbook of Climatology. Part I. General Climatology. New York: MacMillan
       and Co.

Lawther, P.J. 1959. “Chronic Bronchitis and Air Pollution,” Journal of the Royal Society for the
      Promotion of Health, 1:4-9.

Lempfert, R.G.K. 1912. “Sunshine Records: A Comparison of Sunshine Statistics for Urban and
      Rural Stations,” in Papers Read at the Smoke Abatement Conferences. March 26, 27 & 28, pp.
      23-28. Westminster: Coal Smoke Abatement Society.

List, John A., and Craig A. Gallet. 1999. “The Environmental Kuznets Curve: Does One Size
        Fit All?” Ecological Economics, 31:409-23.

Livesey, Sir George. 1906. “Domestic Smoke Abatement,” The Journal of the Royal Society for the
       Promotion of Health, 27:57-63.

London Statistics. Various years.

Manley, Gordon. 1974. “Central England Temperatures: Monthly Means 1659 to 1973,”
      Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 100:389-405.

Martin, Arthur J. 1906. “Smoke Prevention and Coal Conservation,” The Journal of the Royal
       Society for the Promotion of Health, 27:85-107.

Meller, H.B. 1926. “How Cities Can Control the Smoke Nuisance,” National Municipal Review,
       15:270-76.


                                                55
Mitchell, B.R. 1988. British Historical Statistics. London: Cambridge University Press.

Mossman, R.C. 1897. “The Non-Instrumental Meteorology of London, 1713-1896,” Quarterly
     Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 23:287-94.

Owens, John S. 1912. “Wasteful Power Production: With Special Reference with Waste Due to
      Smoke,” in Papers Read at the Smoke Abatement Conferences. March 26, 27 & 28, pp. 89-94.
      Westminster: Coal Smoke Abatement Society.

Poore, G.V. 1893. “Light, Air, and Fog,” Transactions of the Sanitary Institute, 14:13-41.

Registrar General. Weekly Returns. Various years.

Registrar General. Annual Reports. England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. Various years.

Report from the Select Committee on Smoke Prevention, 1843. Great Britain. Parliament. House of
        Commons.

Report of the Smoke Abatement Committee, 1883. London.

Reynolds, Michael. 1882. Stationary Engine Driving: A Practical Manual. London: Crosby,
      Lockwood, and Co.

Rideal, Samuel. 1906. “The Abatement of Smoke in Factories,” Journal of the Royal Sanitary
        Institute, 27:149-51.

Russell, Rollo. 1906. “The Artificial Production of Persistent Fog,” Journal of the Royal Sanitary
       Institute, 27:152-59.

Russell, Rollo. 1912. “Smoke and Fog,” in Papers Read at the Smoke Abatement Conferences.
       March 26, 27 & 28, pp. 21-22. Westminster: Coal Smoke Abatement Society.

Russell, W.J. 1891. “Town Fogs and Their Effects,” Nature, November 5, 1891, pp. 10-16.

Saward, Frederick E. 1899, 1908, and 1914. The Coal Trade: A Compendium of Valuable Information
      Relative to Coal Production, Prices, Transportation, Etc. New York: The Coal Trade Journal.

Schaefer, Theodore W. 1907. “The Contamination of Our Cities With Sulfur Dioxid, the Cause
       of Respiratory Disease,” Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, CLVII (July 25):106-10.

Schlicht, Paul. 1907. “The Production of Coke and Its Application in Domestic Fires,” Journal of


                                                 56
       the Society of Arts, May 10, pp. 684-98.

Scott, Robert H. 1896. “Notes on Some of the Differences Between Fogs, as Related to the
        Weather Systems which Accompany Them,” Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological
        Society, 22:41-65.

Sedwick, William T., and J. Scott MacNutt. 1910. “On the Mills-Reincke Phenomenon and
      Hazen’s Theorem Concerning the Decrease in Mortality from Diseases Other than
      Typhoid Fever Following the Purification of Polluted Water Supplies, “ Journal of
      Infectious Diseases, 12:489-564.

Stradling, David and Peter Thorsheim. 1999. “The Smoke of Great Cities: British and
        American Efforts to Control Air Pollution, 1860-1914,” Environmental History, 4:6-31.

Taylor, R.C., and S.S. Haldeman. 1855. Statistics of Coal: Including Mineral Bituminous
       Substances. Second Edition. Philadelphia: J.W. Moore.

Thomson, Geo. Carruthers. 1894-95. “Smoke Abatement with reference to Steam Boiler
     Furnaces,” Proceedings of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow, 26:148-73.

Tyan, Nicola. 2002. “London’s Private Water Supply, 1582-1902,” in Reinventing Water and
       Wastewater Systems, pp. 342-359. David Haarmeyer and Paul Seidenstat, editors.
       London: John Wiley & Sons.

Welsch, Heinz. 2004. “Corruption, Growth, and the Environment: A Cross-Country Analysis,”
      Environment and Development Economics, 9:663-93.

White, William Charles, and Paul Shuey. 1914. “The Influence of Smoke on Acute and Chronic
       Lung Infections,” in Papers on the Influence of Smoke on Health, pp. 164-73. Oskar Klotz
       and Wm. Charles White, editors. Pittsburgh: Mellon Institute of Industrial Research
       and School of Specific Industries.

Wilson, Leonard G. 2005. “Commentary: Medicine, Population, and Tuberculosis,”
      International Journal of Epidemiology, 34:521-24.

Wise, William. 2001. Killer Smog: The World’s Worst Air Pollution Disaster. Lincoln, NE:
       iUniverse.com publication.

Wright, Carroll D. 1905. Department of Commerce and Labor. Twelfth Special Report of the
      Commissioner of Labor. Coal Mine Labor in Europe. Washington: Government Printing
      Office.


                                                  57
                      (London)/(country)    (Kew)/(country)      (London)/(Kew)

         Interval      winter     summer   winter    summer      winter   summer

         1881-85         .17       .83       .85       .97         .20       .84
         1886-90         .29       .85       .89       .96         .32       .87
         1891-95         .32       .95       .83       1.02        .39       .94
         1896-00         .35       .89       .97       1.03        .36       .86
         1901-05         .32       .93       .88       1.04        .37       .89
         1906-10         .38       .92       .81       .99         .46       .92



Table 1. Duration of Bright Sunshine at London Stations as a Proportion of the Duration at
Neighboring Country Stations



Source: Lempfert (1912), p. 25.




                                            58
 Year    Week    Event #    Knowna     Documentation (Times unless otherwise indicated)

 1855     4         1       No         1/15, p. 10; 2/1, p. 5
 1855     5         2       No         2/5, p. 10
 1858     47        3       No         11/17, p. 10
 1858     48        4       No         11/26, p. 10
 1859     52        5       No         12/19, p. 6; 12/20, p. 10; 12/21, p. 12; 12/30, p. 9; 1/8, p. 6
 1861     3         6       No         1/11, p. 9; 1/16, p. 10
 1861     4         7       No         1/21, p. 10; 1/23, p. 12
 1862     48        8       No         11/15, p. 11; 11/17, p. 10; 11/19, p. 6; 12/3, p. 12
 1864     3         9       No         1/13, p. 12; 1/22, p.12
 1871     50        10      No         11/18, p. 9; 11/19, p. 8; 12/20, p. 6
 1873     51        11      Yes        12/19, p. 10; Brazell (1968), p. 111
 1874     48        12      No         11/23, p. 5
 1874     49        13      No         12/2, p. 10
 1874     52        14      No         12/25, p. 7; 12/28, p. 5
 1875     1         15      No         1/1, p. 11; 1/8, p. 9
 1879     51        16      Yes        12/17, p. 8; Scott (1896); Nature, Nov. 5, 1891, p. 13
 1880     5         17      Yes        BMJ, Feb. 14, 1880, p. 254; Nature, Nov. 5, 1891, p. 13
 1880     6         18      Yes                                  same as above
 1882     6         19      No         2/3, p. 6; 2/6, p. 7; 2/7, p. 10; 2/13, p. 10
 1890     2         20      Yes        Nature, Nov. 5, 1891, pp. 14-15; Brodie (1891)
 1890     3         21      Yes                                  same as above
 1892     1         22      Yes        Nature, Nov. 5, 1891, pp. 14-15
 1892     2         23      Yes                                  same as above
 1892     3         24      Yes                                  same as above
 1892     4         25      Yes                                  same as above
 1892     5         26      Yes                                  same as above
 1893     49        27      No         11/23, p. 8; 11/30, p. 8
 1894     2         28      No         1/8, p. 6; 1/15, p. 6
 1899     51        29      Yes        12/1, p. 11; 12/2, p. 5; 12/4, p. 13; 12/13, p. 11
 1899     52        30      Yes        12/23, p. 12; 12/28, p. 5
 1900     1         31      Yes        1/3, p. 8; Brazell (1968), p. 111
 1900     2         32      Yes                                  same as above

Table 2. Fog-Related Events Identified by Reverse Event Study, 1855-1910

Sources: see text and final column of table.




                                                 59
Figure 1. Brodie’s graph (with a trend line)

Source: see text.




                                               60
Figure 2. Foggy days at six london weather stations, 1904-1911

Source: Lempfert (1912).




                                             61
Figure 3. Foggy days in brixton and west norwood

Source: see text.




                                           62
Figure 4. Deviation from predicted weekly crude death rate: 1855-1910

Source: see text.




                                            63
Figure 5. Percentage deviation from predicted weekly crude death rate: 1855-1910

Source: see text.




                                            64
Figure 6. Excess number of deaths during fog-related events

Source: see text.




                                            65
Figure 7. Deviation from predicted death rate in weeks following fog-related events



Source: see text.




                                            66
Figure 8. Deaths from respiratory diseases in london: 1850-1920

The category “all respiratory” includes: pneumonia, phthisis (tuberculosis), and bronchitis

Sources: Annual Reports of the Registrar General (England and Wales), various years; and London
Statistics, various years.




                                               67
Figure 9. Crude death rate in london, 1840-1915

Sources: Annual Reports of the Registrar General (England and Wales), various years; and London
Statistics, various years.




                                               68
Figure 10. Death rate from bronchitis in london and england & wales, 1850-1920

Sources: Annual Reports of the Registrar General (England and Wales), various years; and London
Statistics, various years.




                                               69
Figure 11. Death rate from bronchitis in glasgow and scotland, 1850-1920

Sources: Annual Reports of the Registrar General (Scotland), various years.




                                                 70
Figure 12. Coal consumption per capital and foggy days in london, 1700-1925

Sources: the coal data are from the 1899, 1908, and 1919 volumes of The Coal Trade by Saward
(editor); the Times, July 23, 1901, p. 11; Dec. 1, 1913, p. 26; Aug. 11, 1927, p. 20; Nature, Nov. 5,
1891, p. 12; and for earlier years Mitchell (1988), a source which also provides data on London’s
population. The fog data are derived from the sources described in the text, especially Brodie
and Mossman.




                                                 71
Figure 13. Total coal consumption in london (in logs): 1700-1920

Source: see note to figure 12.




                                             72
Figure 14. Population density in london proper and greater london, 1801-2001

Source: Poore (1883) for nineteenth century; London Statistics various years.




                                                73
Figure 15. Crude death in greater london and five central districts, 1840-1920

Source: Poore (1883); London Statistics, various years.




                                                 74
Figure 16. Price of Steam Coal in Swansea (Wales) Divided by Price of Bituminous Coal in
Newcastle

Note: trend line estimated with STATA using a running line smoother, bandwidth of .8, and
lowess option.

Sources: price series are from Wright (1905), pp. 409-20. Alternative price series which yield
similar patterns can be found in Great Britain, Board of Trade (1903), pp. 12-19.




                                               75
