NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RATIONAL IGNORANCE IN EDUCATION:
A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN STUDENT PLAGIARISM
Thomas S Dee
Brian A. Jacob
Working Paper 15672
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15672

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Thomas S Dee and Brian A. Jacob. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Rational Ignorance in Education: A Field Experiment in Student Plagiarism
Thomas S Dee and Brian A. Jacob
NBER Working Paper No. 15672
January 2010
JEL No. I2,K4
ABSTRACT
Despite the concern that student plagiarism has become increasingly common, there is relatively little
objective data on the prevalence or determinants of this illicit behavior. This study presents the results
of a natural field experiment designed to address these questions. Over 1,200 papers were collected
from the students in undergraduate courses at a selective post-secondary institution. Students in half
of the participating courses were randomly assigned to a requirement that they complete an anti-plagiarism
tutorial before submitting their papers. We found that assignment to the treatment group substantially
reduced the likelihood of plagiarism, particularly among student with lower SAT scores who had the
highest rates of plagiarism. A follow-up survey of participating students suggests that the intervention
reduced plagiarism by increasing student knowledge rather than by increasing the perceived probabilities
of detection and punishment. These results are consistent with a model of student behavior in which
the decision to plagiarize reflects both a poor understanding of academic integrity and the perception
that the probabilities of detection and severe punishment are low.

Thomas S Dee
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
and NBER
dee@swarthmore.edu
Brian A. Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu

1

1. Introduction
Several high-profile scandals involving plagiarism by prominent writers have
recently captured the public's attention (McGrath 2007). Similarly, the dramatic
technological progress of the last two decades (e.g., the widespread availability of fulltext resources and “cut and paste” word processing) has fueled the impression that this
illicit behavior has become both substantially easier and more common among students
(e.g., Rimer 2003). Posner (2007) has recently argued for a nuanced understanding of
plagiarism in which the gravity of an offense (and, correspondingly, the appropriate
policy response) depends on the extent to which the misrepresentation imposes negative
externalities (i.e., a "detrimental reliance"). By this criterion, plagiarism committed by
students is a particularly serious offense. Students who plagiarize without punishment are
likely to benefit at the expense of their peers with respect to valued outcomes such as
grades and recommendations.1
Unsurprisingly, plagiarism is strongly proscribed in the guidelines of most postsecondary institutions. However, when used in isolation, these stern institutional statutes
may be misaligned with the behavioral context that influences the decision to plagiarize.
Student plagiarism is a fairly unique type of illicit behavior in that it may often reflect a
type of "rational ignorance."2 The available evidence suggests that college students do not
have a clear understanding of what constitutes plagiarism and how it can be avoided (e.g.,
Power 2009, Howard and Davies 2009). Furthermore, the incentives for students to
educate themselves about plagiarism may be fairly weak given that college instructors
tend to put little effort into detection and to prosecute cases of detected plagiarism
informally and lightly (e.g., Schneider 1999, McCabe, Treviño, and Butterfield 2001).

1

As a counterexample of plagiarism that is less problematic, Posner (2007) outlines how Shakespeare's
Antony and Cleopatra borrows liberally but elegantly from Sir Thomas North's translation of Plutarch.
Posner (2007) suggests that such borrowing is a pedigreed form of creativity that does not create material
harm, concluding "if this is plagiarism, we need more plagiarism."
2
Downs (1957) seminal public-choice research popularized the term "rational ignorance" in reference to
voters who choose to obtain low levels of civic knowledge because of the non-trivial costs of gaining
knowledge and the vanishingly small likelihood that their vote would actually be instrumental in decisionmaking. Ironically in the context of this study, Mueller (1989, page 205) notes that this idea was also
present in the earlier writings on democracy by Joseph Schumpeter. An alternative example of an illicit
behavior that may reflect an endogenously determined level of ignorance is tax evasion.

2

Despite the growing concerns about plagiarism in higher education, there is little
objectively measured descriptive evidence on its prevalence and character.3 Furthermore,
policy interventions designed to understand and reduce the prevalence of plagiarism have
not been rigorously evaluated. This study presents the results of a “natural field
experiment” (Harrison and List 2004) designed to provide evidence on these questions.
More specifically, we conducted a group-randomized trial in undergraduate
social-science and humanities classes at a single, selective post-secondary institution
during the fall 2007 semester. Each of the participating classes had a Blackboard web site
that provided students with access to course materials. All of the students in the
participating courses (i.e., 573 students who wrote a total of 1,256 papers) were unaware
that they were participating in a research study but were required by their instructors to
submit their writing assignments electronically through these Blackboard-based course
web sites. We paired the 28 participating courses on baseline traits (e.g., the same
instructor) and randomly assigned courses within these pairs (i.e., "block randomization")
to treatment and control conditions. The classroom-level treatment consisted of requiring
students to complete a short but detailed and interactive Blackboard-based tutorial on
understanding and avoiding plagiarism. Students in the treatment courses were
encouraged to complete the treatment early in the semester but were required to do so
before they were allowed to upload their writing assignments. We collected searchable,
electronic files of the papers from all of the participating courses and analyzed these
papers using proprietary plagiarism-detection software (i.e., Turnitin.com).
Our results indicate that plagiarism occurred in 3.3 percent of the papers from
courses randomly assigned to the control condition. The type of plagiarism in these
papers was almost exclusively of the "mosaic" variety (i.e., using sentences or sentence
clauses without attribution). While the overall prevalence of plagiarism was low, we
found that it was largely concentrated among males and students with lower SAT scores.
The pattern with regard to SAT scores suggests that plagiarism may be substantially more
3

Some evidence suggests that student plagiarism is quite common. For example, in a recent survey fielded
to over 60,000 students at 83 different campuses in the United States and Canada, over a third of students
admitted to paraphrasing or copying a few sentences from a print or Internet source without attribution,
sometime in the past year (McCabe 2005). However, the reliability of much of this evidence has been
questioned because it is based on student self-reports of a behavior which they may not understand well
(Brown and Emmett 2001, Power 2009).

3

common among the typical college student. Based on our data, one would predict a
plagiarism rate of 17.7 percent among students at the national mean of SAT scores (i.e.,
1017) and 31.4 percent among students at the 25th percentile of SAT scores (i.e., 850).
These figures are roughly consistent with prior self-reports on the prevalence of
plagiarism.
We find that random assignment to the web tutorial reduced instances of
plagiarism by roughly 2 percentage points overall (i.e., a two-thirds reduction) and that
this treatment effect was concentrated among students with lower SAT scores. The
results of an ex-post survey and quiz completed by participating students suggest that the
treatment was effective in large part because it increased student awareness about what
constitutes plagiarism and knowledge of effective writing strategies. We find much
weaker evidence that the intervention altered student perceptions about the likelihood of
detection and/or sanctions associated with detection. Our results indicate that an easily
replicable, scalable, and virtually costless educational intervention can be highly effective
at reducing the prevalence of student plagiarism. Furthermore, because the treatment was
particularly effective among students with lower SAT scores, these inferences may have
good external validity for post-secondary institutions that are less selective than the
institution in this study.
The reminder of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we review the
literature on student plagiarism. In section 3, we describe our field experiment in greater
detail. Section 4 discusses our methodology, including how we handle several key
analytical concerns. Section 5 presents our results, and section 6 concludes.

2. Literature Review
This section provides a selective overview of the multidisciplinary research on
plagiarism by students.

2.1 Prevalence and Trends
Plagiarism by students is widely thought to be common, particularly with the
diffusion of Internet access to full-text resources and word-processing software (Rimer
2003). Consistent with this view, a recent study by Baruchson-Arbib and Yaari (2004)

4

found that undergraduates are less likely to view plagiarism from resources that are
available on-line as a form of academic dishonesty. However, the available data on
plagiarism, which is based largely on student self-reports from surveys with distinctive
design features, do not appear to provide clear evidence on the prevalence or trend in
student plagiarism.
An influential early survey of students from 99 colleges and universities during
the spring of 1963 (Bowers 1964) found that 28 percent of students indicated that they
had plagiarized from published materials at least once since entering college. More recent
surveys of college students suggest both higher and lower levels of plagiarism (e.g.,
McCabe and Treviño 1997, Scanlon and Neumann 2002, McCabe 2005).
A number of factors complicate any comparisons of the extant survey data. One is
that the available data are not based on a consistently defined sampling frame of postsecondary institutions and often have quite low response rates. Differences in the design
of the salient survey questions are another complicating factor (e.g., misconduct defined
since entering college or over the past year). The conflicting data on the prevalence of
academic misconduct may also reflect other survey artifacts. For example, Brown and
Emmett (2001) examined data from multiple studies of student dishonesty and found that
the number of student practices included in the study was related to the overall level of
student cheating. Another more subtle complication suggested by McCabe, Treviño, and
Butterfield (2001, page 221) is that comparisons of self-reports by students may
understate the growth in plagiarism because of shifting norms about what actually
constitutes an inappropriate use of source texts.
These concerns about the subjectivity of self reports and low response rates
underscore the usefulness of this study's data, which are based on objective analyses of
the papers submitted by the universe of students in the participating courses. At least two
other studies have provided similar evidence on the prevalence of plagiarism, though on a
smaller scale. Lau et al. (2005) collected the two papers written by 328 students in two
sections of a psychology class and analyzed them using the plagiarism-detection service,
Turnitin.com. This software generates a "similarity score", which indicates how much of
a paper's text matches the text catalogued in their databases. They found that over 20

5

percent of papers had similarity scores above two percent.4 Bilic-Zulle, Azman, Frkovic,
and Petrovecki (2008) used different plagiarism-detection software (WCopyfind) to
identify the pre-intervention prevalence of plagiarism among 111 medical students in
Croatia during 2000 and 2001. The writing assignment in question was based on known
source articles and the software flagged text as plagiarized if six or more consecutive
words matched the source text. Their baseline results indicated a considerable amount of
plagiarism: 66 percent of student papers had a matched-text rate that exceeded 10
percent.

2.2 Individual and Contextual Determinants
The extant literature also suggests that a number of individual and contextual
traits exert an important influence on the likelihood of committing plagiarism. For
example, studies based on student self-reports generally indicate that younger students,
males, those engaged in more extracurricular activities and those with weaker academic
performance are more likely to engage in academic misconduct (e.g., McCabe and
Treviño 1997, Genereux and McLeod 1995). Several studies also examine the
relationship between psychological traits and academic misconduct. For example, Lau et
al. (2005) find that a measure of psychopathy along with low verbal ability were strongly
predictive of an objective measure of plagiarism.
In a recent synthesis of the broader psychological literature on academic
misconduct, Murdock and Anderman (2006) emphasize the role of three motivational
mechanisms. First, students whose academic motivation is extrinsic rather than intrinsic
are more likely to cheat. Second, students are more likely to cheat when they have low
expectations of their capacity to reach their academic goals through personal effort.
Third, students who view the potential costs of cheating as minimal are more likely to
cheat. Posner (2007, page 89) also stressed the role of self-interest noting that students
"plagiarize to save time, to get better grades, or both; the effect on learning and
evaluation is significant and punishment often and appropriately severe."
4

This may actually overstate the true prevalence of plagiarism. We use Turnitin.com to detect plagiarism in
our study as well. However, our review of the similarity scores indicated that they contained a significant
number of false positives. Therefore, we relied on multiple-rater review of the underlying "originality
reports" to identify unambiguous instances of student plagiarism.

6

A review article by McCabe, Treviño, and Butterfield (2001) underscored the
empirical relevance of related but broader contextual factors such as the perception of
cheating by peers and the perceived severity of penalties. The literature on the apparent
relevance of contextual factors lends credence to the consensus view that "cheating can
be most effectively addressed at the institutional level" (McCabe, Treviño, and
Butterfield 2001). Another complicating factor that supports this view is the somewhat
indifferent role that may be played by faculty. College instructors do not generally view
either educating students about avoiding plagiarism or policing instances of plagiarism as
a primary responsibility. Faculty also tend to deal with academic misconduct they may
uncover informally and in a manner that is perceived by students as fairly lenient (e.g.,
Schneider 1999, McCabe, Treviño, and Butterfield 2001).

2.3 Evaluation Studies
There is relatively little research that evaluates specific policies or interventions
designed to reduce student plagiarism.

One prominent institutional policy that has

received some attention is an honor code. Basic cross-sectional comparisons suggest that
honor codes are fairly effective. For example, McCabe, Treviño, and Butterfield (2001)
report that, in a study of students at 31 selective colleges and universities during the
1995-96 academic year 43 percent of students at institutions without honor codes
admitted to copying a sentence or two without attribution while at institutions with honor
codes the corresponding prevalence was 32 percent.
Three other small-scale studies provide similarly encouraging evidence on the
potential efficacy of targeted classroom and institutional policies. Bilic-Zulle, Azman,
Frkovic, and Petrovecki (2008) compared the plagiarism rates among different cohorts of
Croatian medical students and found that it dropped dramatically (i.e., from 66 percent to
11 percent) after the introduction of warnings about the penalties for plagiarism and
making it known that plagiarism-detection software would be used. Second, a similar prepost comparison based on a sample of students at San Diego State University suggests
that completing a web tutorial raised student performance on a plagiarism quiz from 85.6
percent to 91.6 percent (Jackson 2006). Third, a lab-experimental study provides
evidence consistent with the evidence from cross-sectional and time-series comparisons

7

about the importance of contextual factors. Specifically, in a lab study based on
psychology students at a university in the United States, Rettinger and Kramer (2009)
experimentally manipulated student exposure to vignettes about peer attitudes and
behavior regarding academic misconduct and found that this manipulation influenced the
stated likelihood that they or a protagonist would engage in such behavior.
However, the extant literature has a number of important shortcomings that the
design of this study addresses directly. First, this study provides evidence on the
prevalence and characteristics of student plagiarism using objective measures from a
large number of actual student papers rather than potentially unreliable student selfreports. Second, this study provides evidence on the efficacy of a web-based tutorial that
seeks to educate students about what constitutes plagiarism and effective research and
writing strategies for avoiding it. This is a distinctive approach in that it does not rely
directly on the perceived threats of detection but rather on enhancing human capital.
Given the stylized evidence that students with low measures of prior achievement are
more likely to engage in academic misconduct, this may be a particularly effective
margin on which to improve student outcomes. Similarly, policy recommendations often
underscore the need for a "hidden curriculum" that informs students about academic
ethics (e.g., McCabe, Treviño, and Butterfield 2001). The tutorial evaluated in this study
is one quite explicit way to operationalize such a curriculum. Furthermore, the format of
this tutorial is such that it could be replicated and scaled up in different institutions at
little cost.
Third and perhaps most important, by utilizing random assignment in a field
setting, the evaluation evidence presented here is credibly robust to concerns about
internal validity. The available inferences based on cross-institutional comparisons of
student surveys could be seriously confounded by non-random student selection into
schools with particular traits as well as by omitted variables. However, the random
assignment procedures in this study should balance the potentially confounding
unobservables across the treatment and control conditions and allow the effect of the
tutorial to be reliably identified.

8

3. A Natural Field Experiment
The setting for our field research is a single, highly selective post-secondary
institution in the United States. Specifically, we collected and analyzed electronic
versions of anonymized student papers from 28 undergraduate social-science and
humanities courses during the fall 2007 semester. The collection of student papers
occurred largely through the Blackboard classroom-management web page for each
course and the participating students were unaware of the study's existence. As part of the
human-subject protocols for this research project, we do not identify the participating
institution and all student papers were anonymized prior to analysis.

3.1 Study Recruitment and Randomization
We began the recruitment of courses by identifying all the social-science and
humanities courses offered during the Fall 2007 semester. We excluded quantitativemethods courses, small-scale seminars, and research colloquia as well as independent
study and thesis-related courses. We approached the instructors for 46 classes that had
comparatively large enrollments and solicited their participation in a campus-wide study
on student writing. The motivation for our emphasis on larger classes (i.e., typically 18 or
more students) was both increased statistical power for our research effort and a potential
increase in the external validity of our inferences for institutions that, on average, have
larger class sizes than the participating institution. To complement the blockrandomization strategy we describe below, we also recruited courses with somewhat
smaller enrollments in situations where those courses were taught by the instructor of
another recruited course.
The instructors were asked whether they would be willing to include their course
in an IRB-approved, field-research project on the characteristics of student writing. They
were told that participation would not involve any substantive change in their course.
Participation would simply require using Blackboard's classroom-management software
to collect student papers electronically and to provide students with information on their
writing assignments. To encourage participation, the research team made it clear that they
would design and manage this aspect of Blackboard as well as provide participating
instructors with printed or electronic versions of all their submitted writing assignments.

9

The instructors for 9 of the 46 recruited courses provided no responses to recruitment
queries. Four other courses had no valid writing assignment. The instructors for 5
additional courses refused participation.5
The remaining 28 courses were randomly assigned to treatment and control
conditions. Courses in the control state merely had students use Blackboard to submit
their writing assignments. In courses assigned to the treatment state, students also
submitted their writing assignments through Blackboard. However, before they were
allowed to do so, they also had to complete a Blackboard-based tutorial and quiz on
plagiarism. This intervention is described in more detail below.
Our course-based randomization avoids the contamination that might have
occurred if students within the same courses had been randomly assigned to the
treatment. However, a potential drawback of randomizing over only 28 units is that the
treatment and control courses might not be balanced with regard to observed and, more
important, unobserved baseline traits. To reduce this possibility, we employed a simple
block randomization strategy, pairing participating courses on baseline traits and then
randomizing within those pairs.
In an ideal situation, we would be able to match each course to another course
with a similar propensity for student plagiarism by using baseline traits that are highly
predictive of the prevalence of plagiarism. Unfortunately, reliable baseline variables of
this sort are unavailable in this context. However, in light of the prior evidence on the
importance of contextual factors (McCabe, Treviño, and Butterfield 2001), we
conjectured that the likelihood of plagiarism would be related to the many unobservables
associated with particular instructors (e.g., types of writing assignment, writing support,
and the apparent threat of detection) and with particular academic disciplines. Our review
of the syllabi and writing assignments for the participating courses provided some
confirmation for these priors (e.g., the presence of a plagiarism warning on the syllabus
and the extent to which writing assignments involved a student's response to instructorchosen source material as opposed to researching a topic through self-identified
references).
5

One instructor provided no reason for refusing while a second instructor was uncomfortable with using
Blackboard despite the facilitation by the research team. Three other instructors refused because they were
uncomfortable with the "deception" of students, despite the data-security protocols.

10

Based on the available baseline information about the courses and their
instructors, we paired courses prior to randomization in the following manner. First, for
12 of the participating courses, we were able to form pairs among courses taught by the
same professor in the same department (and, in 6 of these cases, randomization was also
within sections of the same course). Second, for 10 other courses, randomization
occurred among courses taught in the same department. In cases where there were
multiple courses from a given department, we paired courses that had similar writing
assignments as indicated by the syllabi (e.g., research content of the assignments and the
presence of a plagiarism warning). The remaining 6 courses were paired to another
course in the same academic division (i.e., social sciences or humanities) using the same
data on the character of the writing assignments.

3.2 The Treatment
In the courses assigned to the treatment, students were required to complete a
Blackboard-based tutorial on understanding and avoiding plagiarism. The tutorial was
adapted for Blackboard from resources available at the Plagiarism Resource Site
(https://ats.bates.edu/cbb/) developed by staff at Colby, Bates and Bowdoin Colleges.6
The tutorial required students to click through 18 sequential screens with text that defined
different forms of plagiarism. This tutorial also provided explicit examples of what
constitutes plagiarism by showing side-by-side examples of source material along with
examples of the correct and incorrect use of that material in a student paper. The tutorial
also outlined effective strategies for avoiding plagiarism (e.g., not procrastinating and
careful note-taking). At the end of this sequence of material, students completed a ninequestion quiz consisting of several detailed and example-driven questions on plagiarism.
Each response triggered detailed feedback on why that answer was either correct or
incorrect before proceeding to the next question. Appendix A contains several illustrative
screenshots of this tutorial.

6

We secured permission for the use of this material, which was also available for sharing and adaptation
under a Creative Commons license. To avoid unintended irony, the tutorial clearly made an attribution to
its source. Consistent with the license conditions, our use of this material was non-commercial and our
adaption of this material is available for sharing upon request.

11

This intervention was deployed on the Blackboard sites of the treatment courses at
the beginning of the third week of the semester (i.e., immediately after the date at which
students could drop the course with no record of having been enrolled). The Blackboard
sites made it clear that students would not be allowed to upload their completed writing
assignments (i.e., the upload mechanism would not activate) until students had completed
the tutorial. However, because of the role that early research and note-taking can play in
unintentional plagiarism, the instructors within the participating treatment courses were
encouraged to email students early in the semester about the need to complete the
Blackboard tutorial. They were also provided with the names and email addresses of
students who had not promptly completed the tutorial and encouraged to provide targeted
follow-up reminders. As a result of this effort, there are no empirically meaningful
distinctions between the effects associated with the intent-to-treat and the effect of the
treatment-on-the-treated in this study. Over 97 percent of students in the treatment
courses fully completed the tutorial while an additional 1.5 percent partially completed
the tutorial.7
An interesting and important feature of this study is that the participating students
were not aware that they were participating in a research study.8 However, as noted
earlier, the participating instructors did know that their courses were involved in a writing
study. In theory, the general awareness among instructors that their student papers were
being externally evaluated in some way may have muddied the treatment contrast by
encouraging all instructors to manage these assignments in a manner that reduced
plagiarism. The existence of sizable treatment effects suggest that, if there were any
effects associated with this general awareness, they were not empirically confounding.
Several of the participating instructors were also clearly aware of the broad intent of the

7

Students who exited the tutorial before completing its entire sequence were allowed to upload their
writing assignments. A small number of students may not have completed the tutorial at all because they
dropped the course or because they submitted hard copy papers directly to the instructor. We collected all
available hard copies for our analysis and assess the implications of study attrition for our key inferences.
8
Nonetheless, the use of electronic paper collection as opposed to printed copies could conceivably
constitute a study-wide deterrent to plagiarism. In theory, this could compromise the external validity of
our results for papers that are collected as printed copies. And the fairly low prevalence of plagiarism in our
study suggests this caveat. If such an effect existed it could also muddy our treatment contrast, which
would bias us towards finding no effect of the intervention. However, given the magnitude of the apparent
treatment effects in this study, this seems less problematic. Furthermore, we suspect that the electronic
submission of papers is an increasingly common mechanism.

12

research study (i.e., the focus on plagiarism). Four participating instructors asked to be
aware of the study goals as a condition of participation and a fifth clearly inferred the
study goals because he or she actively managed other components of their Blackboard
sites. Fortunately, our block-randomization strategy implies that there is uniform
treatment and control variation within these instructors. Three of these instructors each
taught two of the participating courses so they were paired with other courses they taught
prior to randomization. The remaining two instructors taught courses in the same
department and these courses were also paired with each other. This pattern of pairing
implies that any effects that might be associated with an awareness of the study's focus
should again create an attenuation bias in the estimated treatment effects.

3.3 Identifying Plagiarism
We relied on the proprietary web service, Turnitin.com, to analyze the
participating papers for plagiarism.9 For each submitted paper, Turnitin.com generates a
"similarity score" that identifies the percentage of submitted text that matches their
continually updated database of journal articles, newspapers, magazine articles, books,
and web pages. An "originality report" also makes it possible to connect suspicious text
to the potentially plagiarized source. At a pilot stage for this project, we compared the
performance of this service to that of other available software and found that it was
particularly discriminating both with respect to its extensive database and with regard to
identifying plagiarized text that may have been lightly edited.
Settings for the originality reports allowed most quoted text and bibliographies to
be ignored in generating similarity scores. Nonetheless, our review of the similarity
scores from the papers in this field experiment indicated that a large share of the highest
similarity scores reflected false positives. This occurred when the software failed to
recognize correct citations of quoted material and when it flagged oddly formatted
bibliographies as plagiarized text. For example, some high similarity scores occurred
when a paper legitimately quoted other text but used margin offsets instead of quotation

9

As part of the human-subject protocols for this research, all of the collected papers were assigned random
identifiers and anonymized (e.g., names removed from file name, paper titles and headers) prior to analysis.

13

marks. We also found that some high similarity scores were simply due to the
accumulation of common word fragments used throughout a given paper.10
Given the pervasive amount of measurement error in the similarity scores
generated by Turnitin.com, we adopted a straightforward rating strategy using multiple
reviewers. We first reviewed the papers with high similarity scores (i.e., 15 or higher).
Roughly half of these had clearly plagiarized content while the remaining papers
appeared to be false positives exclusively. We then reviewed each paper with a similarity
score between 11 and 15. Of these papers, roughly one third had plagiarized content. We
then reviewed the papers with similarity scores between 8 and 10. Only 16 percent of
these papers were judged to have plagiarized content. As we moved to (and through) the
third strata, the probability of having identifiable plagiarism clearly dropped.
Furthermore, within the lower stratum, the extent of plagiarism in papers with plagiarized
content was substantially lower. Interestingly, our exhaustive review of these papers
indicated that the plagiarism that did occur was predominately of the "mosaic" variety
(e.g., copied sentences, sentence clauses and phrases).
Our analysis focuses on a binary dependent variable that indicates whether a
paper had plagiarized content and was in the two rating strata defined by similarity scores
of 11 or higher. This focus reflected a judgment that the plagiarism that occurred in the
highest two strata was distinctly more consequential in scale. However, as robustness
checks, we also present results based on binary indicators for more and less restrictive
measures of plagiarism (i.e., papers identified as having plagiarized content with
similarity scores of 15 or higher and 8 or higher, respectively).

3.4 Data Description
The 28 participating courses had collective enrollment of 697 students.11 The
writing assignments in these 28 courses and the corresponding course enrollments
implied that there were 1,329 potential papers to be collected. Because attrition from the
collection of papers is a potential threat to both the internal and external validity of our
10

In his recent book on plagiarism, Posner (2007, page 84) discusses Turnitin.com and notes it generates
false positives because of indented quotations and the flagging of incidental phrases.
11
However, because some unique students were enrolled in more than one participating course, there were
573 unique students in the study.

14

study, we made an aggressive effort, in cooperation with the participating instructors, to
obtain physical copies of papers that were submitted as print outs rather than through the
web-based upload mechanisms. More specifically, nearly 6 percent of the potential
papers (i.e., 79 of 1,329) were obtained as printouts. Through the use of scanning and
optical character recognition (OCR) software, we were able to convert these papers to
searchable text and include them in our analysis.
Our final, analytical sample consisted of 1,259 papers, implying a fairly low
attrition rate of 5.3 percent (i.e., 70/1,329). The attrition of these 70 papers was due in
part to students who withdrew from courses or had taken a grade of incomplete (n = 19).
The remaining papers (n = 51) were either not submitted or were submitted directly to the
instructor as printed copies that we could not obtain. As we discuss below, the differences
in attrition across treatment and control classrooms were small and statistically
insignificant.
We were able to identify a number of student traits (e.g., race, gender, SAT
scores) through access to the institution's administrative data (Table 1). The composite
(math and verbal) SAT scores were imputed for those who only had ACT composite data
using a concordance table available from the College Board. We were also able to
identify other student traits (e.g., class status, pass/fail status) from the class enrollment
data.12 We also identified several class-level observables (e.g., class size, the presence of
a plagiarism warning on the syllabus, the number of required papers for the course, the
academic rank and gender of the instructor) that may be relevant determinants of student
plagiarism.

4. Empirical Strategy
The randomized nature of the field experiment alleviates many of the common
selection concerns associated studies of plagiarism, and allows for a straightforward
analysis of the data. We estimate variants of the following OLS regression:
(1)
12

yic = β Tc + ΓX i + ΠC c + α c + ε ic

A small number of potential papers (n = 31), only one of which was lost to attrition, were from students
who were taking a course at the participating institution but were not enrolled there. Because of their
unique enrollment status, some data (e.g., SAT scores) were unavailable for these students. However, their
gender was accurately identified from their first names and other public sources.

15

where i denotes individuals and c denotes classrooms.13 Tc is a binary indicator for
whether the class was in the treatment group, Xi is a vector of student characteristics and
Cc is a vector of classroom characteristics. The αc term is a classroom-specific error term
that will be a concern in properly estimating the precision of our regression estimates,
which we discuss in greater detail below.
In this section, we discuss three issues of particular concern in cluster-randomized
trials such as this: 1) treatment-control balance, 2) sample attrition and 3) proper
treatment of the clustered nature of our data for the purposes of statistical inference.

4.1 Treatment-Control Balance
In expectation, the randomization of classrooms to treatment and control
conditions will ensure that all observable and unobservable characteristics of students and
classrooms are balanced across the two groups. In small samples, however, it is possible
for a specific realization of random assignment to result in poor balance. Our blockrandomization strategy was explicitly designed to avoid this potential problem.
Nonetheless, it is still important to explore the realized balance of baseline traits across
the treatment and control conditions.
Table 1 presents summary statistics that speak to this concern. The first column
shows sample means for the full sample. We can see that the sample contains very highperforming students (i.e., an average SAT score of 1407), who are typical of the
participating institution. There are an equal proportion of males and females, and
reasonable distribution of different race/ethnicity types, with 9 percent AfricanAmerican, 11 percent Hispanic, 20 percent Asian and 54 percent Caucasian. Importantly,
21 percent of students do not indicate a race/ethnicity on school records. The majority of
the sample is composed of freshman and sophomores (21 and 33 percent respectively).
All freshmen take their fall courses pass/fail and roughly 6.8 percent of other students are
taking pass/fail courses in our data. A bit less than 30 percent of classes included some
warning about plagiarism in the syllabus. Female professors taught roughly one-third of
the courses in our sample.

13

Here we abstract away from student-by-paper as the unit of observation.

16

Columns 2 and 3 present classroom-level summary statistics for the treatment and
control groups. In none of these comparisons do we find that the treatment-control
differences are statistically significant. This is striking because, in conducting these
“multiple comparisons,” one might expect to sometimes reject some null hypotheses of
no difference, even when the null hypotheses are true. Various procedures (i.e.,
Bonferroni and Benjamini-Hochberg) are designed to correct for the Type I errors in
multiple comparisons. These corrections would only imply that the p-values in Table 1
are even larger.
However, multiple-comparison procedures that also allow for a joint error
structure across these comparisons might create a more powerful test of the treatmentcontrol differences in baseline covariates. As an alternative way to test whether we are
likely to observe this distribution of covariates under the null hypothesis of random
assignment, we conduct a permutation test analogous to Fischer’s exact test.14 To do so,
we conduct a 1,000 replications in which we randomly assign treatment status to 14 of
the 28 classrooms (keeping the covariates in the classrooms fixed as they are in reality).
We then run a seemingly unrelated regression with each of the covariates as outcomes
and a treatment indicator as the single predictor in each equation. We obtain the Fstatistic from a joint test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on the treatment
indicator for all equations are equal to zero. We then ascertain at which point the true Fstatistic we obtained in our sample would fall in the distribution of the 1,000 F-statistics
we obtained from our permutations. The p-value from this exercise indicates that we
cannot reject the null hypothesis of random assignment. We also conducted an identical
permutation test, but instead of running a SUR, we estimate a single equation OLS model
in which the treatment indicator is the dependent variable and all 20 of the covariates are
predictors.
In summary, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of random assignment, and thus
it appears that our covariates are reasonably well balanced. However, the results in Table
14

Given the small number of observations (i.e., 28) and the relatively large number of covariates we have
(i.e., 20), many standard regression techniques that rely on asymptotic results do not work. For example,
the SUR and OLS regression approaches described above failed miserably in simulation exercises. We
generated a test data set with 28 observations and 20 covariates, which were drawn at random but were set
to match the means and covariances of the 20 covariates in our actual data. We then randomly assigned
treatment status to 14 of the 28 classrooms, and estimated the SUR and OLS models described above.

17

1 suggest that there were some noticeable treatment-control differences in classroomlevel traits. For example, treatment classrooms were substantially more likely to have a
female instructor and less likely to be taught be a full professor. We examine the
robustness of our impact estimates to these statistically insignificant differences through
regression adjustments for classroom observables.

4.2 Sample Attrition
Even if randomization results in good balance across treatment and control
groups, differential sample attrition between the conditions may still result in a biased
estimate of the treatment effect. For example, if students in treatment classrooms were
more likely to drop the class when they feel uncertain about their writing skill, the result
may be that control classrooms have a disproportionate fraction of good writers who may
have a lower propensity to plagiarize even in the absence of the treatment. This dynamic
would lead our empirical strategy to underestimate any beneficial impact of the
treatment.
To test for the presence of differential attrition, we estimate specifications similar
to equation (1) where the outcome is a binary indicator for whether we have any outcome
data for the student-paper observation. We estimate a variety of different variations on
this basic specification, and in no case does assignment to the treatment group have a
statistically significant or substantively important impact on attrition. Hence, sample
attrition does not appear to be a concern with respect to the internal validity of our
results. Furthermore, the low level of attrition also suggests that its implications for the
external validity of this study are negligible.

4.3 Estimation and Statistical Inference
While our final analysis sample contains over 1,200 student-paper observations,
the treatment was randomly assigned across only 28 classrooms. As others have pointed
out, the nested structure of the data has important implication for accurately estimating
the precision of the treatment effects and conducting statistical inference (Bertrand et al.
2004, Cameron et al. 2008, Donald and Lang 2007, Angrist and Pishke 2009).
Specifically, statistical inference must take into account the within-group dependence in

18

the data. A common approach is to report cluster-robust standard errors that generalize
the White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent estimates of OLS standard errors. Such
cluster-robust standard errors provide consistent estimates as the number of clusters goes
to infinity. In practice, however, many applied studies use samples with a small number
of clusters.
Several recent papers demonstrate that cluster-robust standard errors may not be
consistent when the number of clusters is as small (Cameron et al. 2008, Donald and
Lang 2007). More importantly, the direction of the bias generally leads one to over-reject
the null hypothesis. In the analysis below, we present a several alternative estimates
suggested in the recent literature. There are two broad approaches we pursue.
The first strategy utilizes group-level data. In our case, this means that we will
collapse our data to the classroom level and estimate specifications like the following
using the 28 classroom-level observations:
yc = βTc + ΠCc + ε c

(2)

where yc is the rate of plagiarism in classroom c. For the purpose of inference, we
calculate bias-adjusted robust standard errors to account for heteroskedasticity. The bias
adjustment we use is HC2 (described in Angrist and Pischke (2009)) and is meant to
adjust for the finite-sample bias of the commonly used "robust" (White 1980) standard
errors.
A variant of this group-data approach is a two-step procedure that allows us to
incorporate the student-level covariates we have in an effort to gain greater precision. In
the first step, we estimate
yic = ΓX i + µ c + η ic

(3)

where µc provide estimates of the covariate-adjusted group effects, in our case the
adjusted plagiarism rate in each classroom. In step two, we regress these adjusted group
effects on a set of classroom-level variables, which can include our treatment indicator as
well as other classroom covariates (and pair effects):
∧

(4)

∧

µ c = βTc + ΠC c + (υ c + ( µ c − µ c ))
∧

We show GLS estimates of equation (4) that use the inverse of var(µ c ) from
equation (3) as weights. We also report estimates of equation (4) that are unweighted and

19

a third set that are weighted based on the number of student-papers within each
classroom. Following the suggestion of Donald and Lang (2007), we use the tdistribution with C-K degrees of freedom (where C is the number of group-level
observations and K is the number of regressors) to conduct inference on estimates from
all group-level models.
Our second broad approach directly utilizes the micro (i.e., student-level) data.
One of the virtues of using the micro data is that it facilitates identifying heterogeneity in
treatment effects by student-level traits. However, our approach still needs to account for
the nested structure of the data and the relatively small number of classrooms in our
sample. To do so, we calculate and report bias-corrected clustered standard errors using
the method proposed by Bell and McCaffrey (2002). This procedure, called bias-reduced
linearization or BRL, is essentially a generalization of the HC2 correction for the case of
clustering. In recognition of the within-group dependence and the small number of
clusters, we conduct inference based on a t-distribution with C-K degrees of freedom
despite the fact that the estimation utilizes student-level observations.15
Furthermore, we also show results from the bootstrap-based approaches
recommended in Cameron et al. (2008). These authors propose cluster bootstrap-t
procedures to improve inference in cases with a small number of clusters. Bootstrap
estimates of a t-statistic provide "asymptotic refinement" because the asymptotic
distribution of the t-distribution does not depend on any unknown parameters (unlike
regression coefficients, whose asymptotic distribution depends on the unknown residual
variance). In a bootstrap-t procedure, one calculates a t-statistic for each bootstrap
sample, and compares the t-statistic from the original sample to the distribution of tstatistics from the bootstrap replications. If the absolute value of the original t-statistic is
above the 95th percentile of the absolute values from the bootstrap distribution, one
rejects the null hypothesis at the 5 percent level. While this approach provides some
efficiency gains, it does not yield standard errors, which might be of independent interest,
for example to calculate a confidence interval. On the basis of Monte Carlo simulations,
15

Angrist and Pischke (2009) recommend using the maximum of robust and conventional standard errors
for inference since robust standard errors can be subject to considerable sampling variance. In practice, the
BRL standard errors are virtually identical to the conventional standard errors, both of which are larger than
the standard cluster-robust standard errors. In discussing our results, we present the BRL standard errors,
effectively adopting the conservative rule of thumb recommended by Angrist and Pischke (2009).

20

Cameron et al. (2008) recommend using a wild-cluster bootstrap rather than a simple
block bootstrap. The wild-cluster bootstrap re-samples residuals while holding the
regressors fixed. A key advantage of this approach is that it avoids bootstrap replications
in which β or var(β) are inestimable, as can happen more frequently with a small number
of clusters when the treatment varies exclusively at the cluster level.16

5. Results
We begin by presenting in Table 2 some descriptive evidence on the relationship
between various student and class characteristics and the prevalence of plagiarism. For
this exercise, we use our main plagiarism indicator (i.e., papers with similarity scores of
11 or higher that were rated as plagiarism by multiple raters) and simply note that the
results are qualitatively the same using the other measures. Column 1 presents estimates
from a series of bivariate OLS regressions that model an indicator for plagiarism as a
function of a single student or classroom characteristics. The standard errors for the
student level regressors are clustered by student whereas the standard errors for the
classroom regressors are clustered by class with a bias-reducing linearization (BRL)
adjustment.17 Column 2 presents estimates from a single regression model in which all of
the student and classroom characteristics shown are entered jointly as regressors. Hence,
column 1 shows the unconditional relationship between a particular regressor and the
outcome whereas column 2 shows the conditional relationship between the regressor and
the outcome.
Several interesting patterns emerge. In column 1, we see that African-American
and Asian students are more likely to plagiarize than other students while students with
higher SAT scores are less likely to plagiarize. Indeed, the relationship between SAT
score and plagiarism appears convex. The joint model in column 2 indicates that there is
still a significant relationship between SAT score and plagiarism, even after controlling
for other factors. The large positive coefficient on African-American students disappears,
but the positive effect for Asian students remains significant.
16

We are very grateful to Doug Miller for providing STATA code we use to implement the wild-cluster
bootstrap method used in Cameron et al. (2008).
17
More specifically, the standard errors reflect cluster adjustments and a "bias reducing linearization"
(BRL) adjustment, which we discuss below.

21

The relationship between SAT score and plagiarism is quite strong. The bottom
quintile of students at the school, who scored between 1,000 and 1,200 on the SAT, had
plagiarism rates of nearly 14 percent. Using the estimates from column 2 and
extrapolating out of sample, we would predict that students scoring at the national
average on the SAT (a score of 1,017) would have rates of 17.7 percent and students at
the 25th percentile of national SAT scores (i.e., 850) would have a plagiarism rate of 31.7
percent. These results are consistent with prior work indicating that lower-performing
students are more apt to plagiarize (McCabe, Treviño, and Butterfield 2001). And
perhaps not surprisingly, students taking classes pass/fail are significantly less likely to
plagiarize than those taking the course for a letter grade.
As an initial view of the treatment effect, Figure 1 shows histograms of
unadjusted plagiarism rates by classroom organized so that the class pairs are adjacent to
each other. The asterisks below the horizontal axis indicate pairs comprised of one
instructor teaching two classes. In 11 out of 14 pairs, the average plagiarism rate in the
control classroom exceeds that in the treatment classroom. In 2 out of 3 of the other
cases, there were no cases of plagiarism in either classroom. Hence, the plagiarism rate in
the control classroom exceeded the rate in the paired treatment class in only 1 out of 14
pairs. Simple nonparametric tests based on these means suggest that the intervention
substantially reduced the prevalence of plagiarism. For example, a Wilcoxon rank-sum
test for matched-pair data rejects the null hypothesis of equality across the treatment and
control conditions with a p-value of .008 for a two-sided test. An analogous test using
adjusted classroom means derived from a regression that includes all of the student and
classroom covariates shown in Table 2 also rejects the null of equality with a p-value of
.048.

5.1 Baseline Estimates
Tables 3 and 4 present parametric estimates of the treatment effect to properly
quantify the magnitude and determine the statistical precision of the effect. We start with
specifications that use classroom-aggregate data as a conservative estimate of the
precision of our treatment effect estimates. In Panel A of Table 3, the dependent variable
is the unadjusted classroom mean plagiarism rate, which ranges from zero to .31. Column

22

1 shows the results from a model that includes no other covariates besides the treatment
indicator, weights each classroom observation equally and does not make any adjustment
to the standard errors. The resulting point estimate of -0.036 suggests that the treatment
reduced plagiarism by roughly 3.6 percentage points, a very large effect given the
classroom-level control mean of 5.6 percent (i.e., a decrease of 64 percent). With a
standard error of .024, however, this point estimate is not statistically different than zero.
However, after controlling for either class-level observables or pair fixed effects, this
impact estimate becomes statistically significant. In particular, introducing pair fixed
effects has virtually no effect on the impact estimate but increases its statistical precision
appreciably. Furthermore, the robust and HC2 standard errors are quite similar to the
conventional standard errors in the pair fixed-effects specification.
Panel B shows the key results from the two-step estimation procedure described
above, including different sets of controls and with different weights (i.e., equation (4)).
Our preferred specification in column 6 includes student characteristics and pair fixed
effects, and weights the second-step regression with the inverse of the covariance matrix
on the classroom fixed effects in step one. The resulting point estimate of -.023 is smaller
but statistically significant, with a p-value of .027. This impact estimate implies a 41
percent reduction in plagiarism relative to the control group mean.
Table 4 presents the estimated treatment effect conditional on student covariates
and the pair fixed effects. Interestingly, the BRL-adjusted standard errors shown in
column 3 are nearly identical to the conventional standard errors shown in column 1, both
of which are substantially larger than the typical cluster-robust standard errors shown in
column 2. Indeed, the standard error in column 3 is virtually identical to the GLS
estimate from Table 3, Panel B, column 6. Columns 4 and 5 present results from the
standard block bootstrap-t and the wild cluster bootstrap-t suggested by Cameron et al.
(2008), which should provide more efficient estimates. The 95% confidence intervals of
the t-statistics come from 10,000 replications of the bootstrap. The p-value reported
indicates the fraction of the 10,000 replications in which the t-statistic was larger, in
absolute value, than -2.684, the t-statistic from the full sample.
Taken together, these results suggest a treatment effect that is large in magnitude,
statistically significant and robust to a variety of alternative strategies to calculating the

23

standard errors.18 Table 5 presents several additional robustness checks. Column 1
replicates the estimates from column 3 of Table 4 as a baseline. Columns 2 and 3 show
that using more and less restrictive definitions of plagiarism (i.e., similarity scores 15 or
above and 8 or above, respectively) do not materially change our results. Some students
in our sample appear in multiple classes. As a result, roughly 11 percent of students were
simultaneously in at least one treatment and control classroom. For these students, it is
possible that exposure to the treatment in one class might have influenced behavior in
other classes. For this reason, the specification in column 4 assigns treatment status to all
observations of students who were in at least one treatment class. The results are virtually
identical to the baseline. In column 5, we limit the sample to classroom pairs in which the
instructor taught both the treatment and control classes. In column 6, we re-estimate the
main specification dropping all observations from the four pairs in which one of the
instructors in the pair was known to be broadly aware of the objective of the study.19
While the point estimates differ slightly across these specifications, they are not
significantly different than the baseline results.
Columns 7-9 show results for logit and probit models as well as OLS. With the
full set of baseline student and classroom controls, many observations drop from the nonlinear models. For this reason, the specifications in columns 7-9 include a limited set of
covariates.20 In addition, we report conventional standard errors, which Table 4 indicates
are virtually identical to the BRL-adjusted standard errors. The OLS estimate in column 7
is slightly large than the baseline estimate shown in column 1, as one would expect since
we drop classroom pairs with no observed cases of plagiarism (and thus no potential
treatment effect). More importantly, however, the average marginal effect from the probit
(column 8) and logit (column 9) models yield very similar results to those in column 7.

18

In results not reported here but available upon request, we examined the impact of the intervention on
student grades in subsequent courses. We found no statistically significant or substantively important
impacts.
19
While we did not systematically inform instructors of the purpose of the study, several instructors
insisted on knowing as a condition of participation and others inadvertently discovered the objective while
working with the electronic submission system we used.
20
These specifications drop observations with missing SAT score (no variation in outcome), drop four
classrooms with no variation in outcome, drop the pass-fail indicator variable (no variation), drop the
indicators for assistant, associate and visiting professor (almost no variation), and combine the Hispanic
and other race indicators (because the other race indicator has no variation in outcome).

24

This suggests that our baseline OLS results are robust to the use of alternative
specifications.

5.2 Treatment Heterogeneity
Prior literature as well as the analysis shown in Table 2 suggests that the
prevalence of plagiarism varies systematically with student characteristics. It thus seems
likely that the impact of any particular intervention may also vary across students. Table
6 shows treatment effects separately for several key subgroups. In columns 1 and 2, we
see that the intervention had a similar effect on male and female college students.21
Columns 3-6 show the results separately by year in college. The point estimates are
roughly equivalent for all but sophomores (for which the point estimate is essentially
zero). More specifically, though the treatment effects for juniors and seniors are
estimated with comparative precision, the differences in treatment effects by class are not
statistically significant.
To explore the relationship between initial achievement/cognitive ability and the
intervention, we estimate models that allow the treatment effect to vary with a student's
SAT score. Figure 2 shows the treatment effects and control mean estimated by local
linear regression using a triangular kernel with bandwidth of 200 SAT points. Confidence
intervals use BRL corrected standard errors. The treatment effect model includes all
covariates from the primary specification described above.22
To begin, note that the mean plagiarism rate among control students is over 10
percent for students at the bottom of the SAT distribution. The rate declines steadily as
SAT score rises, asymptoting to nearly zero at the upper end of the SAT distribution.
More interestingly, we see that the intervention had a much larger impact on students at
the bottom tail of the SAT distribution. Based on the estimates from this model, we
would conclude that the intervention reduced the likelihood of plagiarism by roughly 10
percentage points among students with SAT scores below 1,200. While these students
comprise just less than 10 percent of the students in our sample, the national average of
21

The treatment estimate for female students becomes smaller and statistically insignificant in models that
control for classroom observables instead of pair fixed effects.
22
A model that interacts SAT score with linear and quadratic terms of the SAT score yields comparable
results.

25

math and verbal SAT scores among all test-takers in 2007 was 1,017 and the 25th
percentile was 850. While the external validity of any intervention trial is open to
question, this treatment heterogeneity suggests that the intervention may have a large
impact on the typical college student.
In theory, it is possible that the treatment effect may have varied with classroom
or instructor characteristics. Unfortunately, with only 28 classrooms and 14 pairs, our
ability to detect such differences is quite limited. The results shown in Table 7 suggest
that impacts may have been larger in classes with female professors, professors below the
rank of full professor and in classes that did not include a warning on the syllabus
regarding plagiarism. However, none of these treatment effect differences are statistically
significant at conventional levels.

5.3 Human Capital or Deterrence?
Our intervention was designed to reduce the prevalence of plagiarism by
educating students about what constitutes plagiarism and providing them with effective
strategies for avoidance. However, it may also (or even exclusively) be that this
intervention reduced plagiarism simply by increasing the perceived likelihood that
plagiarism would be detected and prosecuted. To assess the mediating mechanisms by
which this intervention was effective, we fielded a web-based survey of the participating
students approximately one month after the end of the semester and after the collection of
writing assignments for this study had concluded. The survey contained 10 questions
tapping student attitudes regarding the course and the instructor, along with three truefalse questions assessing the student’s knowledge of plagiarism (see Appendix B). The
response rate was 51 percent and did not differ significantly across treatment and control
groups.23
Table 8 presents results from analyses that examine the impact of the treatment on
survey responses. More specifically, Table 8 reports the estimated treatment effects from
23

Because of the operating constraints implied by Blackboard's survey mechanism, student identifiers were
not available for the student-level survey responses within participating courses. Blackboard’s design also
implied that one course pair could not participate in this follow-up survey. One instructor effectively
merged the Blackboard site for two sections of the same course. This did not complicate the treatment,
which could be viewed only by the treatment course students in this pair. However, because Blackboard’s
survey mechanism strips individual identifiers, it was not possible to separate treatment and control
responses for this pair of courses.

26

OLS regressions that condition on student traits and pair fixed effects, with BRL-adjusted
clustered standard errors. The results in the first row of Table 8 indicate that, though
students in treatment courses were somewhat more likely to not complete the survey, this
difference was not statistically significant. In other words, the response rate to the survey
appears balanced across treatment and control conditions.
Perhaps most interestingly, the next row in Table 8 indicates that students in
treatment classes were substantially more likely to correctly answer all the three quiz
items, which assessed student understanding of plagiarism. This is not surprising insofar
as these items were based directly on the information provided in the on-line tutorial. The
fact that roughly 87 percent of control students answered all three items correctly
indicates that many students were aware of much of the information contained in the
tutorials. However, the fact that virtually 100 percent of students in treatment classes
answered all three items correctly confirms that the intervention provided information to
a non-trivial fraction of students and that these students retained such information for at
least one semester.
The remaining rows in Table 8 identify the treatment-control differences for the
other survey responses where responses were on a scale of 1 to 5 with 1 indicating strong
disagreement with the statement and 5 reflecting strong agreement.24 Interestingly, the
data from question 6 indicate that students in the treatment courses were significantly
more likely to agree that they had a good understanding of plagiarism, a finding
consistent with the quiz results and the educational intent of the tutorial. In contrast, the
results to questions 8, 9, and 10 suggest that the intervention did not have a statistically
significant deterrent effect. That is, respondents in treatment courses were not
significantly more likely to think that a professor would detect plagiarism, respond to it in
some way or report it to a judiciary committee. As a composite measure of student
perceptions regarding the likelihood of detection and sanction for plagiarism, we also
calculated the average of survey questions 8, 9 and 10. In the last row of Table 8, we see
that assignment to the treatment condition is not significantly related to this composite

24

In results available upon request, we confirm that we obtain comparable results if we use binary
outcomes reflecting the top two categories (i.e., agree or strongly agree) instead of the continuous level of
agreement measure.

27

measure.25 While not definitive, these results suggest that the primary mediating
mechanism for the intervention was education rather than deterrence.

6. Discussion
Rapid technological advances (e.g., access to full-text resources and cut-and-paste
word processing) have contributed to the widely held impression that plagiarism by
students has dramatically increased on college campuses. Some commentators have
suggested that instructors and institutions should respond to this academic misconduct by
increasing the penalties for plagiarism as well as the probability that an infraction is
detected (e.g., Galles et al. 2003). In contrast, other observers have expressed unease
about fostering increasingly adversarial classroom environments. However, despite the
degree of concern and the corresponding calls for reform, there has been surprisingly
little credible evidence on how much student plagiarism actually occurs and on the policy
determinants of this illicit behavior.
The results of the unusual field experiment discussed here suggest that plagiarism
is not all that common at selective institutions but may be substantially more common
among college students with average SAT scores. This study also presented experimental
evidence that a fairly brief but detailed educational tutorial can be highly effective at
reducing the prevalence of plagiarism. An ex-post survey of the participants in this
experiment suggested that this tutorial was effective by increasing student knowledge
about plagiarism rather than by increasing the perceived probabilities of detection and
punishment.
These results are consistent with a model of student behavior in which plagiarism
persists in equilibrium because of rational ignorance. That is, the available evidence
clearly suggests that students have a generally poor understanding of what constitutes
plagiarism. However, they may also have weak incentives to educate themselves about
this illicit behavior. College instructors often view policing plagiarism and teaching
25

It should be noted that a specification that includes classroom covariates in addition instead of pair fixed
effects yields a point estimate of roughly .13, which represents a moderate size effect (i.e., roughly .25 of
the standard deviation of the measure) that is statistically different than zero. This is one of the few
instances in which the inclusion of classroom covariates instead of (or in addition to) pair fixed effects
leads to any substantive change in our estimates. However, the estimate of .13 is not significantly different
than the estimate of .06 shown in Table 8 here. Our read of these results is that the present study does
present compelling evidence in either direction with regard to potential deterrent effects.

28

students about it as outside their responsibilities. Furthermore, when plagiarism is
detected, the penalties are often informal and fairly light.
If this characterization of student plagiarism is accurate, it suggests that academic
integrity at colleges and universities resembles a “tragedy of the commons” in that the
individual incentives of both students and their instructors are not well aligned to support
collectively advantageous institutional norms. However, our evaluation results also
suggest that educationally themed interventions can meaningfully address this problem.
In particular, the web-based tutorial evaluated in this study constituted a cost-effective
and easily scalable approach to supporting a “hidden curriculum” of academic integrity
and did so without necessarily relying on meaningful effort from instructors.

References
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press, 2009.
Baruchson-Arbib, Shifra and Eti Yaari. “Printed versus Internet Plagiarism: A Study of
Students’ Perception,” International Journal of Information Ethics 1, 2004,
pages 1-7.
Bell, Robert M., and Daniel F. McCaffrey, “Bias Reduction in Standard Errors for Linear
Regression with Multi-Stage Samples,” Survey Methodology 28(2), 2002, pages
169–179.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S. How Much Should We Trust Differences-inDifferences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 2004; 119(1), 249-75.
Bowers, William J. Student Dishonesty and its Control in Colleges (New York: Bureau
of Applied Social Research, Columbia University, 1964), 155.
Bilic-Zulle, Lidija, Josip Azman, Vedran Frkovic, Mladen Petrovecki. "Is There an
Effective Approach to Deterring Students from Plagiarizing?" Science and
Engineering Ethics 14, 2008, 139-147.
Brown, B.S. and D. Emmett. “Explaining variations in the level of academic dishonesty
in studies of college students: Some new evidence,” College Student Journal
35(4), 2001.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah. B. Gelbach and Doug Miller. “Bootstrap-Based Improvements
for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol
90, No 3, 2008, pages 414-427.
Donald, Stephen G., and Kevin Lang, “Inference with Difference-in-Differences and
Other Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2), 2007, pages 221–
233.
Downs, Anthony. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper, 1957.

29

Galles, Gary, Philip E. Graves, Robert L. Sexton and Surrey M. Walton. “Monitoring
Costs and Tolerance Levels for Classroom Cheating,” American Journal of
Economics and Sociology, Vol. 62, No. 4 (Oct., 2003), pp. 713-719
Genereux, R.L. and B.L. McLeod. “Circumstances surrounding cheating: A questionnaire
study of college students,” Research in Higher Education 36, 1995, pages 687704.
Harrison, Glenn W. and John A. List. "Field Experiments," Journal of Economic
Literature Vol XLII, December 2004, pages 1009-1055.
Howard, Rebecca Moore and Laura J. Davies. "Plagiarism in the Internet Age,"
Educational Leadership, March 2009, 64-67.
Jackson, Pamela. "Plagiarism Instruction Online: Assessing Undergraduate Students'
Ability to Avoid Plagiarism," College & Research Libraries 67(5), 2006, 418428.
Lau, Katherine S.L., Craig Nathanson, Kevin M. Williams, Bryce Westlake, and Delroy
L. Paulhus. “Investigating Academic Dishonesty with Concrete Measures,”
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Poster presented at
the 17th annual meeting of the American Psychological Society, Los Angeles,
2005
McCabe, Donald L. "Cheating Among College and University Students: A North
American Perspective," International Journal for Educational Integrity (2005)
Volume 1, No. 1.
McCabe, Donald L. and Linda Klebe Treviño. “Individual and Contextual Influences on
Academic Dishonesty: A Multicampus Investigation,” Research in Higher
Education 38(3), 1997, pages 379-396.
McCabe, Donald L., Linda Klebe Treviño, and Kenneth D. Butterfield. "Cheating in
Academic Institutions: A Decade of Research," Ethics and Behavior 11(3),
2001, 219-232.
McGrath, Charles. "Plagiarism: Everybody Into the Pool," The New York Times, January
7, 2007.
Mueller, Dennis C. Public Choice II, Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Murdock, T.B. and E. Anderman, E. “Motivational perspectives on student cheating:
Current status and future directions,” Educational Psychologist 41, 2006, pages
121-145.
Posner, Richard A. The Little Book of Plagiarism. Random House, Inc. 2007.
Power, Lori G. “University Students’ Perceptions of Plagiarism,” Journal of Higher
Education 80(6), November/December 2009, pages 643-662.
Rettinger, David A. and Yair Kramer. "Situational and Personal Causes of Student
Cheating," Research in Higher Education 50, 2009: 293-313.
Rimer, Sara. "A Campus Fad That's Being Copied: Internet Plagiarism," The New York
Times, September 3, 2003.
Scanlon, Patrick M., & Neumann, David R. “Internet plagiarism among college
students,” Journal of College Student Development 43, 2002, pages 374–385.
Schneider, Alison, "Why Professors Don't Do More to Stop Students Who Cheat,"
Chronicle of Higher Education, 22 January 1999, A9.

30

Appendix A – Selected Tutorial Screens
Introduction

Page 1

Page 10

31

Page 17

Tutorial Quiz Question 3 with interactive feedback

32

Appendix B – Follow-up Survey
Questions 1 through 10, which are listed below had five possible responses: Strongly Agree, Agree,
Neither Agree nor Disagree, Disagree, Strongly Disagree
Question 1 - Overall, I enjoyed this class.
Question 2 - I found this class to be fairly difficult academically.
Question 3 - I found the writing assignment(s) for this class somewhat stressful.
Question 4 - I tended to get an early start, rather than procrastinate, on writing assignments for
this class.
Question 5 - When working on the writing assignments for this class, I paid particular attention
to avoiding plagiarism.
Question 6 - I have a good understanding of what constitutes plagiarism in academic writing.
Question 7 - I know how to avoid plagiarism in my writing assignments.
Question 8 - If my writing assignments for this class contained any plagiarism, this instructor
would detect it.
Question 9 - If this instructor felt that one of my writing assignments contained any plagiarism,
he or she would ignore it.
Question 10 - If this instructor felt that one of my writing assignments contained any
plagiarism, he or she would report it to the [institutional judiciary authority].
Questions 11, 12, and 13 were true/false questions.
Question 11 - Suppose you are writing a research paper. You have cut and pasted a lot of
information from articles you found on web sites and databases into a Word file on your
computer. While writing your essay, you find yourself patching together pieces from different
sources, and you have occasionally lost track of which ideas were your own and which were
from various articles and websites. You could go back to the original sources but the prospect
is daunting. Fortunately, if your professor queries your sources, you can legitimately claim that
you didn’t plagiarize because it wasn’t intentional.
Question 12 - Suppose it would be quite easy for you to re-tool whole sections of a paper you
have written for a previous to satisfy the requirements of another course you are currently
taking. It is acceptable practice to re-submit this edited paper – without checking with either
professor -- because you are writing a paper for a different professor and a different course.
Question 13 - Plagiarism is not limited to taking something from a book; it also includes
stealing ideas from a movie, a professor’s lecture, or from an interview on a radio news
program.

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Student
Level Data
Classroom Aggregate Data
Full Sample Control Mean Treatment
Diff: T-C
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Fraction Female
0.561
0.499
0.558
0.06
Fraction Black
0.086
0.090
0.088
0.00
Fraction Hispanic
0.116
0.108
0.134
0.03
Fraction Asian
0.180
0.201
0.216
0.02
Fraction White
0.563
0.537
0.515
-0.02
Fraction Other Race
0.055
0.063
0.047
-0.02
Average SAT Score
1407
1404
1409
4.52
Fraction papers submitted as hard copy
0.059
0.087
0.058
-0.03
Fraction Seniors
0.213
0.181
0.226
0.05
Fraction Juniors
0.251
0.196
0.268
0.07
Fraction Sophomores
0.331
0.284
0.336
0.05
Fraction Freshmen
0.205
0.340
0.171
-0.17
Fraction taking the course as Pass/Fail
0.068
0.055
0.081
0.03
Fraction taking class for a letter grade
0.732
0.607
0.749
0.14
Class size
27.2
25.9
23.9
-2.07
Number papers required for the class
2.5
2.1
1.9
-0.21
Warning about plagiarism on the syllabus
0.301
0.286
0.429
0.14
Social science course
0.799
0.857
0.857
0.00
Assistant professor
0.231
0.214
0.286
0.07
Associate professor
0.221
0.214
0.214
0.00
Full professor
0.271
0.357
0.214
-0.14
Visiting professor
0.277
0.214
0.286
0.07
Female professor
0.327
0.286
0.571
0.29
Number of observations
1259
14
14
P-value from SUR with all covariates as the outcome
variables and the treatment indicator as the single predictor
0.509
P-value from OLS regression of treatment indicator on all
covariates
0.258
Notes: *=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

P-value
(5)
0.30
0.93
0.45
0.76
0.70
0.49
0.66
0.71
0.50
0.16
0.28
0.15
0.28
0.23
0.47
0.59
0.46
1.00
0.68
1.00
0.42
0.68
0.14

Table 2: Relationship between Plagiarism and Student and Class Characteristics
Bivariate
Multivariate
Regressions
Regression
(1)
(2)
Female
0.012
0.011
(0.009)
(0.007)
Black
0.054**
-0.005
(0.027)
(0.026)
Hispanic
0.018
-0.010
(0.017)
(0.020)
Asian
0.036**
0.032**
(0.017)
(0.014)
Other race
-0.006
-0.011**
(0.004)
(0.005)
Missing race
0.019*
0.019**
(0.010)
(0.009)
SAT score
-0.227*
-0.255*
(0.127)
(0.149)
SAT score squared
0.008*
0.009
(0.005)
(0.005)
Missing SAT score
-1.695*
-1.890*
(0.890)
(1.053)
Hard copy paper
0.045
0.046
(0.030)
(0.034)
Freshman
-0.005
-0.003
(0.012)
(0.010)
Sophomore
0.007
0.004
(0.012)
(0.012)
Junior
0.024
0.024
(0.017)
(0.016)
Missing class year
-0.017*
-0.024**
(0.010)
(0.009)
Pass-Fail
-0.026**
-0.015**
(0.007)
(0.007)
Missing grade designation
-0.021*
0.001
(0.012)
(0.035)
Class size
-0.000
0.003
(0.001)
(0.004)
Number of papers
-0.008
0.002
(0.010)
(0.029)
Warning about plagiarism in syllabus
-0.004
-0.035
(0.019)
(0.037)
Female professor
-0.012**
0.031
(0.003)
(0.067)
Assistant professor
-0.034
-0.058
(0.044)
(0.066)
Associate professor
-0.038
-0.095
(0.043)
(0.145)
Visiting professor
-0.039
-0.071
(0.041)
(0.101)
Number of students
Mean of dep. var.

1259
0.024

Notes: Standard errors on student-level covariates are clustered by student and standard errors
on classroom level covariates are clustered by classroom with BRL-cluster adjustment.
All models contain pairid indicators.
*=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

Table 3: Group Data Estimates of the Effect of Treatment Status on Plagiarism

coeff
s.e.
p-value (t dist)
N
Df
Student covariates
Class covariates
Pair Fixed Effects
s.e.

Panel A: Dependent Variable = Unadjusted Classroom Mean Rate of Plagiarism
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.036
-0.049**
-0.036**
-0.043
-0.036**
(0.024)
(0.023)
(0.014)
(0.027)
(0.014)
0.148
0.043
0.025
0.165
0.025

(6)
-0.036**
(0.014)
0.025

28
26

28
19

28
13

28
6

28
13

28
13

No
No
No
regular

No
Yes
No
regular

No
No
Yes
regular

No
Yes
Yes
regular

No
No
Yes
robust

No
No
Yes
hc2

Panel B: Dependent Variable = Adjusted Classroom Mean Rate of Plagiarism (adjusted for student characteristics)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
coeff
-0.031
-0.038
-0.031**
-0.034
-0.022**
-0.023**
s.e.
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.013)
(0.027)
(0.010)
(0.009)
p-value (t dist)
0.206
.113
0.038
0.254
0.050
.027
N
Df

28
26

28
18

28
13

28
6

28
13

28
13

Student covariates
Class covariates
Pair Fixed Effects

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Identity

Number of
student-papers

Inverse
covariance
matrix from step
one

Weighting

Identity

Identity

Identity

Notes: *=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

(1)
-0.023**
(0.009)
0.026

None

(2)
-0.023**
(0.006)
0.001

-2.684

(3)
-0.023**
(0.009)
0.018

-2.684
[-1.460, 2.104]
0.0104

Block Bootstrap-t
(4)
-0.023**
(0.009)
0.018

-2.684
[-2.960, -1.286]
0.0872

Wild Block
Bootstrap-t
(5)
-0.023**
(0.009)
0.018

Cluster-robust with Cluster-robust with Cluster-robust with
BRL correction
BRL correction
BRL correction

-3.973

Cluster-robust

Table 4: Micro Data Estimates of the Effect of Treatment Status on Plagiarism

Treatment Effect
Standard error
P-value (from the t distribution)
T-statistic (from full sample estimation)
95% percent CI of T-statistic from bootstrap
p-value of T-statistic differs from the bootstrap
s.e. correction
Notes: All models include student covariates and pair fixed effects.
N=1259 and cluster df=14 for all models.
*=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

Table 5: Robustness Tests

1259
1221
7

Baseline
(1)
-0.023**
(0.009)
0.018

0.040

1259
1228
14

Less restrictive
definition of
plagiarism
(2)
-0.025**
(0.011)
0.031

0.021

1259
1221
7

More
restrictive
definition of
plagiarism
(3)
-0.020**
(0.007)
.013

0.033

1259
1228
14

Assign T to
student
(4)
-0.020**
(0.007)
0.012

0.032

438
417
6

0.036

875
848
10

0.033

1091
1070
12

OLS
(7)
-0.028**
(0.010)
0.017

0.033

1091
1106
12

Probit
(8)
-0.023**
(0.011)
0.048

0.033

1091
1106
12

Logit
(9)
-0.024**
(0.009)
0.026

Excluding
pairs in which
both
instructors
Classroom
likely knew
pairs with
the purpose of
same professor
the study
(5)
(6)
-0.011
-0.028**
(0.013)
(0.013)
0.413
0.061

N
Df
Cluster df
0.033

coeff
s.e.
p-value (t dist)

Control mean

Notes: All estimates in columns 1-6 come from specifications using the micro data with BRL-adjusted s.e.
Column 7 presents OLS estimates with no standard error corrections.
Columns 8 and 9 present average marginal effects with standard errors calculated using the delta method.
All models include student covariates and pair fixed effects.
*=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

0.059

Female
(1)
-0.023**
(0.011)
546
14

0.054

Male
(2)
-0.026**
(0.012)

0.056

260
7

0.313

Freshman
(8)
-0.039
(0.036)

0.025

408
14

0.952

Sophomore
(9)
0.001
(0.015)

0.029

302
12

0.026

Junior
(10)
-0.042**
(0.017)

0.024

259
9

0.111

Senior
(11)
-0.028*
(0.016)

Class

p-value (t dist)
713
14
0.029

Table 6: Robustness by Student Characteristics
Gender

N
Cluster df
0.036

coeff
s.e.

Control mean

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression.
All models include student covariates and pair fixed effects.
Standard errors shown in parenthesis are BRL-adjusted clustered standard errors.
*=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

0.031
845
6

0.209

0.038

350
3

0.771

(3)
-0.013
(0.039)

0.030

909
9

0.010

Not Full
Professors
(4)
-0.024**
(0.007)

0.023

388
3

0.592

Syllabus Warning
(5)
-0.011
(0.019)

0.035

871
7

0.122

No Syllabus
Warning
(6)
-0.023*
(0.013)

Full Professors

p-value (t dist)
414
4
0.024

Table 7: Robustness by Class Characteristics
Female
Male Professors
Professors
(1)
(2)
-0.050**
-0.028
(0.015)
(0.020)
N
Cluster df
0.090

coeff
s.e.

Control mean

Notes: Each column represents a separate regression.
All models include student covariates and pair fixed effects.
Standard errors shown in parenthesis are BRL-adjusted clustered standard errors.
*=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

Table 8: Impacts on Student Attitudes and Perceptions

Answered all 3 quiz items correctly
Question 1 - Overall, I enjoyed this class.
Question 2 - I found this class to be fairly difficult academically.
Question 3 - I found the writing assignment(s) for this class somewhat stressful.
Question 4 - I tended to get an early start, rather than procrastinate, on writing
assignments for this class.
Question 5 - When working on the writing assignments for this class, I paid
particular attention to avoiding plagiarism.
Question 6 - I have a good understanding of what constitutes plagiarism in
academic writing.
Question 7 - I know how to avoid plagiarism in my writing assignments.
Question 8 - If my writing assignments for this class contained any plagiarism,
this instructor would detect it.
Question 9 - If this instructor felt that one of my writing assignments contained
any plagiarism, he or she would ignore it.
Question 10 - If this instructor felt that one of my writing assignments contained
any plagiarism, he or she would report it to the College Judiciary Committee.

Control Mean
(s.d.)
(1)
0.866
3.766
(1.035)
3.416
(0.938)
3.237
(0.998)
2.968
(1.208)
4.000
(0.829)
4.363
(0.634)
4.356
(0.552)
4.021
(0.776)
1.598
(0.770)
3.811
(0.814)
4.077
(0.608)

Diff: T-C
(s.e.)
(2)
0.157**
(0.070)
0.301
(0.236)
-0.030
(0.122)
-0.176
(0.129)
0.050
(0.161)
0.006
(0.136)
0.075**
(0.032)
0.034
(0.336)
0.076
(0.196)
-0.112
(0.276)
0.007
(0.102)
0.061
(0.407)

Question 8/9/10 mean, 5=strongly agree that instructor will notice/address
plagiarism (question 9 reverse coded).
Notes: N=369.
Each row reflects a separate OLS regression in which the outcome is the student response to a particular survey
question, coded 1 to 5 as described in the text.
BRL-cluster adjusted s.e. are shown in parentheses.
All regressions include pair fixed effects in addition to the treatment indicator.
*=significant at the 10% level; ** = significant at the 5% level.

0

.1

.2

.3

Figure 1: Unadjusted plagiarism rates in treatment and control classes

*

−

*

*

−

−

*

−

−

*

−

−

−

*

Grouped by block pairs
Control Group Class Mean

Treatment Group Class Mean

* indicates same teacher taught both classrooms in pair.

treatment effect
−.6 −.5 −.4 −.3 −.2 −.1 0

.1

.2

.3

Figure 2: The impact of the web-based tutorial on plagiarism, by student SAT score

10

12

14
SAT score

Treatment effect
Control mean

95% confidence interval

16

