NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLAINING THE RISE IN EDUCATIONAL GRADIENTS IN MORTALITY
David M. Cutler
Fabian Lange
Ellen Meara
Seth Richards
Christopher J. Ruhm
Working Paper 15678
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15678

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2010

The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the National Institute on Aging. Ted Joyce and
seminar participants at the American Economics Meetings in San Francisco, at Dartmouth College,
The Harvard University School of Public Health, and at the Yale School of Public Health provided
helpful comments on earlier versions of this work. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by David M. Cutler, Fabian Lange, Ellen Meara, Seth Richards, and Christopher J. Ruhm.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Explaining the Rise in Educational Gradients in Mortality
David M. Cutler, Fabian Lange, Ellen Meara, Seth Richards, and Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 15678
January 2010
JEL No. I1,I12
ABSTRACT
The long-standing inverse relationship between education and mortality strengthened substantially
later in the 20th century. This paper examines the reasons for this increase. We show that behavioral
risk factors are not of primary importance. Smoking has declined more for the better educated, but
not enough to explain the trend. Obesity has risen at similar rates across education groups, and control
of blood pressure and cholesterol has increased fairly uniformly as well. Rather, our results show
that the mortality returns to risk factors, and conditional on risk factors, the return to education, have
grown over time.

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
Fabian Lange
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
fabian.lange@yale.edu
Ellen Meara
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
meara@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Seth Richards
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
serichar@econ.upenn.edu
Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
Bryan School, UNCG
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
chrisruhm@uncg.edu

I.

Introduction
Mortality in the United States has declined by much more among the better educated than

among the less educated. Between 1960 and 2000, education-related gaps in mortality grew
dramatically. For example, between 1960 and 1986, education-related gaps in mortality grew 20
percent (Gregory Pappas et al. 1993). The gap widened further, and more rapidly in the decade
after 1990, when life expectancy of those attending college increased an additional 1.6 years with
no change among those who did not go to college, yielding a 30 percent growth in life
expectancy gaps by education (Ellen Meara, Seth Richards, and David M. Cutler 2008). By
2000, college-educated 25-year olds could expect to live 7 years longer than their peers with less
schooling. These patterns have thrust the issue of health disparities onto the political agenda.
Reducing health disparities (by race and ethnicity as well as economic status), along with
improving population health, are two major components of the Healthy People 2010 objectives
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2000).
Despite this policy focus, sources of the increase in these educational disparities remains
poorly understood. Some studies, focusing on medical care providers, show that advantaged
individuals receive better and earlier care than their less advantaged counterparts (e.g. Saif S.
Rathore et al. 2000). Other analyses stress behavioral differences: the better educated are less
likely to smoke, drink, and (at least among women) to be obese (David M. Cutler and Adriana
Lleras-Muney 2008). Still other research suggests the possibility that high status individuals are
less exposed to unalleviated stress (Michael G. Marmot 2006).
This paper analyzes the extent to which behavioral differences (smoking and obesity),
and their immediate medical correlates (hypertension and high cholesterol), can explain changes

1

in educational mortality gradients occurring over the past three decades. 1 Smoking and obesity
are natural to examine because they are the two leading behavioral causes of death in the United
States. Tobacco use is responsible for about 435,000 premature deaths annually (Ali H. Mokdad
et al. 2004) and obesity for between 100,000 and 400,000 early deaths per year (Katherine M.
Flegal et al. 2005; Walter C. Willett et al. 2005). Since the obese often develop high blood
pressure (hypertension) and high cholesterol (hypercholesterolemia), and management of these
risk factors is itself a behavioral issue, we further examine how disease management varies
across education groups. Finally, we separately consider deaths due to cardiovascular disease
(CVD, mostly heart disease) and cancer, since these represent major sources of premature
mortality and are responsive to changes in modifiable risk factors.
David M. Cutler, Edward L. Glaeser, and Allison B. Rosen (2009) show that behavioral
risk factors play an important role in understanding changes in overall mortality trends overall.
They estimated the contribution of demographics and risk factors (smoking, drinking, obesity,
and blood pressure) to 10-year mortality risk during the last three decades of the 20th century and
provide evidence that decreases in smoking and better control of hypertension contributing most
to the substantial reductions in age-adjusted deaths rates, while increases in obesity raised
mortality risk (also see S. Jay Olshansky et al. 2005, and Susan Stewart, David M. Cutler, and
Allison B. Rosen 2009). We use similar data but, instead of focusing on the entire population,
assess the extent to which differential changes in risk factors explain secular increases in
education-related mortality gaps.
1

We are not the first to look at these issues. Evelyn M. Kitagawa and Philip M. Hauser (1968) identified
educational differentials in age-specific mortality, present in 1960, and there has been substantial related recent
research (e.g. Jacob J. Feldman et al. 1989; Harriet Orcutt Duleep 1989; Pappas et al., 1993; Eileen M. Crimmins
and Yasuhiko Saito 2001; Kyle Steenland, Jane Henley, and Michael Thun 2002; Mitchell D. Wong et al. 2002;
Charles C. Lin et al. 2003; Gopal K. Singh and Mohommad Siahpush 2006; Meara, Richards, and Cutler 2008),
most finding that the educational gaps have increased over time.

2

Our analysis reveals three primary findings. First, education-gradients in mortality are
stronger for men than women but have increased over time for both sexes. Second, despite the
importance of smoking, obesity, hypertension, and cholesterol as determinants of population
health, differential changes in these risk factors do not explain the widening educational gap in
mortality since the 1970s. Deaths from cancer, rather than CVD, account for the bulk of this
increase, and this occurs both because the share of deaths due to cancer is growing over time and
because educational differentials in cancer mortality have increased. Finally, the mortality
returns to risk factors, and conditional on risk factors, the return to education, have grown over
time for reasons that are not yet understood. Thus, even if less educated populations were able to
achieve risk factor profiles that mirrored those with more education, widening mortality
differentials would likely persist.
We do not directly address why the impact of risk factors and education have increased
over time, but three explanations seem likely. First, access to medical care may have become
more important for detecting disease early and treating it appropriately, and the better educated
have superior access to care. Second, the living environments (i.e. the exposure to
environmental health risks) may have improved more over time for the better educated. Third,
the management of chronic health problems may have become more sophisticated over time in
ways that favor the highly educated. Our data are not adequate to test these theories, which we
leave to subsequent research.
Sections II and III present the data we analyze and descriptive trends in mortality. The
fourth section presents our empirical approach. The fifth section reports our mortality
regressions, and the sixth section uses these to understand changes in the education-gradient in
mortality. Section VII examines CVD and cancer deaths. The last section concludes.

3

II.

Data and Key Variables
Our analysis utilizes data from various waves of the National Health and Nutrition

Examination Surveys (NHANES) and multiple years of the National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS). The NHANES and NHIS both provide samples that are nationally representative of the
non-institutionalized U.S. population in the specified period, using stratified, multi-stage
probability cluster designs. Information on subsequent mortality is obtained for some of the
surveys, as described below, and is used to estimate education-related differences in death rates.
The remainder of this section describes the surveys and key explanatory variables.

The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
Baseline information for this study was obtained from NHANES I, covering the period
1971-1975. Subsequent descriptive data are from the NHANES II (1976-1980) and NHANES
III (1998-1994), and the first six years (1999-2004) of the continuous NHANES survey
(hereafter referred to as NHANES IV). 2
The NHANES is particularly useful since it includes a physical exam component
providing clinical measures of weight, height, blood pressure, and cholesterol. Because we are
interested in trends in mortality determinants for specified groups, rather than changes in the
composition of U.S. residents, we exclude Hispanics from the analysis. We further limit the
samples to whites, since the earlier NHANES does not provide adequate size to estimate
mortality among non-white populations. All results are age-adjusted and separated by gender, so
that trends do not reflect changes in these characteristics.
2

See: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm for further information on the NHANES.

4

The absence of persons institutionalized at baseline leads to lower estimates of future
mortality than would be obtained for the full population. However, Meara, Richards and Cutler
(2008) demonstrate that, conditional on surviving one year, the death rates for adults initially
living in the community closely resemble those reported in published statistics for the entire
population. Therefore, we limit the sample to individuals surviving at least one year from the
baseline interview for all mortality models estimated below.
We further restrict the sample to those aged 25-74. 3 This provides 5,942 respondents
from NHANES I (1971-75), and 8,408, 4,903 and 5,143 for NHANES II, III and IV respectively.
NHANES I and NHANES III include mortality follow-up surveys, in which respondents are
matched to National Death Index records providing information on the timing and cause of
death. For NHANES I, the follow-up survey covers a period of 10 years (1981-85). For
NHANES III we utilize public use data including deaths through 1998-2000, providing 10 years
of information for around half of survey respondents. 4 Relatively small sample sizes for the
NHANES III follow-up reduce the precision of these estimates, so they are only used as a
supplementary source of information on mortality differentials. The main data set employed
during the later sample period is the NHIS, which is described further below. In addition to the
analysis of total mortality, we examine deaths due to cardiovascular disease (CVD) and cancer,
as defined in NHANES I using ICD-9 codes. 5

3

The upper age limit was 74 years old for NHANES I and II.
The NHANES III public use mortality data include perturbations of data elements to protect confidentiality of
respondents. These do not affect the estimates of demographic differences in death rates.
5
The three-digit ICD-9 codes corresponding to cancer and cardiovascular disease are 140-290 and 390-460.
4

5

The National Health Interview Surveys
We supplement NHANES with data from the 1987-88, 1990-95, and 1997-2000 years of
the National Health Interview Survey. 6 The NHIS data have been linked to deaths through 2002,
and we compute survival for a follow-up period of a decade, or through 2002 for individuals
interviewed after 1992. The advantage of using the NHIS is its large sample size (over 200,000
observations in our analysis sample), which allows us to estimate mortality functions with much
greater precision than in the NHANES (particularly NHANES III). The cost is that, unlike
NHANES, all information is self-reported. Therefore, the NHIS lacks the clinical markers used
to evaluate the role of hypertension or cholesterol control in NHANES. Also, self-report data
underestimate obesity prevalence since height is over-reported and weight is understated (Marie
F. Kuczmarski, Robert J. Kuczmarski, and Matthew Najjar 2001; Elmer V. Villanueva 2001).
As with NHANES, our mortality estimates are for persons surviving at least one year, to
adjust for the exclusion of the institutionalized at baseline. Similarly, we restrict the sample to
non-Hispanic whites aged 25-74 at baseline, leaving a final sample size of 206,364. 7 Cause-ofdeath in the NHIS is classified using “U codes” that represent broad categories compiled from
the underlying International Classification of Diseases-10th Revision codes. We use the latter to
identify cancer and CVD mortality. 8

6

1989 and 1996 are excluded due to a lack of information on smoking. Information on the NHIS is available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis.htm.
7
The age and race/ethnicity restrictions eliminate 155,763 respondents. Another 11,454 observations were deleted
due to missing information (on education, race/ethnicity, weight, height, smoking status or future mortality from the
National Death Index follow-up) and 1,598 were excluded because they died within a year of the baseline interview.
8
The ICD-10 codes indicating cancer are C00-C97, and for cardiovascular disease the codes are I00-I99.

6

Education
We divide the population into two broad education groups: those who completed more
than 12 years of schooling (college attendees) and those with less education. These broad
categories were chosen to minimize errors introduced by the known tendency to over-report the
attainment of a high school degree (Paul D. Sorlie and Norman J. Johnson 1996). Secular
changes in the composition of the education groups are potentially problematic, since the share
of individuals attending college has grown dramatically over time: the proportion of college
educated men in our sample grew from 33 to 60 percent between 1971-75 and 1999-2004; the
corresponding increase for women was from 24 to 61 percent. Following Meara, Richards, and
Cutler (2008), we test for the importance of such compositional changes by estimating
specifications where individuals on the margin between the low and high education group are
randomly reassigned so as to equalize the compositional shares across time periods.

Behavioral Risk Factors
We focus on smoking, obesity, blood pressure and cholesterol as potentially important
risk factors for mortality. Current smokers as those who report smoking at the time of interview;
former smokers are those who had previously smoked at least 100 cigarettes but do not smoking
at the interview date. 9 In supplemental specifications we also control for the number of
cigarettes smoked per day (for current smokers) and the time since last use (for former smokers),
although these are measured with greater error than current/former/never status, and so they are
not included in the main models.
9

The exact wording of the questions changed in the 1992 NHIS to measure individuals who smoked on some days.
There is no reason to believe this change would differentially affect smoking rates by education.

7

We distinguished five weight categories based on body mass index (BMI): weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared. Height and weight are obtained from medical
examinations employing standardized procedures and equipment in NHANES but from (less
accurate) self-reports in the NHIS. Following national and international standards, we define
“underweight”, “healthy weight”, “overweight”, “class 1 obese”, and “class 2 or class 3 obese”
for BMI of: <18.5, 18.5 to <25; ≥ 25 to <30, ≥ 30 to <35 and ≥ 35 (World Health Organization
1997; National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute 1998). Persons with a BMI of 35 or more are
sometimes referred to as “severely obese”. Although BMI is less accurate than laboratory
measures of body composition, since it does not account for variations in muscle mass or in the
distribution of body fat, it is a favored method of assessing excess weight because it is simple,
rapid, and inexpensive to calculate. 10
One reason excess body weight increases mortality is because obese individuals tend to
have high rates of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia (Aviva Must et al. 1999; Cutler,
Glaeser, and Rosen 2009), placing them at risk of serious cardiovascular events. The
development of effective medications to control high blood pressure and cholesterol may have
substantially reduced the risk of death from these conditions, raising the possibility that larger
mortality gradients might reflect increased success in controlling these health problems for high
but not low educated individuals. We investigate this by estimating models that include controls
for blood pressure and cholesterol.
Blood pressure was divided into four groups, following the recommendations of the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (2004): normal (systolic blood pressure (SBP) <120
mmHG and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) <80 mmHG); pre-hypertension (120≤ SBP<140 or
10

Some researchers prefer anthropometric measures such as waist circumference (K. M. Sönmez et al. 2003), waisthip ratio (M. A. Dalton et al. 2003), or waist-height ratio (Brian D. Cox and Margaret J. Whichelow 1996).

8

80≤ DBP<90); stage 1 hypertension (140≤ SBP<160 or 90≤ DBP<100); and stage 2
hypertension (SBP ≥ 160 or DBP ≥ 100). Total cholesterol levels were divided into three groups,
based on guidelines in the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (2002): normal (<200);
borderline high cholesterol (200 to <240); and high cholesterol ( ≥ 240). We focus on total
cholesterol rather HDL and LDL because the latter were not available in NHANES I.
Other risk factors also influence mortality, but they are decidedly less important in
overall deaths. The third leading behavioral cause of death is alcohol use. In comparison to
smoking and obesity, alcohol use accounts for only around 22,000 deaths annually (Melonie
Heron et al. 2009), and many of these deaths result from automobile accidents involving persons
younger than 25, who are excluded from our analysis.

III. Descriptive Trends
5-year mortality and education
Table 1 displays 5-year age-adjusted death rates by sex and education group. Between
the early 1970s and the 1990s, mortality rates fell overall, with particularly large reductions for
men and the college-educated. Among less educated males, the estimated 5-year death rate
declined from 6.3% in NHANES I (1971-75) to 5.8% in the NHIS (1987-96), a drop of 0.5
percentage points; this compares to a 2.0 point reduction (from 5.8% to 3.8%) for college
attendees. 11 The fatality rates of non-college educated women increased 0.5 points (from 3.1 %
to 3.6%) over the same period, while falling 1.0 percentage point (from 3.7% to 2.7%) among
Burkhauser and Cawley (2008) recommend the use of Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis (BIA).
11
The five-year mortality period begins after the initial restriction of surviving one year after the interview, to
account for the exclusion of the non-institutional population from the baseline survey. Since the NHIS mortality
were analyzed through 2002, 1996 is the last interview year for which we have five years of follow-up data.

9

college attendees. 12 Thus, survival gains were large in recent decades but mainly for the highly
educated. Table 1 also illustrates that education gradients were stronger for males than for
females in each time period.
It is worth noting that college-educated women have slightly higher estimated mortality
rate than their peers in NHANES I (3.7% versus 3.2%) and NHANES III (3.2% versus 2.9%).
Given the data required to construct 5-year mortality rates, the sample sizes are relatively small
(2,200 and 700 in NHANES I and 1,500 and 950 in NHANES III) and these differences are not
statistically significant. The finding that education conferred no mortality advantage to adult
women in the 1970s echoes similar findings of a flat mortality gradient for females, especially
for deaths due to Cancer and Cardiovascular disease, obtained in earlier analysis of the National
Cancer Society cohorts from 1959-1971 (Samuel H. Preston and Irma T. Elo 1995; Steenland,
Henley, and Thun 2002). The lack of sample size in the NHANES III data prompted us to use
the larger NHIS samples for these years. While the small NHANES I samples preclude us from
drawing firm conclusions regarding the nature of female mortality in the early 1970s, data from
the NHIS unambiguously indicates that there were large education-mortality gradients for both
sexes at the end of the 20th century,.
Table 2 reveals an equally important trend of rising education over time. For men,
college attendance rose from 33 to 54 percent between NHANES I and the NHIS. Among
women the growth was even larger: from 24 to 49 percent. 13 Such large changes make it
important to ensure that results are not due to compositional changes in education groups, rather
12

These patterns resemble recent estimates by Meara, Richards, and Cutler (2008).
Corresponding secular increases in education are found in other national data sets. For instance, Current
Population Survey data indicate that the fraction of white males (females) 25 and older with a high school degree or
more rose from 54.0% to 84.8% (55.0% to 85.0%) between 1970 and 2000 (U.S. Census Bureau 2009; Table 222).
13

10

than differential patterns of survival conditional on education. We address this issue in section
VI.

Age-adjusted risk factors
Tables 3A and 3B show how risk factors related to smoking, obesity, hypertension and
hypercholesterolemia differ across education groups and over time. The results are presented
separately for males and females and we compare changes from 1971-1975 (using NHANES I)
to either 1987-96 (from the NHIS) or 1996-2004 (using NHANES IV).
An inverse relationship between education and current smoking exists in all periods but
has increased with time, particularly for women. Current smoking fell 8 percentage points
between 1971-75 and 1999-2004 for less educated males, versus 15 points among college
attendees. Smoking increased by one percentage point for non-college educated females but
dropped 12 points for college attendees during the same period. These results, which mirror
findings previously obtained by Meara, Richards, and Cutler (2008) lend credence to the
possibility that differential reductions in smoking have contributed to increasing educational
gaps in mortality.
The trends in obesity are somewhat sensitive to the choice of endpoints and data sets,
with larger secular growth observed for NHANES IV than the NHIS. 14 These qualifications
notwithstanding, Table 3 demonstrates a rapid growth in obesity for all groups but without strong
educational differences. Between 1971-75 and 1999-2004, the fraction of less educated males
who were obese (class I or higher) increased 17 percentage points (from 14% to 31%) and the
proportion severely obese (class II or greater) rose 8 points (from 2% to 10%). The

11

corresponding expansion in obesity and severe obesity for college educated men was 20 points
(from 9% to 29%) and 8 points (from 1% to 9%). Among females, the 18 percentage point rise
in obesity (from 11% to 29%) for college-educated women was only slightly less than the 20
point increase (from 17% to 37%) for those with less schooling, and both groups had an 11
percentage point growth in severe obesity. 15 Although obesity growth is smaller when using the
NHIS rather than the NHANES IV, similar changes are again observed for the two education
groups. These similarities imply that obesity trends are unlikely to explain much of the growth
in education gaps in mortality that are the focus of this analysis.
The bottom portion of tables 3A and 3B document success stories in the battle to reduce
risk factors for cardiovascular disease, as measured by the reductions in high blood pressure and
cholesterol. Hypertension (Stage I or II) dropped 29 (18) percentage points for less educated
males (females) and 26 (17) points for college attendees. Corresponding reductions in severe
(Stage II) hypertension were 14 (10) for less educated males (females), and 13 (8) percentage
points for college attendees. The prevalence of high cholesterol declined by between 10 and 13
percentage points for both sexes and education categories. The less educated are more likely to
have high blood pressure or cholesterol at both points in time but decreases in the severe forms
of these health risks tend to be slightly larger for them (except for high cholesterol among men),
so that the secular changes will not be able to explain the widening in education-mortality
gradients.

14

This occurs because the self-report data in the NHIS lead to an understatement of BMI, as discussed, and since
the NHANES IV covers a later period (1999-2004 rather than 1987-96) and so picks up the substantial growth in
weight occurring at the very end the 20th century.
15
These results are consistent with previous research indicating that SES-BMI differentials are constant or
narrowing over time (Qi Zhang and Youfa Wang 2004; Virginia W. Chang and Diane S. Lauderdale 2005).

12

IV.

Empirical Approach
We examine whether trends in risk factors contribute to widening education differentials

in death rates, using an approach similar to Cutler, Glaeser, and Rosen’s (2009) investigation of
the sources of overall gains in life expectancy. Our main empirical analysis involves three steps.
First, we estimate mortality hazard rates as a function of behavioral risk factors and education,
using information from a single data set (such as NHANES I or the NHIS). This equation
describes the relationship between the control variables and mortality given other determinants
(e.g. medical technologies) present at that point in time. The schooling coefficient indicates the
educational differential for persons with given risk factors. Second, we use the parameter
estimates generated in the first stage to simulate how mortality would change within an
education group, given the distribution of risk factors present at a different time period. Finally,
we calculate ratios of predicted death rates for less versus more educated individuals for each of
the four possible combinations of population characteristics and mortality equations from
combinations of the earlier (NHANES I, 1971-75) and later (NHIS 1987-2000) period. For
example, the actual mortality gradient during 1971-75 is calculated using the NHANES I sample
characteristics and the mortality hazard rates estimated from this same data set. Conversely, the
1987-2002 education-mortality gradient predicted if the population retained the risk
characteristics of 1971-75 is obtained by applying the NHIS mortality equation to the NHANES
I data. The difference between these two estimates shows the change in the gradient that is due
to trends in population risk factors. Since educational and mortality trends vary dramatically
between men and women, we estimate all models separately for subsamples stratified by sex.
The basic equation is a proportional hazard model of mortality risk taking the form:

13

(1)

mortality ( X , college, age )s = exp(β ′ * X s + λ * colleges + γ * ages ) ,

where the s subscript specifies the survey (NHANES I or the NHIS in the main models). College
is an indicator of whether a respondent reported >12 years of education, age is expressed in
single years between 25 and 74, and X contains the set of behavioral risk factors. This
specification offers a natural fit for the log-linear relationship between mortality risk and age. 16
The models are estimated using maximum likelihood and we report hazard ratios throughout.
In the basic specification, X includes two indicators of smoking status (“current” and
“former” smokers, with those never smoking the reference group) and four indicators of weight
(underweight, overweight, obese class 1, and obese class 2 or 3, with healthy weight as the
reference group). We experimented with more complete or flexible models of risk factors by
including controls for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia, interactions of smoking and
obesity with education, or both. These results are discussed briefly below. One caveat to the
overall modeling approach is that we assume there are no changes in year effects within a given
survey, so that we average mortality effects of risk factors across these years.
As mentioned, counterfactual estimates of death rates were calculated using data from
one survey but the mortality equation from another. For instance, we calculate what the
mortality risk would have been in the NHANES I period if the population contained the risk
factors present in the NHIS between 1987 and 2000 by applying the parameters estimated from
NHANES I (denoted with the subscript 71-75) to the distribution of risk-factors in the NHIS
(subscripted with 87-00). For the college educated, this is calculated as:

16

This specification gives rise to a Gompertz distribution of time to death.

14

Εˆ [mortality ( X , college, age; θ 1971− 75 ) | college = 1, survey = 1987 − 2000] =

(2)

1
Ni

∑ exp(β ′

i∈87 − 00 , college =1

71− 75

* X i + λ 71− 75 * collegei + γ 71− 75 * agei )

.

We can compare this estimate to actual predicted mortality hazard in NHANES I to see how
changes in the behavioral risks have affected mortality between the two time periods.
Alternatively, we can compare the mortality rate calculated from (2) to that obtained using both
the NHIS mortality equation and risk factors, to indicate how much of the total secular trend is
due to changes in the model coefficients – that is how much occurs for reasons other than
changes in the risk factors. In the tables, we perform the estimates described above separately by
education groups and calculate both actual and counterfactual educational gradients.
Because of small sample sizes in NHANES III, our primary trend decomposition is for
NHANES I versus the NHIS. However, we also re-estimated mortality models for the 1990s and
simulated predicted mortality using the smaller NHANES III sample.
The standard errors reported below are more conservative than those usually obtained in
regression decompositions. We accounted for both estimating error in the mortality model and
sampling error for the distribution of risk factors in different survey periods (rather than just the
former as is typical). 17 Appendix A details the process used to derive the correct standard errors.

V.

Mortality Hazard Rate Estimates
Table 4 displays estimates of the mortality equations described in equation (1) for

subsamples stratified by sex, controlling for education, smoking and obesity status. Since we are
17

We find that for our standard errors are 20-25% larger than those obtained without accounting for errors in the
distribution of risk factors.

15

estimating hazard models, coefficients greater (less) than one indicate increased (decreased)
mortality risk.
Two findings stand out. First, controlling for smoking and body weight (Model B), the
college-educated have lower expected mortality rates than their less educated peers, and this
differential has increased over time. The predicted hazard rates of highly educated NHANES I
men are a statistically insignificant 12% below those of non-college attendees. For NHANES III
and NHIS males, the corresponding differences are 26% and 25%, and these differences are
significant. College-educated women in NHANES I have a (statistically insignificant) 9%
higher hazard rate than their counterparts; for NHANES III and NHIS females, the predicted
rates are 12% and 20% lower. For females, the estimated college education effect is only
statistically significant in the NHIS.
Obesity and smoking do explain a portion of the educational differential in mortality rates
at a point in time, as expected since both represent significant health risks. This can be seen by
noting that the predicted risk reduction associated with a college education is always larger in
specifications that do not control for smoking or body weight (Model A of the table) than when
these are included (Model B). In such models, college attendance is associated with a risk
reduction of 22%, 31% and 33% for males in the NHANES I, NHANES III and the NHIS, and 6%, 24% and 25% for corresponding females.
Second, current smoking is associated with a much larger increase in mortality rates than
other risk factors, and with some suggestion that these adverse effects have increased over time.
Averaging across specifications, the hazard rates of current smokers are around twice as high as
for persons who have never smoked. Severe (class 2 or 3) obesity also confers a substantial
elevation in mortality risk, raising the predicted hazard rates by 44% to 128%, although the

16

differences are not always statistically significant. Being underweight or mildly obese predicts
increased death rates, although usually by statistically insignificant amounts. Overweight (but
non-obese) persons sometimes have slightly reduced mortality risk. The mortality equations
estimated using the NHIS resemble those estimated obtained from NHANES III, except that the
former are more precise. For this reason, we focus on results using the NHIS below.

VI.

Education-Mortality Gradients
We next use the hazard rate estimates, described above, to examine the extent to which

trends in education-mortality gradients result from changes in behavioral risk factors.
Throughout, we present mortality ratios with college attendees as the reference group, so that
ratios above one indicate higher mortality for the less educated. Table 5 shows the simulated
mortality ratios under different scenarios. Each row shows the data source used to estimate the
mortality models – either NHANES I covering 1971-75 or the NHIS for 1987-2000. The
columns indicate the data from which the population risk factors are obtained. Entries on the
main diagonal therefore indicate actual education gradients. For instance, less educated males
were predicted to have 31% higher hazard rates of death than male college attendees in 1971-75,
and the gap rises to 52% in 1987-2000; the 21 percentage point increase is shown as the third
element of the main diagonal. By contrast, less educated males would have had mortality 56%
higher than male college attendees in 1971-75 if the hazard rate equation in 1987-2000 had
applied in that time period. This figure would be 27% for the NHIS time period, using the
NHANES I mortality model.
Table 5 shows that changes in population risk factors play essentially no role in
explaining the trend increase in mortality gradients. As mentioned, less educated NHANES I

17

males have a 31% higher risk of death than their college-attending peers. The differential using
the same hazard rate equation but the population risk factors from the NHIS – 15 to 25 years
later – is a slightly smaller 27%. The implication is that changes in behavioral risks explain none
of the rise in the education gap in mortality. Patterns of smoking and obesity play a similarly
small role in all of the remaining comparisons in Table 5, regardless of whether estimates use
parameters based on either the NHANES I or NHIS data.
By contrast, the mortality decrement for being less educated, holding patterns of smoking
and obesity constant, worsens with time. Continuing with the previous example, predicted
mortality hazard rates of the less educated NHANES I male sample would be 56% higher than
for those with more schooling, had the parameters from the NHIS mortality equation applied,
which is larger than the actual (52%) differential observed in the later period.
The bottom panel of Table 5 shows analogous results for females. Secular changes in
smoking and obesity from the 1970s to the 1990s account for a 2 to 3 percentage point rise in the
education-mortality ratio, out of a 42 point total increase (the mortality ratio rises from 0.92 to
1.34). Thus, trends in these risk factors explain less than 10% of the increase in the female
education-mortality gradient, with more than 90% resulting from changes in the returns to
behavioral risks and education (given a set of behavioral risks).
These results might be an artifact of the blunt measures of smoking used. To this point,
we have controlled for tobacco use only at the extensive margin (in part because this is measured
more accurately than smoking intensity). However changes at the intensive margin might be
important if college-educated tobacco users have cut the amount they smoke by more than their
non-college counterparts. 18 Similarly, there could be differences in the timing of last use among
18

This possibility is salient given the importance of tobacco-related causes of death shown in prior literature (Wong
et al. 2002; Meara, Richards, and Cutler 2008).

18

former smokers, which could be important because health risks continue to be elevated for a
substantial period of time after smoking cessation. These possibilities are addressed in Table 6,
which displays simulated mortality ratios based on mortality hazard rate models that include
additional controls for smoking intensity (<5, 6-10, 11-19, 20, 21-39, > 39 cigarettes on smoking
days) and the time since quitting smoking (<1, 2-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and >20 years).
The results in Table 6 are virtually identical to those in Table 5 for males, indicating that
little is lost by using our parsimonious covariates for current or previous smoking. Conversely,
differential trends in the intensity and timing of tobacco use do seem to explain some of the rise
in the excess mortality of less educated females. Specifically, trends in risk behaviors are
estimated to account for between 7 and 17 percentage points of the total 43 point (from 0.92 to
1.35) increase in the mortality gradient for women, implying that these explain 20% to 40%
percent of the total change. Nevertheless, even in this case, the majority of the secular trend
(60% to 80%) does not result from changes in the pattern of behavioral health risks.
As mentioned, education levels changed dramatically over the period studied. The
proportion of males attending college rose over 60 percent (from 33% to 53%) and that of
females more than doubled (from 24% to 49%) between NHANES I and the NHIS. The
composition of individuals within these education groups therefore probably also changed (e.g.
the non-college educated were likely to be lower in the ability distribution in the 1990s than the
1970s). We tested whether our results were sensitive to such compositional changes using the
following procedure. First, to make the education shares in the latter period equal to those from
NHANES I, we duplicated all observations with education equal to some college (13-15 years of
education). Second, we re-weighted these observations to shift 24.89% of women and 20.72% of

19

men from the high to low education group in the NHIS data. 19 Third, we estimated the basic
mortality models for the revised NHIS data, and simulated mortality as before.
The results of this exercise, summarized in Table 7, are similar to the main findings in
Table 5, indicating that the latter are not being driven by compositional changes of education
subgroups. Using the mortality equation from NHANES I, changing risk factors can explain no
more than a small portion of the widening gap in mortality. Based upon the hazard rate estimates
from the NHIS, changes in behavioral risks imply no change or declining educational gradients
in mortality for men and 8 percentage points of a 53 point increase for women. Once again,
these results indicate that the widening education gap in death rates results primarily from
changes in the mortality function rather than in the distribution of risk factors.
As a final check, we replicated the results using NHANES III rather than NHIS data (see
Appendix Table A.1). Although smaller sample sizes imply less precise estimates, changes in
smoking and obesity again explain little of the trend in education-mortality gradients. The male
mortality ratio increases 8 percentage points (from 1.26 to 1.34), between 1971-75 and 1988-94,
with changes in smoking and obesity predicted to reduce the gap by 5 points. For women, trends
in the risk factors account for 6 to 9 percentage points of a 28 point rise in the gradient (which
grows from 0.95 to 1.23).
Using the NHANES III data, we also examined patterns for alternative mortality models
that: 1) added interactions between smoking and obesity, and 2) included these interactions plus
supplementary controls for high blood pressure and cholesterol. The results were essentially
unaffected by these alternatives (also summarized in Table A.1), except that changes in risk
factors provided even less of an explanation for the rising education gaps of women when
19

This approach – randomly splitting the data until shares were equal by duplicating observations and re-weighting
them – has the benefit of not introducing sampling error.

20

including the most comprehensive controls. Specifically, in this specification, changes in the
risk factors were responsible for anywhere between 1 percentage point narrowing and a 6
percentage point widening in educational mortality ratios, compared with a 25 point increase in
the female educational gradient (and, as observed before, educational gradients would have
narrowed for men).
The bottom line is that trends in behavioral risk factors can explain, at most, only a small
share of the observed widening in the mortality gap across education groups.
The finding that tobacco use explains a large share of point-in-time differences in
mortality across groups but not changes over time seems surprising, given that tobacco use
declined by more for the better educated than for the less educated. However, several factors
could explain this surprising result. First, the mortality effects of “current smoking” are larger in
magnitude in later time periods compared with earlier time periods, although the change in
returns to smoking over time is not precisely measured. But if some characteristics of smokers
such as their co-morbid conditions, other environmental exposures (living or working with other
smokers), or other factors are related to smoking status, these could explain why the rate of
smoking in the population is less important than the effect of smoking for those individuals who
remain smoking. This, combined with a higher level of smoking among the less educated could
generate the results we observed. Furthermore, smoking rates vary much less by education
group among individuals over the age of 50 (results available upon request), among whom most
deaths occur.

21

VII.

Cardiovascular and Cancer Mortality
In this section, we separately analyze the education gradients in deaths due to CVD and

cancer. These are the two most important sources of mortality in the United States 20 and both
are influenced by behavioral risks such as smoking and obesity. Thus, they help indicate why
mortality gradients have changed. Ideally, we would examine even more detailed categories –
such as cancers closely linked to smoking – but sample size limitations prohibit this.
Table 8 presents age-adjusted 5-year mortality rates for these two causes, and from all
causes combined. Cancer and CVD account for 69% to 78% of all deaths in our data, with
slightly higher shares for women than men and in NHANES I than in the NHIS. In relative
terms, cancer has become more important over time for men as cancer death rates have increased
modestly (from 1.6% to 1.8%) while CVD mortality has fallen rapidly (from 3.1% to 1.6%). By
contrast 5-year death rates from the two causes did not change for women over 30 year period.
These overall patterns conceal strong differences across education groups, particularly for
cancer. Five-year death rates from cancer rose from 1.6% to 2.2% (1.0% to 1.2%) for less
educated men (women), while declining from 1.4% to 1.3% (1.4% to .8%) among college
attendees. Conversely, CVD death rates fell for both sexes and education groups, although more
sharply for men than women. Changes in cancer deaths account for nearly half of the increased
mortality rate gap by education occurring from the 1970s to the 1990s (.7 for males and .8 for
females of the 1.5 and 1.7 percentage point increases). In contrast, patterns of CVD deaths
narrowed the mortality gaps for males and had no impact on educational gaps for females. Thus,
changes in cancer mortality play a key role in accounting for trends in educational gradients in
total mortality.

22

Hazard rate estimates for deaths from cancer and cardiovascular disease are displayed in
Table 9. Estimates for the early 1970s are imprecise and make comparisons across time periods
difficult. For males, the findings suggest that the education gradient in cancer mortality rose
between NHANES I and NHIS: the relative cancer mortality hazard associated with higher
education declined from 1.12 to 0.78. In other words, the protective effect of education (or its
correlates) increased over time. We do not observe a similar decline in mortality risk for CVD
among college attendees. The pattern by broad disease is the same for females as among males –
hazard rates for the college-educated remained unchanged for CVD, but declined significantly
for cancer mortality (from 0.96 to 0.76).
We next calculated counterfactual cancer and CVD mortality ratios, corresponding to
those for total mortality in Table 5. For both cancer and obesity, we find little evidence that the
changing risk profiles explain the widening in the mortality gradient (Table 10). This is true
regardless of the whether the model is estimated using NHANES I or the NHIS. Instead, the
widening mortality gradient is due to the increase in relative risk of death associated with
behaviors like smoking, and, conditional on these behaviors, the relative risk of low education
for cancer mortality. Our most robust finding (supported in those specifications with the most
precise estimates) is that risk factors did not change in ways that made CVD or cancer deaths
change differentially over time by education. Instead, the changing return to education and to
risk factors has favored the more educated.
Our findings create a puzzle regarding how changes in medical technology or other
factors influencing the impact of risk factors on death might increase educational gaps in
mortality. To garner more information on this puzzle with available data, we estimated models
20

Heart and cerebrovascular diseases, both of which are included in CVD, were the first and third most common
causes of mortality in 2006, together accounting for 31.7 percent of deaths; cancer was the second most frequent

23

of two risk factors for cardiovascular mortality, cholesterol and hypertension, as a function of
education, smoking, and obesity in each of the four NHANES samples, controlling for gender.
These two factors are both quantitatively important, and they provide a good example because
prescription drugs to control cholesterol and blood pressure have been widely credited with
mitigating the role of these risk factors in deaths due to cardiovascular disease. For brevity, these
results are not shown, but they are available upon request. As expected based on the results in
Table 3, the advantage of education for cholesterol control and hypertension did not change over
time– education conferred a protective effect against high cholesterol that remained nearly
identical in each NHANES sample, and rates of hypertension were similar across education
groups in each of the four NHANES samples. 21 Taken together, the results suggest that the
health risk of obesity, as measured by hypertension, fell significantly over time. However, there
is no suggestion that access to medical care, or compliance with complex medical regimens, for
example, contributed to educational disparities in these important risk factors for deaths due to
CVD.

VIII.

Discussion
This paper examines how education-related disparities in mortality rates changed

between the early 1970s and the end of the twentieth century, and investigates the extent to
which behavioral risk factors explain these trends. Consistent with previous research, we
document that the educational gradients are steeper for men than women but have widened over
time more for females than males.
cause, being responsible for 23.0 percent of deaths (Heron et al. 2009).
21
Our analysis revealed a striking change in the effect of obesity on hypertension over time. In NHANES III and
IV, the elevated risk of hypertension among overweight individuals observed in earlier surveys nearly disappeared.
This pattern did not hold for cholesterol.

24

Our most striking finding is that the widening educational gaps in death rates are not
explained by secular changes in key behavioral risk factors. In particular, although higher levels
of mortality among the less educated are partially due to their higher rates of smoking , trends in
smoking explain little if any of the relative increase in mortality for the less educated over the
last three decades. In our main estimates, the mortality gap between males without and with
college rose 21 percentage points, whereas differential changes in smoking and obesity would
have led to a 4 or 5 point decrease, ceteris paribus. For women, patterns of smoking and obesity
can explain approximately 3 points out of the 42 percentage point increase. The risk factors play
a more important role in some (but not all) alternative specifications but never explain more than
a small fraction of the rising education-gradient in mortality.
Instead, it is the return to education (conditional on health behaviors) and changes in
returns to behaviors that are important. For example, the detrimental impact of smoking has
strengthened over time for both men and women, as have the negative consequences of severe
obesity for females (although small NHANES 1 sample sizes limit the precision of these
estimates). We found suggestive evidence that these effects are particularly pronounced for
cancer, which has become a more important source of death over time.
There are several possible explanations for these findings. One is that the highly
educated have better access to medical care, and thus achieve superior results due to higher
productive efficiency as described by Michael Grossman (1972) and Donald Kenkel (1991).
This might have become more pronounced over time, as sophisticated treatments have improved
the survival of those receiving them 22 and new technologies have led to earlier detection. 23
22

Productive efficiency is discussed at length by Michael Grossman (1972) and Donald Kenkel (1991); there is
some evidence on this point from Dana Goldman and James Smith (2002) based on better adherence to complex
treatment regimens for HIV and diabetes, and Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2008), who document better adherence to
cancer prevention and screening among better educated. There is evidence of substantial SES differences in the

25

Adherence to prescribed regimes may also have become both more important and more difficult
over time, yielding large gains in life expectancy for highly educated individuals who have better
adherence rates. 24
The issues are especially salient for cancer, which may play a particularly important role
in the increasing gradients observed for total mortality and where the trend reduction in death
rates appears to be due to improvements in screening, earlier diagnosis, and treatment (Cutler
2008). For instance, there is recent evidence that breast and prostate cancer are detected at later
stages and treated less aggressively, once detected, for low than high SES individuals and that
these differences are associated with an inverse SES-mortality relationship (Bouchardy et al.,
2006; Byers et al., 2008; Rapiti et al., forthcoming).
A second explanation is that environmental risks may have declined more over time for
the highly educated. For instance, changes in the nature of employment may have led to larger
reductions in job stress and work-related health hazards for professional than manual
occupations. 25 There could also be similar patterns for geographically-based risks, such as those
due to pollution or local government spending on health and the infrastructure, particularly if
housing has become more geographically segregated by education. Chay and Greenstone (2003)
for example, demonstrated that recession-induced factory slowdowns and closings had beneficial
receipt of cardiac catheterization and coronary revascularization following heart attacks (David A. Alter, et al. 1999;
Rathore et al. 2000). Similar differences in access to expensive cancer diagnostic technology and treatments might
be expected.
23
For instance, Smith (2007) shows that the overall prevalence of undiagnosed diabetes fell dramatically between
1976-80 and 1998-2002 but with much larger reductions for college attendees than for the non-college educated.
24
Chen and Lange (2009) show that less educated individuals have relatively low rates of screening for various
cancers, especially among those with significant risk factors for cancer. The same patterns are observable in selfassessed cancer risk, suggesting that education might play a role in making individuals aware of their risks and
consequently in obtaining adequate treatment. Goldman and Smith (2002) find that educated individuals have
greater adherence rates for the treatment of HIV and diabetes, with consequent improvements in health outcomes.
25
For example, Ickovics, et al. (1997) show that life stress, social isolation and depression were all inversely related
to social class (as measured by education and occupation) among men hospitalized following heart attacks.

26

impacts on infant health (due to the associated reductions in certain air pollutants), especially
among disadvantaged groups, measured based on black versus white infant deaths.
Understanding the mechanisms for the effects we identify is important for achieving
national goals of reducing disparities in longevity and medical outcomes. Our results do not
imply that improvements in the health-related lifestyles of the less educated would yield no
benefits. To contrary, reducing smoking, obesity, hypertension and hypercholesterolemia would
improve health. However, our results suggest that even the complete elimination of disparities in
behavioral risks across education groups would be unlikely to do away with educationdifferentials in mortality.

References
Allison David B., Kevin R. Fontaine, JoAnn E. Manson, June Stevens, and Theodore B.
VanItallie. 1999. “Annual Deaths Attributable to Obesity in the United States.” JAMA,
282(16):1530-1538.
Alter, David A., David Naylor, Peter Austin, and Jack V. Tu. 1999. “Effects of
Socioeconomic Status on Access to Invasive Cardiac Procedures and on Mortality After
Acute Myocardial Infarction” New England Journal of Medicine, 341(18): 1359-1367.
Bouchardy, Christine, Helena M. Verkooijen and Gérald Fioretta. 2006. “Social Class is an
Important and Independent Prognostic Factor of Breast Cancer Mortality.” International
Journal of Cancer, 119: 1145-1151.
Burkhauser, Richard V., and John Cawley. 2008. "Beyond BMI: The Value of More Accurate
Measures of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research," Journal of Health
Economics, 27(2): 519-529.

27

Byers, Tim E., Holly J. Wolf, Katrina R. Bauer, Susan Bolick-Aldrich, Vivien W. Chen,
Jack L. Finch et al. “The Impact of Socioeconomic Status on Survival After Cancer in
the United States” Cancer, 113, 2008; 582-91.
Chang, Virginia W., and Diane S. Lauderdale. 2005. “Income Disparities in Body Mass Index
and Obesity in the United States, 1971-2002,” Archives of Internal Medicine, 165(18):
2122-2128.
Chay, Kenneth, and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
Recession,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):
Chen, Keith and Fabian Lange. 2010. “Education and Allocative Efficiency. Evidence from
Breast Cancer Screening,” Unpublished manuscript.
Cox, Brian D and Margaret J. Whichelow. 1996. “Ratio of Waist Circumference to Height is
Better Predictor of Death than Body Mass Index,” British Medical Journal, 313(7070):
1487-1488.
Crimmins, Eileen M. and Yasuhiko Saito. 2001. “Trends in Healthy Life Expectancy in the
United States, 1970-1990: Gender, Racial, and Educational Differences,” Social Science
and Medicine, 52: 1629-1641.
Cutler, David M. 2008. “Are We Finally Winning the War on Cancer?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 22(4): 3-26.
Cutler, David M. and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2008. "Education and Health: Evaluating
Theories and Evidence" In Making Americans Healthier: Social and Economic Policy
as Health Policy, ed. James House, Robert Schoeni, George Kaplan, and Harold
Pollack, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, .
28

Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser and Allison B. Rosen. 2009. “Is the US Population
Behaving Healthier?” In Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment, ed. Jeffrey
R. Brown, Jeffrey Leibman and David Wise. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Dalton, M., A. J. Cameron, P.Z. Zimmet, J.E. Shaw, D. Jolley, D.W. Dunstan et al. 2003.
“Waist Circumference, Waist-Hip Ratio and Body Mass Index and Their Correlation
with Cardiovascular Disease Risk Factors in Australian Adults” Journal of Internal
Medicine, 254(6): 555-563.
Duleep, Harriet Orcutt. 1989. “Measuring Socioeconomic Mortality Differentials Over Time”
Demography, 26(2): 345-351.
Feldman, Jacob J., Diane M. Makuc, Joel C. Kleinman andJoan Cornoni-Huntley. 1989.
“National Trends in Educational Differentials in Mortality” American Journal of
Epidemiology 129(5): 919-933.
Flegal, Katherine M., Barry I. Graubard, David F. Williamson, Mitchell H. Gail. 2005.
“Excess Deaths Associated with Underweight, Overweight, and Obesity,” JAMA, 293:
1861-1867.
Goldman, Dana P. and James P. Smith. 2002. “Can Patient Self-Management Help Explain
the SES Health Gradient?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 99(16): 10929-10934.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation,
New York: Columbia University Press.

29

Heron, Melonie, Donna L. Hoyert, Sherry L. Murphy, Jiaquan Xu, Kenneth D. Cohanek,
and Betzaida Tehada-Vera. 2009. Deaths: Final Data for 2006. National Vital
Statistics Reports, 57(14). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Ickovics, Jeannette R., Catherine M. Viscoli, and Ralph I. Horwitz. 1997. “Functional
Recovery After Myocardial Infarction in Men: The Independent Effects of Social Class”
Annuals of Internal Medicine, 127: 518-525.
Kenkel, Donald. 1991. “Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling,” Journal of
Political Economy, 99(21): 287-305.
Kenkel, Donald. 2007. “The Evolution of the Schooling-Smoking Gradient.” Ithaca, NY,
Unpublished Manuscript, March 2007 (accessed on September 2, 2009 at
http://paa2007.princeton.edu/download.aspx?submissionId=71558).
Kitagawa, Evelyn M. and Philip M. Hauser. 1968. “Differential Mortality in the United State
by Cause of Death, 1960.” Demography, 5(1): 318-333.
Kuczmarski, Marie Fanelli, Robert J. Kuczmarski, and Matthew Najjar. 2001. “Effects of
Age on Validity of Self-Reported Height, Weight, and Body Mass Index: Findings from
the Third Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994.” Journal of the
American Dietetic Association, 101(1): 28-34.
Lin, Charles C., Eugene Rogot, Norman J. Johnson, Paul D. Sorlie and Elizabeth Arias.
2003. “A Further Study of Life Expectancy by Socioeconomic Factors in the National
Longitudinal Mortality Study.” Ethnicity and Disease 13(2): 240-247.

Marmot, Michael G. 2006. “Status Syndrome: A Challenge to Medicine,” JAMA, 295:13041307.

30

Meara, Ellen, Seth Richards, and David M. Cutler. 2008. “The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes In
Mortality And Life Expectancy, By Education, 1981-2000.” Health Affairs (Millwood)
27: 350-360.
Mokdad, Ali H., James S. Marks, Donna F. Stroup, and Julie L. Gerberdin. 2000. “Actual
causes of death in the United States.” JAMA, 291:1238-1245.
Must, Aviva, Jennifer Spadano, Eugenie H. Coakley, Alison E. Field et al. 1999. “The
disease burden associated with overweight and obesity.” JAMA, 282(16):1523-1529.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 2004. The Seventh Report of the Joint Committee
on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure.
Washington D.C.: US Government Printing Office.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 2002. Third Report of the National Cholesterol
Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on: Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of
High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III), Final Report.
Washington D.C.: US Government Printing Office.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 1998. Clinical Guidelines on the Identification,
Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The Evidence Report.
Washington D.C.: US Government Printing Office.
Olshansky, S. Jay, Douglas J. Passaro, Ronald C. Hershow, Jennifer Layden, et al. 2005.
“A Potential Decline in Life expectancy in the United States in the 21st Century.” New
England Journal of Medicine 352(11): 1138-1145.
Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wilbur Hadden, and Gail Fisher. 1993. “The Increasing
Disparity in Mortality between Socioeconomics Groups in the United States, 1960 and
1986.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 329: 103-109.

31

Preston, Samuel H. and Irma T. Elo. 1995. “Are Educational Differentials in Adult Mortality
Increasing in the United States?” Journal of Aging and Health, 7:476–496.
Rapiti, Elisabetta, Ferald Fioretta, Robin Schaffar, Isabel Neyroud-Caspar, et al.
Forthcoming. “Impact of Socioeconomic Status on Prostate Cancer Diagnosis,
Treatment, and Prognosis.” Cancer.
Rathore, Saif S., Alan K. Berger, Kevin P. Weinfurt, Manning Feinleib et al. 2000. “Race,
Sex, and the Medical Treatment of Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly.” Circulation,
102:642-648.
Singh, Gopal K. and Mohammad Siahpush. 2006. “Widening Socioeconomic Inequalities in
US Life Expectancy, 1980-2000.” International Journal of Epidemiology 35(4): 969979.
Smith, James P. 2007. “Diabetes and the Rise of the SES Health Gradient”, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 12905.
Sönmez, K., M. Akcakoyun, A. Akcay, D. Demir, N.E. Duran et al. 2003. “Which Method
Should Be Used to Determine the Obesity, in Patients with Coronary Artery Disease?
(Body Mass Index, Waist Circumference or Waist-hip Ratio” International Journal of
Obesity, 27(3): 341-346.
Sorlie, Paul D. and Norman J. Johnson. 1996. “Validity of Education Information on the
Death Certificate,” Epidemiology 7(4): 437-439.
Steenland, Kyle, Jane Henley, and Michael Thun. 2002. “All-Cause and Cause-specific Death
Rates by Educational Status for Two Million People in Two American Cancer Society
Cohorts, 1959-1996.” American Journal of Epidemiology, 156(1): 11-21.

32

Stewart, Susan, David M. Cutler, and Allison B. Rosen. 2009. “Forecasting the Effects of
Obesity and Smoking on U.S. Life Expectancy,” New England Journal of Medicine,
361(23): 2252-2260.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2009. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2009 (128th Edition).
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2000. Healthy People 2010: Understanding
and Improving Health. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Villanueva, Elmer V. 2001. “The Validity of Self-Reported Weight in US Adults: A Population
Based Cross-Sectional Study.” BMC Public Health 21(1), Epub.
Willett, Walter C. Frank B. Hu, Graham A. Colditz, and JoAnn E. Manson. 2005.
“Underweight, Overweight, Obesity, and Excess Deaths.” JAMA, : 294:551.
Wong, Mitchell D., Martin F. Shapiro, John W. Boscardin, and Susan L. Ettner. 2002.
“Contribution of Major Diseases to Disparities in Mortality.” New England Journal of
Medicine, 347(20): 1585-1592.
World Health Organization. 1997. Obesity: Preventing and Managing the Global Epidemic.
Report of a WHO Consultation on Obesity. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization.
Zhang, Qi, and Youfa Wang. 2004. “Trends in the Association between Obesity and
Socioeconomic Status in U.S. Adults: 1971 to 2000.” Obesity Research, 12(10): 16221632.

33

TABLE 1: AGE-ADJUSTED 5-YEAR MORTALITY RATES (PERCENT)
BY SEX, EDUCATION AND TIME PERIOD
EDUCATION

NHANES I
(1971-75)

NHANES III
(1988-94)

NHIS
(1987-96)

CHANGE FROM
NHANES I to NHIS

MALES
≤12 Years
> 12 Years

≤12 Years
> 12 Years

6.3
(0.57)
5.8
(0.86)

5.0
(0.63)
3.6
(0.60)

5.8
(0.13)
3.8
(0.11)
FEMALES

-0.5
(0.58)
-2.0
(0.87)

3.1
(0.37)
3.7
(0.71)

2.9
(0.43)
3.2
(0.57)

3.6
(0.09)
2.7
(0.09)

+0.5
(0.38)
-1.0
(0.72)

Note: Reported statistics are age-adjusted to the year 2000, gender specific age distribution of
the NHIS. Five-year mortality was computed for individuals surviving at least one year from
baseline. Reported mortality rates are in percent and changes in percentage points. In
parentheses: standard errors.
TABLE 2: COMPLETED EDUCATION BY GENDER AND DATA-SET (PERCENT)
NHANES
NHANES
NHANES I NHANES II
IV
III
EDUCATION
(1971-75)
(1976-80)
(1988-94)
(1999-2004)
MALES
< 12 years
12 years
> 12 years
< 12 years
12 years
> 12 years

34
(0.9)
33
(0.9)
33
(0.9)

27
(0.7)
35
(0.8)
38
(0.8)

34
(0.9)
42
(0.9)
24
(0.8)

29
(0.7)
43
(0.8)
28
(0.7)

19
(0.8)
32
(1.0)
50
(1.1)
FEMALES
17
(0.8)
40
(1.0)
43
(1.0)

Note: See note on Table 1.

Page 34

NHIS
(1987-96)

12
(0.7)
27
(0.9)
60
(1.0)

13
(0.1)
33
(0.2)
54
(0.2)

12
(0.7)
27
(0.9)
61
(1.0)

13
(0.1)
38
(0.1)
49
(0.1)

TABLE 3A: SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR AGE ADJUSTED RISK FACTORS, BY TIME PERIOD, MALES

Risk Factor

Education
(Years)

% with Risk Factor

Change in Risk Factors (%)

NHANES
I
1971-75

NHANES
II
1976-80

NHANES
III
1988-94

NHANES
IV
1999-2004

NHIS
(1987-2000)

NHANES I
-NHANES
IV

NHANES I NHIS

≤12

48
(1.1)
31
(1.1)

45
(1.0)
35
(0.9)

43
(1.4)
36
(1.4)

40
(1.6)
32
(1.5)

41
(0.2)
31
(0.2)

-8
(1.9)
1
(1.9)

-7
(1.1)
0
(1.1)

> 12

34
(1.7)
30
(1.7)

33
(1.4)
35
(1.4)

20
(1.3)
38
(1.6)

19
(1.1)
31
(1.3)

21
(0.2)
32
(0.2)

-15
(2.0)
1
(2.1)

-13
(1.7)
+2
(1.7)

12
(0.7)
2
(0.3)
8
(1.0)
1
(0.4)

12
(0.6)
3
(0.3)
8
(0.8)
2
(0.4)

17
(1.0)
7
(0.7)
14
(1.1)
5
(0.7)

21
(1.0)
10
(1.0)
20
(1.1)
9
(0.8)

15
(0.2)
5
(0.1)
12
(0.1)
4
(0.1)

9
(1.2)
8
(1.0)
12
(1.5)
8
(1.0)

3
(0.7)
3
(0.3)
4
(1.0)
3
(0.4)

Smoking
Current
Former
Current
Former
Obesity
Class 1

≤12

Class 2/3
Class 1
Class 2/3

> 12

Page 35

TABLE 3A, CONTINUED: SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR AGE ADJUSTED RISK FACTORS, BY TIME PERIOD, MALES
Risk Factor

Education
(Years)

Hypertension
Stage I
Stage II

≤12

Stage I
Stage II
High
Cholesterol

> 12
≤12
> 12

NHANES
I
1971-75
31
(1.1)
17
(0.9)
26
(1.6)
16
(1.3)
29
(1.1)
30
(1.7)

% with Risk Factor
NHANES
NHANES
II
III
1976-80
1988-94
29
(0.9)
18
(0.7)
28
(1.3)
17
(1.1)
29
(0.9)
31
(1.4)

19
(1.1)
4
(0.6)
15
(1.2)
4
(0.6)
25
(1.2)
22
(1.3)

Change in Risk Factors (%)
NHANES
IV
1999-2004

NHANES I NHANES IV

16
(1.2)
3
(0.6)
13
(0.9)
3
(0.4)
19
(1.3)
17
(1.0)

-15
(1.6)
-14
(1.1)
-13
(1.8)
-13
(1.4)
-10
(1.7)
-13
(2.0)

Note: All reported statistics are age-adjusted to the year 2000, gender specific age distribution of the NHIS. Class 1
obesity refers to individuals with a BMI of 30 to 34.9. Class 2/3 obesity refers to persons with a BMI of 35 or greater.
Hypertension stages I and II are defined in text. High cholesterol refers to total cholesterol >240 mmHG.

Page 36

TABLE 3B: SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR AGE ADJUSTED RISK FACTORS, BY TIME PERIOD, FEMALES
Risk Factor

Education
(Years)

Smoking
Current
Former
Current

≤12

> 12

Former

NHANES
I
1971-75

% with Risk Factor
NHANES
NHANES
NHANES
II
III
IV
1976-80
1988-94
1999-2004

Change in Risk Factors (%)
NHIS
NHANES I - NHANES I (1987-2000) NHANES IV
NHIS

35
(1.0)
13
(0.7)
28
(1.7)
19
(1.4)

37
(0.8)
15
(0.6)
25
(1.3)
24
(1.3)

33
(1.2)
23
(1.1)
18
(1.2)
29
(1.5)

36
(1.6)
21
(1.3)
16
(1.0)
27
(1.2)

35
(0.2)
20
(0.2)
20
(0.2)
26
(0.2)

1
(1.9)
8
(1.5)
-12
(2.0)
8
(1.8)

0
(1.0)
7
(0.7)
-8
(1.7)
7
(1.4)

12
(0.7)
5
(0.5)
8
(1.0)
3
(0.6)

12
(0.6)
7
(0.5)
8
(0.8)
3
(0.6)

16
(0.9)
12
(0.8)
11
(1.0)
8
(0.9)

21
(1.3)
16
(1.2)
15
(1.0)
14
(0.9)

12
(0.1)
7
(0.1)
9
(0.1)
5
(0.1)

9
(1.5)
11
(1.3)
7
(1.4)
11
(1.1)

0
(0.7)
2
(0.5)
1
(1.0)
2
(0.6)

Obesity
Class 1

≤12

Class 2/3
Class 1
Class 2/3

> 12

Page 37

TABLE 3B, CONTINUED: SUMMARY STATISTICS FOR AGE ADJUSTED RISK FACTORS, BY TIME PERIOD, FEMALES
Risk Factor

Hypertension
Stage I

Education
(Years)

≤12

Stage II
Stage I

> 12

Stage II
High
Cholesterol

≤12
> 12

NHANES
I
1971-75
22
(0.9)
15
(0.7)
19
(1.4)
13
(1.2)
36
(1.0)
29
(1.7)

% with Risk Factor
NHANES
NHANES
II
III
1976-80
1988-94
21
(0.7)
16
(0.6)
23
(1.3)
10
(0.9)
35
(0.8)
32
(1.4)

12
(0.8)
4
(0.5)
11
(1.0)
4
(0.7)
29
(1.2)
27
(1.4)

Change in Risk Factors (%)
NHANES
IV
1999-2004

NHANES I To
NHANES IV

14
(1.1)
5
(0.7)
10
(0.8)
5
(0.6)
23
(1.4)
19
(1.0)

-8
(1.4)
-10
(1.0)
-9
(1.6)
-8
(1.3)
-13
(1.7)
-10
(2.0)

Note: All reported statistics are age-adjusted to the year 2000, gender specific age distribution of the NHIS. Class 1
obesity refers to individuals with a BMI of 30 to 34.9. Class 2/3 obesity refers to persons with a BMI of 35 or greater.
Hypertension stages I and II are defined in text. High cholesterol refers to total cholesterol >240 mmHG.

Page 38

TABLE 4: MORTALITY MODEL WITH CONTROLS FOR EDUCATION, SMOKING AND OBESITY
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Characteristic

NHANES I
1971-75

NHANES III
1988-94

NHIS
1987-2000

NHANES I
1971-75

MALES
Model A
Some College

(5)

(6)

NHANES III
1988-94

NHIS
1987-2000

FEMALES

0.78
(0.12)

0.69
(0.11)**

0.67
(0.02)**

1.06
(0.22)

0.76
(0.14)

0.75
(0.02)**

0.88
(0.14)

0.74
(0.12)*

0.75
(0.02)**

1.09
(0.22)

0.88
(0.17)

0.80
(0.02)**

Former Smoker

1.04
(0.18)

1.43
(0.30)*

1.30
(0.03)**

1.26
(0.29)

1.27
(0.24)

1.38
(0.04)**

Current Smoker

1.88
(0.33)**

1.99
(0.48)**

2.41
(0.08)**

1.69
(0.32)

2.57
(0.52)**

2.43
(0.07)**

Underweight

2.11
(0.48)**

2.18
(0.71)**

1.61
(0.07)**

1.13
(0.28)

1.09
(0.35)

1.38
(0.05)**

Overweight

0.85
(0.12)

0.79
(0.13)

0.88
(0.02)**

0.72
(0.14)*

1.12
(0.23)

1.04
(0.03)

Class 1 Obesity

1.71
(0.33)**

0.70
(0.16)

1.11
(0.04)**

1.32
(0.29)

1.07
(0.28)

1.45
(0.05)**

Class 2/3 Obesity

1.44
(0.70)

1.44
(0.47)

1.70
(0.10)**

1.71
(0.49)*

2.28
(0.59)**

1.94
(0.09)**

Model B
Some College

Note: Table displays the relative risk obtained from hazard rate models. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Model A
controls only for educational status; model B adds covariates for smoking and obesity. The reference group in model B is normal
weight individuals who never smoked. Individuals are followed for 10 years after the NHANES I and III interview dates. The
NHIS covers the 1987-2000 surveys, with mortality follow-up continuing for 10 years or through 2002 if this is less than 10 years.
* (**) denote a difference in relative risk from 1 that is significant at a 0.10 (0.05) level.

Page 39

TABLE 5: OBSERVED AND PREDICTED MORTALITY RATIOS AND DIFFERENTIALS
Distribution of Risk Factors
Model estimated on:

NHANES I
(1971-1975)

NHIS
(1987-2000)

CHANGE:
NHANES I to NHIS

MALES
NHANES I

1.31
(0.22)

1.27
(0.20)

-0.04
(0.09)

NHIS

1.56
(0.10)

1.52
(0.04)

-0.04
(0.09)

Difference

0.25
(0.21)

0.25
(0.20)

0.21
(0.22)

FEMALES
NHANES I

0.92
(0.19)

0.95
(0.19)

0.02
(0.06)

NHIS

1.31
(0.08)

1.34
(0.04)

0.03
(0.07)

Difference

0.38
(0.19)

0.39
(0.19)

0.42
(0.20)

Note: Mortality ratios refer to the ratio of predicted mortality between those without and with
college educations. Ratios greater than one imply greater mortality for the less educated. Insample risk ratios are shown in bold. Counterfactual risk ratios or differentials are based on
the estimates from table 4, but for a different survey wave. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Page 40

TABLE 6: OBSERVED AND PREDICTED MORTALITY RATIOS AND DIFFERENTIALS WITH
ADDITIONAL CONTROLS FOR SMOKING INTENSITY AND QUIT TIMING
Distribution of Risk Factors
Model estimated on:

NHANES I
(1971-75)

NHIS
(1987-2000)

CHANGE:
NHANES I to
NHIS

MALES
NHANES I

1.31
(0.22)

1.26
(0.20)

-0.05
(0.10)

NHIS

1.52
(0.10)

1.53
(0.04)

+0.01
(0.09)

Difference

0.21
(0.21)

0.27
(0.20)

0.22
(0.23)

FEMALES
NHANES I

0.92
(0.19)

1.09
(0.23)

0.17
(0.15)

NHIS

1.28
(0.08)

1.35
(0.04)

0.07
(0.07)

Difference

0.36
(0.19)

0.25
(0.23)

0.43
(0.20)

Note: See note on Table 5. Mortality ratios in this table are estimated in the same way,
except that the mortality model includes additional controls for the intensity of smoking
and time since last tobacco use for former smokers.

Page 41

TABLE 7: OBSERVED AND PREDICTED MORTALITY RATIOS AND DIFFERENTIALS WITH
CONSTANT SHARE OF INDIVIDUALS IN HIGH EDUCATION GROUP
Distribution of Risk Factors
Model estimated on:

NHANES I
(1971-75)

NHIS
(1987-2000)

CHANGE:
NHANES I to
NHIS

MALES
NHANES I

1.31
(0.22)

1.28
(0.20)

-0.03
(0.09)

NHIS

1.69
(0.11)

1.65
(0.05)

-0.03
(0.10)

Difference

0.38
(0.21)

0.37
(0.21)

0.34
(0.23)

FEMALES
NHANES I

0.92
(0.19)

0.97
(0.19)

0.05
(0.06)

NHIS

1.37
(0.09)

1.45
(0.06)

0.08
(0.08)

Difference

0.45
(0.20)

0.48
(0.20)

0.53
(0.20)

Note: See note on Table 5. Mortality ratios in this table are estimated in the same way,
except that observations have been reweighted to maintain constant shares in each
education category, using the procedure discussed in the text.

Page 42

TABLE 8: AGE-ADJUSTED 5-YEAR MORTALITY RATES BY YEARS OF EDUCATION AND
CAUSE OF DEATH
NHANES I
NHIS
(1971-75)
(1987-2000)
Cause of Death
<=12
>12
Difference
<=12
>12
Difference
MALES
All Causes
Cancer
Cardiovascular

All Causes
Cancer
Cardiovascular

6.3
(0.57)
1.6
(0.29)
3.5
(0.43)

5.8
(0.86)
1.4
(0.43)
2.2
(0.54)

0.5
5.8
(1.03)
(0.13)
0.2
2.2
(0.52)
(0.08)
1.3
1.8
(0.69)
(0.08)
FEMALES

3.8
(0.11)
1.3
(0.07)
1.3
(0.06)

2.0
(0.17)
0.9
(0.11)
0.5
(0.1)

3.1
(0.37)
1.0
(0.21)
1.5
(0.26)

3.7
(0.71)
1.4
(0.44)
1.3
(0.42)

-0.6
(0.80)
-0.4
(0.49)
0.2
(0.49)

2.7
(0.09)
0.8
(0.05)
1.2
(0.06)

1.1
(0.13)
0.4
(0.07)
0.2
(0.08)

3.6
(0.09)
1.2
(0.05)
1.4
(0.06)

Note: See note on Table 1. Cancer and cardiovascular disease account for 74% (69%) of
all male deaths in the NHANES I (NHIS) follow-up and 78% (70%) of corresponding
female deaths.

Page 43

TABLE 9: MORTALITY MODEL FOR MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS & CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
NEOPLASMS
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
MALES

FEMALES

MALES

FEMALES

NHANES I
(1971-75)

NHIS
(1987-2000)

NHANES I
(1971-75)

NHIS
(1987-2000)

NHANES I
(1971-75)

NHIS
(1987-2000)

NHANES I
(1971-75)

NHIS
(1987-2000)

Some College

1.12
(0.32)

0.73**
(0.04)

0.91
(0.29)

0.76**
(0.04)

0.72
(0.17)

0.78
(0.04)

0.96
(0.35)

0.90*
(0.04)

Former Smoker

1.00
(0.34)

1.34**
(0.09)

1.30
(0.46)

1.27**
(0.08)

0.99
(0.25)

1.41**
(0.08)

1.25
(0.46)

1.41**
(0.07)

Current Smoker

1.89*
(0.56)

2.53**
(0.13)

0.78
(0.28)

2.23**
(0.13)

1.80*
(0.46)

2.78**
(0.17)

2.74**
(0.70)

2.58**
(0.12)

Underweight

2.01+
(0.80)

1.26*
(0.13)

0.68
(0.45)

1.23**
(0.08)

1.33
(0.51)

1.43*
(0.15)

0.59
(0.27)

1.14*
(0.08)

Overweight

0.85
(0.21)

1.00
(0.04)

1.25
(0.40)

1.16**
(0.06)

0.77
(0.15)

0.97
(0.05)

0.51*
(0.15)

1.02
(0.05)

Class 1 Obesity

1.23
(0.48)

1.47**
(0.09)

1.48
(0.64)

1.74**
(0.10)

1.76*
(0.46)

1.00
(0.07)

1.36
(0.40)

1.34**
(0.09)

1.17
(0.15)

1.77+
(0.59)

1.37**
(0.12)

2.35
2.26**
1.93
2.46**
1.61
(1.85)
(0.20)
(1.15)
(0.19)
(1.00)
Note: See note on Table 4. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Class 2/3 Obesity

Page 44

TABLE 10: OBSERVED AND PREDICTED MORTALITY RATIOS AND DIFFERENTIALS FOR MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS AND
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS
DISTRIBUTION OF RISK FACTORS
DISTRIBUTION OF RISK FACTORS
CHANGE:
CHANGE:
NHANES I
NHIS
NHANES I
NHIS
MODEL
NHANES I to
NHANES I to
(1971-75)
(1987-2000)
(1971-75)
(1987-2000)
ESTIMATED ON:
NHIS
NHIS
MALES
NHANES I
NHIS
DIFFERENCE

1.02
(0.30)
1.66
(0.13)
0.64
(0.30)

1.00
(0.29)
1.57
(0.06)
0.57
(0.29)

-0.02
(0.09)
-0.09
(0.11)
0.55
(0.31)

1.13
(0.37)
1.42
(0.12)
0.29
(0.37)

1.11
(0.34)
1.42
(0.07)
0.31
(0.35)

-0.02
(0.08)
0.00
(0.09)
0.29
(0.37)

1.57
(0.37)
1.53
(0.12)
-0.04
(0.36)

1.55
(0.35)
1.47
(0.07)
-0.08
(0.36)

-0.02
(0.12)
-0.06
(0.09)
-0.10
(0.37)

1.05
(0.39)
1.14
(0.07)
0.09
(0.39)

1.11
(0.39)
1.20
(0.05)
0.08
(0.40)

0.06
(0.09)
0.05
(0.05)
0.15
(0.39)

FEMALES
NHANES I
NHIS
DIFFERENCE
SEE NOTE TO TABLE 5

Page 45

