                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INNOVATION AND CLIMATE POLICY

                                               David Popp

                                         Working Paper 15673
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15673


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2010




A revised version of this paper will appear in the forthcoming Annual Review of Resource Economics.
I thank an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovation and Climate Policy
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 15673
January 2010
JEL No. O31,O33,Q40,Q42,Q54,Q55

                                            ABSTRACT

Reducing emissions of the greenhouse gases that cause climate change will require dramatic changes
in the way that energy is produced and consumed. The cost of technological changes such as alternative
energy sources and improved energy efficiency will play a large role in determining the overall cost
of combating climate change. The development of these technologies will be heavily influenced by
government policy. Both environmental and R&D policies provide incentives encouraging the development
of clean technologies. Understanding the incentives provided by these policies, and their influence
on the development of new technologies, is important for understanding the ultimate effects of climate
policy. This chapter reviews the literature on environmental innovation and diffusion, with a focus
on studies relevant to the development of clean energy technologies necessary to address climate change.
I discuss the implications of this literature for the development of climate policy.


David Popp
Associate Professor of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
       As concerns about the potential future damages from climate change grow, there is

increased support for policies to slow or even reverse the growth in greenhouse gas emissions

that has occurred during the Industrial Revolution. The “American Clean Energy and Security

Act” passed by the U.S. House of Representatives on June 26, 2009 calls for reducing U.S.

greenhouse gas emissions by 17 percent below 2005 levels by 2020, and 83 percent by 2050.

European Union proposals to stabilize global temperatures an average of two degrees Celsius

over pre-Industrial Revolution levels imply stabilizing atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)

concentrations at 450 parts per million (ppm). Current levels already exceed 380 ppm. To meet

such targets, annual CO2 emissions would need to peak at about 9 billion tons of carbon per year

by about 2012, and fall to as little as 3.5 billion tons per year by 2100 (Holdren 2006).

       Meeting emission reduction targets such as these will not be possible without major

changes in the way that energy is produced and consumed.              Given the current status of

alternative technologies, making such changes will be costly. Generation of electricity and heat

is the largest source of carbon emissions, accounting for 41% of carbon emissions worldwide in

2006, followed by transportation at 23% (IEA 2008). In both cases, alternative carbon-free

energy sources such as wind, solar, or hydrogen fuels all are priced higher than traditional fossil

fuels (IEA 2006). Other possible solutions, such as carbon capture and storage, are even more

costly, and include uncertainties about the geological feasibility of storage sites (Barrett 2009).

Nonetheless, the International Energy Agency projects that, to stabilize concentrations at 450

ppm, 60 percent of passenger vehicles sold worldwide in 2030 would need to be hybrid, plug-in

hybrid, or electric vehicles. Also by 2030, more electricity would need to be generated from

wind and other non-hydro renewable sources than by coal, even with the possibility that some

coal generation would include carbon capture and storage (IEA 2009a).
                                                                                                 2


       However, technology improvements are likely to occur, leading to lower costs. Much

uncertainty surrounds the potential for technological change. In its latest report on climate

change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports estimates of the costs of

stabilizing global carbon concentrations from a variety of climate models.            To stabilize

concentrations at a level of 550 parts per million (ppm), the estimated costs, in terms of lost GDP

in the year 2050, range from a four percent loss to a slight increase in GDP, relative to baseline

growth (IPCC 2007). Projections of future technological change are an important driver of these

differences, and affect not only the cost of reducing emissions, but also predictions of what

emissions levels will occur in the absence of climate policy initiatives.

       Understanding the potential for technological change requires an understanding of the

process through which these changes occur. All private sector innovation suffers from market

failures. These are even more acute in the case of climate change, as environmental market

failures compound the problem. Thus, policy plays a key role shaping both the direction and

magnitude of climate-friendly technological change. In turn, these policy-induced innovations

will lower the cost of reducing carbon emissions. For instance, in a review of cost-benefit

studies of proposed U.S. environmental regulations, Harrington et al. (2000) find pre-policy

predictions of the net benefits of environmental regulation to be lower than evaluations after the

fact, as newly developed technologies lower the costs of complying with regulation.

       In this paper, I review the literature on environmental technological change, focusing on

the implications of this research for climate policy.           The literature on environmental

technological change is large, and I do not attempt a complete review here. Rather, the focus is

on selected studies that can be used to inform the design of climate policy. For a more thorough

review, see Popp, Newell, and Jaffe (2009). Moreover, the focus is at the microeconomic level.
                                                                                                 3


For recent reviews of the growing literature on the macroeconmic effects of endogenous

technological change for climate policy, see Köhler et al (2006) and Gillingham et al. (2008).



I. Market Failures and the Policy Response

       To consider the incentives (or lack thereof) that firms have to develop and deploy

environmental technologies, I first consider the incentives faced for the development and

deployment of new technologies. Technological change proceeds in three stages. At each stage,

incentives, in the form of prices or regulations, affect the development and adoption of new

technologies:

       Invention: an idea must be born.

       Innovation: new ideas are then developed into commercially viable products. Often, these

two stages of technological change are lumped together under the rubric of research and

development (R&D).

       Diffusion: to have an effect on the economy, individuals must choose to make use of the

innovation.



A. Market Failures for Environmental R&D

       At all three stages, market forces provide insufficient incentives for investment in either

the development or diffusion of environmentally-friendly technologies. Economists point to two

market failures as the explanations for underinvestment in environmental R&D. These market

failures provide the motivation for government policy designed to increase such research.

       One market failure is the traditional problem of environmental externalities. Because

pollution is not priced by the market, firms and consumers have no incentive to reduce emissions
                                                                                                                 4


without policy intervention. Thus, without appropriate policy interventions, the market for

technologies that reduce emissions will be limited, reducing incentives to develop such

technologies. For climate change, examples of such technologies include alternative energy

sources, capturing methane gas from landfills, and carbon capture and sequestration. Note that,

even without climate policy in place, there are incentives to develop and deploy energy efficient

technologies, as improving energy efficiency not only reduces emissions, but also lowers costs.

Indeed, since 1980, energy intensity, defined as energy consumption per dollar of GDP, has

fallen at a rate of 1.5% per year since 1995.1 The market failure problem simply means that

individuals do not consider the social benefits of using technologies that reduce emissions, so

that firms underinvest in energy efficient technologies.

        The second market failure pertaining to R&D is the public goods nature of knowledge

(see, for example, Geroski 1995). In most cases, new technologies must be made available to the

public for the inventor to reap the rewards of invention. However, by making new inventions

public, some (if not all) of the knowledge embodied in the invention becomes public knowledge.

This public knowledge may lead to additional innovations, or even to copies of the current

innovations.2 These knowledge spillovers provide benefit to the public as a whole, but not to the

innovator. As a result, private firms do not have incentives to provide the socially optimal level

of research activity.

        Much economic research has been done quantifying the effect of such spillovers.

Economists studying the returns to research consistently find that knowledge spillovers result in

a wedge between private and social rates return to R&D. Examples of such studies include

1
  Calculated from data available at http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/international/energyconsumption.html, accessed
June 4, 2008.
2
  Intellectual property rights, such as patents, are designed to protect inventors from such copies. However, their
effectiveness varies depending on the ease in which inventors may “invent around” the patent by making minor
modifications to an invention. See, for example, Levin et al. (1987).
                                                                                                5


Mansfield (1977, 1996), Pakes (1985), Jaffe (1986), Hall (1996), and Jones and Williams (1998).

Typical results include marginal social rates of return between 30 and 50 percent.             In

comparison, estimates of private marginal rates of return on investments range from 7 to 15

percent (Bazelon and Smetters 1999, Jones and Williams 1998, Hall 1996). Since firms make

investment decisions based on their private returns, the wedge between private and social rates of

return suggests socially beneficial research opportunities are being ignored by firms because they

are unable to fully capture the rewards of such innovations.



B. Policy Responses

       The combination of environmental externalities and knowledge market failures suggests

two possible avenues through which policy can encourage the development of environmentally-

friendly technologies: correcting the environmental externality and/or correcting knowledge

market failures.   Because knowledge market failures apply generally across technologies,

policies addressing knowledge market failures may be general, addressing the problem in the

economy as a whole. Examples include patent protection, R&D tax credits, and funding for

generic basic research. Such policies focus on the overall rate of innovation – how much

innovative activity takes place. In contrast, policies aimed specifically at the environment focus

on the direction of innovation. While this includes policies regulating externalities, such as a

carbon tax or cap-and-trade system, it also includes environmental and energy policies using

more general R&D policy mechanisms with a specific focus on the environment, such as

targeted government subsidies for adoption of alternative energy, and targeted funding for basic

and applied research.
                                                                                                   6


       Studies evaluating the effectiveness of these various policy options find that

environmental and technology policies work best in tandem. While technology policy can help

facilitate the creation of new environmentally-friendly technologies, it provides little incentive to

adopt these technologies. Fischer (2008) develops a theoretical model showing that government

support for emissions control R&D is only effective if there is at least moderate environmental

policy in place to encourage adoption of the resulting technologies. Using a computable general

equilibrium model to study the potential effects of energy R&D for climate change mitigation,

Schneider and Goulder (1997) show that policies to address knowledge spillovers are more

effective if they address all knowledge spillovers, rather than focusing exclusively on R&D

pertaining to alternative energy. Not surprisingly, technology subsidies alone have a smaller

environmental impact than policies that directly address the environmental externality.

       Popp (2006a) considers the long-run welfare gains from both an optimally-designed

carbon tax (one equating the marginal benefits of carbon reductions with the marginal costs of

such reductions) and optimally designed R&D subsidies.           Popp finds that combining both

policies yields the largest welfare gain. However, a policy using only the carbon tax achieves

95% of the welfare gains of the combined policy, while a policy using only the optimal R&D

subsidy attains just 11% of the welfare gains of the combined policy in his model. In contrast to

Schneider and Goulder, R&D policy has less effect in this study, as the subsidies only apply to

the energy sector.

       Acemoglu et al. (2009) develop a two-sector model of directed technical change, in

which a single output is produced using inputs from a clean and dirty sector, to evaluate the role

of taxes and R&D subsidies. In their model, two effects influence the direction of innovative

activity: a market size effect that directs innovation towards the larger sector, and a price effect
                                                                                                7


that directs innovation towards the sector with a higher price. Because the dirty sector (e.g.

fossil fuel production) is currently the larger sector, in the absence of policy the market size

effect causes the productivity gap between the dirty and clean sectors to grow over time. Thus,

any delays in climate policy are costly, as fossil fuel productivity develops faster than the

productivity of clean alternatives in the absence of policy. As such, more stringent (and thus

costlier) policies will be needed at later dates to close the gap between clean and dirty fuels.

Regarding the choice of policies, Acemoglu et al. also find that the optimal policy mix includes

both a carbon tax and R&D subsidies. Using the R&D subsidy to direct research towards the

clean energy sector results in a lower (and thus less distortionary) carbon tax than would be

necessary if the carbon tax were used alone to both reduce emissions and redirect research

inputs.

          The intuition behind each of these studies is that, while R&D subsidies aid the

development of new technologies, environmental policy is necessary to ensure the diffusion of

these technologies. However, each of the aforementioned studies focus on the macro level, and

assume that technologies, once created, are optimally deployed in response to whatever policy

incentives may or may not be in place. Fischer and Newell (2008) use a micro approach to study

a broader set of policies, including those encouraging technology adoption, to assess policies for

reducing carbon dioxide emissions and promoting innovation and diffusion of renewable energy.

Although the relative cost of individual policies in achieving emissions reductions depends on

parameter values and the emissions target, in a numerical application to the U.S. electricity

sector, they find the ranking is roughly as follows: (1) emissions price, (2) emissions

performance standard, (3) fossil power tax, (4) renewables share requirement, (5) renewables

subsidy, and (6) R&D subsidy. Nonetheless, an optimal portfolio of policies—including
                                                                                                8


emissions pricing and R&D—achieves emission reductions at significantly lower cost than any

single policy.

       In a similar exercise, Gerlagh and van der Zwaan (2006) find an emissions performance

standard to be cheapest policy for achieving various carbon stabilization goals. They note that,

like a carbon tax, the emissions performance standard directly addresses the environmental

externality. In addition, like a renewable subsidy, the emissions performance standard stimulates

innovation in a sector with high spillovers. In comparing the results of these two papers, Gerlagh

and van der Zwaan note that the ordering of policies depends on the assumed returns to scale of

renewable energy technologies.      Fischer and Newell assume greater decreasing returns to

renewable energy, due to the scarcity of appropriate sites for new renewable sources. Thus, an

important question raised by Gerlagh and van der Zwaan is whether the cost savings from

innovation will be sufficient to overcome decreasing returns to scale for renewable energy

resulting from limited space for new solar and wind installations.



II. Innovation and Climate Policy

       While the studies in previous section demonstrate the importance of both climate and

R&D policy, they provide less guidance on the policy mechanisms to be used. There are a wide

range of policies in place that could be classified as “climate policy.” These include broad-based

policies such as carbon taxes and cap-and-trade systems to limit carbon emissions, to targeted

policies such as renewable portfolio standards, restrictions on incandescent light bulbs, fuel

economy standards, and investment tax credits for solar energy.
                                                                                                                      9


         Focusing on energy usage as a means of reducing greenhouse gas emissions depends on

one of two strategies (Holdren 2006).3 One is to reduce the carbon intensity of energy use (that

is, the amount of carbon emitted per unit of energy consumed). This ratio has been falling over

time, as the deployment of cleaner energy sources such as natural gas and wind increases. A

second option is to reduce energy intensity (energy usage per dollar of GDP) by improving

energy efficiency. More efficient technologies enable a country to achieve greater economic

output from a given amount of energy.

         This distinction suggests two places to look for evidence of the effect of climate policy

on innovation. One is energy prices. Policies designed to reduce carbon emissions will increase

the price of fossil fuels, raising the incentives for innovation on both energy efficiency and on

clean energy technologies. This is true not only for policies such as a carbon tax, but also, for

example, of mandates that change the nature of electricity production. Experiences from past

increases in energy prices provide evidence on how innovation may respond to future price

increases resulting from climate policy.

         However, climate policies do more than raise prices. They also change the relative costs

and benefits of competing technologies. Carbon taxes make coal relatively more expensive than

natural gas. Renewable energy portfolio standards and renewable energy investment tax credits

increase the rewards for innovation on alternative energy sources. Thus, understanding the

influence of policies, whether technology-specific or broad based market policies, is also

important. Because countries have only recently begun to adopt policies specifically designed to

address climate change, only a few empirical papers specifically address the effects of climate

policy on innovation.           However, there is a much broader literature on the effects of


3
  While other strategies, such as reforestation, are also important, I focus on energy usage as most efforts to improve
technology in response to climate change have focused on the energy sector.
                                                                                               10


environmental policy on innovation that provides guidelines as to how climate policy may affect

innovation.



A. Induced Innovation and Environmental Policy

       Studies on the effect of policy or prices on innovation draw their motivation from the

notion of induced innovation (Hicks 1932, Binswanger and Ruttan 1978, Acemoglu 2002),

which recognizes that R&D is a profit-motivated investment activity and that the direction of

innovation likely responds positively in the direction of increased relative prices. Empirical

studies on the effect of policy and prices on environmental innovation both support the

conjectures of the induced innovation hypothesis and provide evidence of the magnitude of these

effects. Early studies of induced innovation from environmental policy made use of pollution

abatement control expenditures (PACE) to proxy for environmental regulatory stringency. Jaffe

and Palmer (1997) examine the correlation between PACE by industry and indicators of

innovation more broadly. They find a significant correlation within industries over time between

the rate of expenditure on pollution abatement and the level of R&D spending. They do not,

however, find evidence of an effect of pollution control expenditure on overall patenting.

Hamamoto (2006) finds similar effects on R&D spending in Japan. Brunnermeier and Cohen

(2003) estimate the relationship between PACE and environmental patents across various U.S.

industries, finding that patents increase by just 0.04 percent when PACE increases by $1 million.

       One limitation of these papers is that they do not take advantage of the disaggregated

nature of patent data. Each looks at innovation within specific industries. Jaffe and Palmer

include all patents associated with an industry, whether or not they are environmental

technologies, and Hamamoto includes all R&D activities, not just those focused on the
                                                                                               11


environment. Brunnermeier and Cohen focus specifically on environmental technologies, but

group several such technologies together for each industry. Thus, effects of innovation on

specific technologies may be masked by stagnant trends in other technologies.           Research

focusing on specific technologies finds stronger effects. For instance, Lanjouw and Mody

(1996) use the International Patent Classification (IPC) to identify several key environmental

patent classes. Using patent data from the US, Japan, Germany, and 14 low-and middle-income

countries, they find that environmentally-friendly innovation increases as pollution abatement

cost expenditures in the country increase. Popp (2006b) finds significant increases in patents

pertaining to sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides emissions reduction in response to the passage of

environmental regulations in the United States, Japan, and Germany.

       Evidence of inducement has also been sought by examining the response to changing

energy prices. Newell et al. (1999) examine the extent to which the energy efficiency of the

menu of home appliances available for sale changed in response to energy prices between 1958

and 1993. Using an econometric model of induced innovation as changing characteristics of

capital goods over time, they decompose changes in energy efficiency into changes due to price-

based substitution and changes due to innovation.       Their estimates show how the product

characteristic transformation surface changes over time. Using these estimates, they simulate

changes in energy efficiency for each product both with and without the historical changes in

energy price and efficiency standards.     Newell et al. find that technological change in air

conditioners was biased against energy efficiency in the 1960s (when real energy prices were

falling), but that this bias was reversed after the two energy shocks of the 1970s. Suggesting the

role that policy-induced technological change may play as climate policy moves forward, they

find that energy efficiency in 1993 would have been about one-quarter to one-half lower in air
                                                                                                                   12


conditioners and gas water heaters if energy prices had stayed at their 1973 levels, rather than

following their historical path.

         While these earlier works demonstrate links between energy prices, policy, and

innovation, they do not provide elasticities between prices and R&D. One paper that does is

Popp (2002). Similar to Lanjouw and Mody, Popp uses patent classifications to identify 11

different alternative energy and energy efficiency technologies. Using a distributed lag model,

Popp estimates the elasticity of energy patenting activity with respect to energy prices for these

technologies. The distributed lag model is consistent with an adaptive expectations model of

prices, in which expected future prices depend on a weighted average of past prices. The

regression controls for the quality of knowledge available to an inventor as well as other factors

influencing R&D, such as government support for energy research and technology-specific

demand shifters.4 Popp finds a long-run elasticity of energy patenting with respect to energy

prices of 0.354.

         Both studies also find that the innovative response happens quickly. Newell et al. find

that most of the response to energy price changes came in less than five years of those changes.

Popp (2002) finds that the mean lag response time between energy prices and patenting activity

occurs in 3.71 years, and the median lag in 4.86 years. Thus, similar to Newell et al., over one-

half of the full effect of an energy price increase on patenting will have been experienced after

just five years. When looking at the innovative response to environmental regulation, rather than

energy prices, the response time is even faster.                 Popp (2006b) finds an almost immediate

innovative response to the passage of clean air regulations in the US, Japan, and Germany.

Similarly, Johnstone et al. (2009) find that patenting activity for renewable energy technologies,

4
 For example, for patents on using waste products as energy, the price utilities pay to purchase waste products for
fuel is included in the regression. This figure captures the increased supply of waste that became available as fuel
owing to concerns about declining landfill space during the 1980’s.
                                                                                              13


measured by applications for renewable energy patents submitted to the European Patent Office

(EPO), has increased dramatically in recent years, as both national policies and international

efforts to combat climate change begin to provide incentives for innovation. Figure 1 illustrates

these trends for five technologies: wind, solar, geothermal, ocean power, and electricity from

biomass and waste. With the exception of biomass and waste, each technology experiences an

increase in innovation after signing of the Kyoto Protocol in December 1997.

                             [INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

        Finally, it is important to consider where the resources for policy-induced R&D come

from. This question of crowding out is raised in two recent simulations of climate policy. Using

the ENTICE model, Popp (2004) begins with a base case that assumes one-half of new energy

R&D crowds out other R&D.         In this case, induced innovation increases welfare by 9%.

Assuming no crowding out increases the welfare gains from induced innovation to as much as

45%, while assuming full crowding of R&D reduces welfare gains to as little as 2%. Finally,

Gerlagh (2008) extends this work by separately modeling the choice of carbon-energy producing

R&D, carbon-energy saving R&D, and neutral R&D. In such a case, it is carbon-producing

R&D, rather than neutral R&D, that is crowded out by induced carbon-energy saving R&D. As

a result, the impact of induced technological change is larger, with optimal carbon taxes falling

by a factor of 2.

        Given the range of possible outcomes depending on assumptions about crowding out, I

turn to empirical evidence on the effects of energy R&D on non-energy R&D. Popp and Newell

(2009) use patent and R&D data to examine both the private and social opportunity costs of

climate R&D. Looking first at R&D spending across industries, they find that funds for energy

R&D do not come from other sectors, but may come from a redistribution of research funds in
                                                                                                14


sectors that are likely to perform energy R&D. Given this, they link firm-level patent and

financial data to take a detailed look at climate R&D in two sectors – alternative energy and

automotive manufacturing – asking whether an increase in alternative energy patents leads to a

decrease in other types of patenting activity. They find evidence of crowding out for alternative

energy firms, but no evidence of crowding out for automotive firms. Interestingly, the patents

most likely to be crowded out by alternative energy research are innovations enhancing the

productivity of fossil fuels, such as energy refining and exploration. This is consistent with the

notion that any apparent crowding out reacts to market incentives – as opportunities for

alternative energy research become more profitable, research opportunities for traditional fossil

fuels appear less appealing to firms. This provides support for Gerlagh’s result that crowding out

is less damaging to the economy if it is carbon-energy enhancing technologies that are crowded

out.



B. Innovation and the Choice of Policy Instrument

       These empirical studies on induced innovation provide some insight as to the pace of

environmental innovation. Also important, however, is the nature of policies used to stimulate

innovation. Policymakers have a range of policy instruments available to regulate environmental

quality. Command-and-control regulations direct a specific level of performance. For instance,

performance standard sets a uniform control target for firms (such as pounds of sulfur dioxide

emissions per million BTUs of fuel burned), but do not dictate how this target is met.

Technology-based standards specify the method, and sometimes the actual equipment, that firms

must use to comply with a particular regulation, such as requiring that a percentage of electricity

be generated using renewable sources. Market-based policies establish a price for emissions,
                                                                                                15


either directly through the use of fees, such as a carbon tax, or indirectly through the use of

permits that can be bought and sold among firms, such as in the U.S. SO2 market or the

European Union’s Emission Trading Scheme for carbon.

       In general, market-based policies are thought to provide greater incentives for innovation,

as they provide rewards for continuous improvement in environmental quality (e.g. Magat 1978,

1979; Milliman and Prince 1989). In contrast, command-and-control policies penalize polluters

who do not meet the standard, but do not reward those who do better than mandated. More

recent works suggest that the effects are more nuanced. Ulph (1998) considers not only the

effect of policy and innovation on the polluting activity of firms, but also on the product market.

Comparing the effects of pollution taxes and command-and-control standards, he finds that

increases in the stringency of the standard or tax had ambiguous effects on the level of R&D.

Environmental regulations have two competing effects: a direct effect of increasing costs, which

increases the incentives to invest in R&D in order to develop cost-saving pollution-abatement

methods; and an indirect effect of reducing product output, which reduces the incentive to

engage in R&D.

       Similarly, Fischer et al. (2003) find that an unambiguous ranking of policy instruments

was not possible. Policy instruments affect the innovation incentives primarily through three

effects: (1) an abatement cost affect, reflecting the extent to which innovation reduces the costs

of pollution control; (2) an imitation effect, which weakens innovation incentives due to

imperfect appropriability; and (3) an emissions payment effect, which can weaken incentives if

innovation reduces firms’ payments for residual emissions. As a result, the ranking of policy

instruments depends on the innovator’s ability to appropriate spillover benefits of new
                                                                                              16


technologies to other firms, the costs of innovation, environmental benefit functions, and the

number of firms producing emissions.

       Finally, a recent paper by Bauman, Lee, and Seeley (2008) raises the possibility that

command and control policies may induce more innovation under certain scenarios. The results

of previous models follow when innovation lowers the marginal abatement cost curve.

However, these papers assume end-of-pipe solutions to pollution reduction, such as installing a

scrubber on a smokestack. For end-of-pipe solutions, the marginal cost of no abatement is zero,

so that a marginal abatement cost curve starts at the origin. In such cases, innovation always

results in lower marginal abatement costs. However, pollution can also be reduced by changing

processes, such as using cleaner fuel or using a more efficient boiler. In such cases, innovation

may make the marginal abatement cost steeper. For instance, if a plant plans to reduce emissions

by shutting down temporarily, it will forego more output (and profit) when it is using a more

efficient boiler. In these cases, the marginal abatement cost curve after innovation will not be

unambiguously below the original marginal abatement cost curve. Should that occur, command

and control standards may provide greater incentive for innovation than market-based policies.

Note, however, that their analysis is positive rather than normative in nature and does not

directly address the traditional view that market-based policies are overall more efficient than

command and control.

       Given the ambiguous predictions of these models, empirical evidence on the effects of

various market instruments on innovation is important. Popp (2003) studies U.S. innovations for

SO2 control before and after the 1990 Clean Air Act (CAA) instituted permit trading. Before this

Act, new plants were required to install a flue gas desulfurization (FGD) unit capable of

removing 90 percent of SO2. As a result, the innovations that occurred before the 1990 CAA
                                                                                                               17


focused on reducing the cost of FGD units, rather than on improving their environmental

performance. After passage of the 1990 CAA, the nature of innovation changed, with a greater

focus on improving the ability of FGD units to remove SO2 from a plant’s emissions. Similarly,

Taylor et al. (2003) note that the scrubber requirement led to a reduction in patents on pre-

combustion techniques for reducing SO2 emissions, such as cleaner coal.

        Moreover, even among market-based policies, differences between policies matter.

Johnstone et al. (2009) examine the effect of different policy instruments on renewable energy

innovation in 25 OECD countries. They compare price-based policies such as tax credits and

feed-in tariffs5 to quantity-based policies such as renewable energy mandates, and find important

differences across technologies. Quantity-based policies, such as renewable energy certificates,

favor development of wind energy. Of the various alternative energy technologies, wind has the

lowest cost and is closest to being competitive with traditional energy sources. As such, when

faced with a mandate to provide alternative energy, firms focus their innovative efforts on the

technology that is closest to market. In contrast, direct investment incentives are effective in

supporting innovation in solar and waste-to-energy technologies, which are further from being

competitive with traditional energy technologies.

        These results suggest particular challenges to policy makers who wish to encourage long-

run innovation for technologies that have yet to near market competitiveness. Economists

generally recommend using broad-based environmental policies, such as emission fees, and

letting the market “pick winners.” This leads to lower compliance costs in the short-run, as firms

choose the most effective short-term strategy. However, this research suggests complications for

the long-run. Because firms will focus on those technologies closest to market, market-based


5
 Feed-in tariffs, used in various European countries, guarantee renewable energy producers a minimum price for the
electricity they produce.
                                                                                               18


policy incentives do not provide as much incentive for research on longer-term needs. This

suggests a trade-off: directed policies such as investment tax credits or technology mandates

more effectively encourage the deployment of more expensive emerging technologies that are

not yet cost-effective. However, this raises the costs of compliance, as firms are forced to use

technologies that are not cost-effective. One possible solution here is to use broad, market-based

policies to ensure short-run compliance at low costs, and use support for the research and

development process to support research on emerging technologies. Thus, the focus is on

continued improvement for emerging technologies, rather than on deployment of them. I turn

next to a discussion of the issues surrounding public R&D financing.



C. Government R&D

       Until now, we have focused primarily on the incentives faced, and activities conducted,

by private firms.     However, as noted earlier, even when environmental regulations that

encourage eco-innovation are in place, private firms will focus research efforts on technologies

that are closest to market. One of the particular problems faced with many climate-friendly

innovations is the long-time frame from the initial invention to successful market deployment.

Consider, for instance, the case of solar energy. Despite research efforts that began during the

energy crises of the 1970s, solar is still only cost competitive in niche markets, such as remote

off-grid locations.

       This leaves a potential role for government-sponsored R&D to fill in the gaps,

particularly in the case of climate change, where a diversified energy portfolio will be necessary

to meet currently proposed emission reduction targets. Public R&D spending plays a particularly

important role in the energy sector. In 2004, the last year for which private energy R&D data are
                                                                                                19


available, U.S. industry spent $2.4 billion on energy R&D, while the U.S. government spent $2.9

billion (National Science Foundation 2008, IEA 2009b). In 2008, the U.S. government spent

$4.3 billion on energy R&D. Of this, 23% went to nuclear energy R&D, with about 10% each

going to renewable energy, fossil fuels, and energy efficiency. Total global government energy

R&D were estimated to be $12.7 billion. The share of support going to nuclear power is larger

globally, at 39%. Twelve percent of this $12.7 billion goes to renewable energy. Since the

signing of the Kyoto Protocol in December 1997, the share of energy R&D devoted to

renewables has grown. Beginning in 1998, public renewable energy R&D spending has nearly

doubled, while overall public energy spending has increased by just 45% (IEA 2009b).

       This government investment plays several roles. First, note that government R&D can

help to compensate for underinvestment by private firms. Unlike firms, the government is in

position to consider social returns when making investment decisions. In addition, government

R&D tends to have different objectives than private R&D. Government support is particularly

important for basic R&D, as long-term payoffs, greater uncertainty, and the lack of a finished

product at the end all make it difficult for private firms to appropriate the returns of basic R&D.

Thus, the nature of government R&D is important. For example, Popp (2002) finds that

government energy R&D served as a substitute for private energy R&D during the 1970s, but as

a complement to private energy R&D afterwards. One explanation given for the change in

impact is the changing nature of energy R&D. During the 1970s, much government R&D

funding went to applied projects such as the effort to produce synfuels. Beginning with the

Reagan administration, government R&D shifted towards a focus on more basic applications.

These results suggest that, if a goal of government policy is to avoid duplicating and potentially

crowding out private research efforts, then government R&D support should focus on basic
                                                                                                 20


research or on applied research whose benefits are difficult to capture through market activity.

For instance, improved electricity transmission systems benefit all technologies, and will

typically not reap great rewards for the innovator. Applied technologies whose costs are still

high, such as solar photovoltaics, will also see less private investment, as firms focus on projects

with greater short-term payoffs. In cases such as these, public R&D efforts will be less likely to

crowd out private research efforts.

       The uncertain nature of long-term research also makes government R&D valuable. In a

situation where failure is more likely than success, but the successes will have great social value,

government can bear the costs of a diversified R&D portfolio more easily than any one private

firm. Consider, for example, the U.S. National Research Council’s review of energy efficiency

and fossil energy research at DOE over the last two decades (National Research Council 2001).

Using both estimates of overall return and case studies, they concluded that there were only a

handful of programs that proved highly valuable. Their estimates of returns suggest, however,

that the benefits of these successes justified the overall portfolio investment. These uncertain

returns to research argue for diversified government R&D portfolios, rather than trying to pick

winning technologies at early stages of development.

       In addition to correcting for underinvestment by private firms, many government R&D

projects aim to improve commercialization of new technologies (referred to as “transfer” from

basic to applied research). Such projects typically combine basic and applied research, and are

often done through government/industry partnerships (National Science Board, 2008).             For

example, the United States passed several policies in the 1980s specifically designed to improve

transfer from the more basic research done at government and university laboratories to the
                                                                                                           21


applied research done by industry to create marketable products.6 As such, this technology

transfer can be seen as a step between the processes of invention and innovation.

        A small number of papers have addressed the role of government R&D plays facilitating

transfer of energy technology. Jaffe and Lerner (2001) study the effectiveness of federally

funded research and development centers (FFRDCs) owned by the U.S. Department of Energy

(DOE). Jaffe and Lerner supplement a detailed patent citation analysis of patents assigned either

directly to the laboratories or to private contractors who collaborated on research at the DOE labs

with case studies of two DOE laboratories where technology transfer efforts increased in the

1980s and 1990s.7 They find that both patenting and the number of citations received per patent

increased at DOE laboratories since the policy shifts of the 1980s. They also find that the type of

research performed at a laboratory affects technology transfer. Transfer is slower when more

basic research is performed, or when the research has national security implications.

        Popp (2006c) examines citations made to patents in 11 energy technology categories,

such as wind and solar energy. He finds that energy patents spawned by government R&D are

cited more frequently than other energy patents. This is consistent with the notion that these

patents are more basic. More importantly, after passage of the technology transfer acts in the

early 1980s, the children of these patents (that is, privately-held patents that cite government

patents) are the most frequently cited patents, suggesting that transferring research results from

the government to private industry produces valuable research results.

        Finally, an important question for policy makers is how much government R&D money

to spend on energy. Here, however, economics provides less of an answer. Cost-benefit analysis


6
  Examples include the Stevenson-Wylder Technology Innovation Act of 1980, the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, and the
Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986.
7
  The two laboratories are Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Idaho National Engineering and
Environmental Laboratory.
                                                                                                22


provides a useful tool for post-hoc evaluation of R&D spending, but estimating the potential

benefits from new energy spending is more difficult. Engineers are better suited to determine

which projects are most deserving from a technical standpoint. Given the need for a diversified

energy portfolio to address climate change, it is hard to imagine that there would not be enough

deserving technologies for the research funding available. Rather, economic analysis suggests

that the constraints for funding are likely to come from other sources, such as what is the pool of

scientist and engineering personnel currently available to work on energy projects, and how

quickly can we grow this pool. That is, the limits to how much we can spend come not from the

number of deserving projects, but rather limits of the existing research infrastructure.

       As an example, consider the experience of the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH),

which supports biomedical research in the U.S. The NIH budget has traditionally grown at a

slow, steady pace. However, between 1998-2003, annual NIH spending nearly doubled, from

$14 billion to $27 billion. Adjusted for inflation, this represents a 76% in just five years, and

was nearly twice as high as the increase for the entire decade before. This rapid increase resulted

in high adjustment costs. New post-doctorate researchers needed to be brought in to support

research projects.   Managing a larger budget entails administrative costs for NIH. Moreover,

after this rapid doubling, research funds were cut, so that real NIH spending was 6.6% lower in

2007 than in 2004. This created a career crisis for the same post-doctorate researchers supported

by the earlier doubling of support, as there was more competition for funds to start their own

research projects. Moreover, scientists spent more time writing grant proposals. Because the

probability of funding for any one proposal falls as the NIH budget falls, researchers submitted

multiple proposals in the hope that one would succeed (Freeman and van Reenen, 2009). This
                                                                                               23


NIH experience suggests the value of slow and steady growth in energy R&D budgets, which

allows time for the development of young researchers in the field.



III. Diffusion of Climate-Friendly Technologies

       Technological advances are of little use unless society ultimately makes use of the

innovation through technology diffusion, that is, the process by which a new technology

penetrates the relevant market. Often times, a technology that appears to surpass competing

technologies in performance and cost will not immediately be chosen over existing technologies.

A key question is whether this slow diffusion is a result of rational actors responding to varying

incentives or due to market inefficiencies. In this section I briefly review the literature on

diffusion of environmental technologies, focusing on two key questions. First is the time lag

between invention and adoption, focusing on the adoption of technologies within a single

market. Second is the flow of knowledge across regions.



A. Diffusion Within Countries

       The diffusion of a new technology is a gradual, dynamic process. New technologies are

not adopted en masse. Rather, adoption usually begins with a few early adopters, followed by a

more rapid period of adoption, with the rate of adoption leveling off once most potential users

have adopted the technology. This process generates the well-known S-shaped diffusion curve:

the rate of adoption rises slowly at first, speeds up, and then levels off as market saturation

approaches.   Early attempts to explain this process focused on the spread of information

(epidemic models, such as Griliches 1957) and differences among firms (probit models, such as

David 1997). More recently, researchers combine these explanations while adding potential
                                                                                                24


strategic decisions of firms.    These papers find that firm-specific differences explain most

variation in adoption rates, suggesting that gradual diffusion is a rational process in response to

varying incentives faced by individual actors.

       Environmental technologies can be different, however. Incentives to adopt end-of-pipe

technologies that only serve to reduce emissions must come from environmental regulation.

Therefore, it is not surprising that studies addressing adoption of environmental technologies

find that regulations dominate all other firm-specific factors. Examples include Kerr and Newell

(2003) on the removal of lead from gasoline in the United States, Kemp (1998) on the effect of

effluent charges on biological treatment of wastewater, Snyder et al. (2003) on the diffusion of

membrane-cell technology in the chlorine manufacturing industry, and Popp (2009) on NOX

pollution control technologies at power-plants.      Pertaining to climate policy, these studies

suggest that clean energy technologies will not diffuse without the support of policy. While the

use of renewable energy sources provides benefits such as reduced carbon emissions and, in

some cases, improved energy security, in the absence of policy these benefits are largely external

to the individual power producer. Without environmental policy addressing carbon emissions

from fossil-fuels, firms do not have incentive to adopt more costly technologies that reduce

emissions but provide no additional cost savings to the firm.

       In contrast, energy efficiency and fuel-saving technologies will diffuse even without the

aid of policy, as they do provide cost-saving benefits to the user. Rose and Joskow (1990), for

example, find that the adoption of fuel-saving technology by U.S. electric utilities is positively

correlated with fuel prices. Adoption of these technologies is generally more gradual, following

typical S-shaped diffusion patterns. However, to the extent that fuel prices do not capture the
                                                                                                  25


external costs of energy use, such as carbon emissions, energy prices alone will not encourage a

socially optimal level of adoption for energy efficiency technologies.

       An important puzzle in the literature on energy technology diffusion is the notion that

seemingly cost-effective energy-efficient technologies diffuse slowly, suggesting what has

become to be known as an “energy efficiency paradox.” To the extent that diffusion is limited

by other market failures, policy measures that simply increase the economic incentive to adopt

environmentally-friendly technologies will be insufficient. In addition, policies focused directly

on the correction of adoption market failures can be justified.

       Several researchers have examined this energy efficiency paradox, offering explanations

including consumers using high discount rates, credit-constrained consumers caring more about

up-front costs than lifetime cost savings, agency problems (such as in landlord/tenant

relationships), and uncertainty over future costs. Jaffe and Stavins (1994) find that higher energy

prices lead to greater use of insulation in new home construction, but that the costs of installation

are a more important consideration.        Anderson and Newell (2004) examine the role of

information by asking how firms respond to energy audits offered through the US Department of

Energy’s Industrial Assessment Centers (IAC). This program has offered energy assessments at

no cost to small and medium-sized manufacturers since 1976. Anderson and Newell note that

firms adopted only 53 percent of recommended projects, even though the average payback time

for these projects was just 1.29 years. When adopting new energy-saving technologies, plants

are 40 percent more responsive to initial costs than annual energy savings. Anderson and Newell

find that over 98 percent of firms have payback thresholds of less than five years, with a median

payback threshold of just 1.2 years.
                                                                                                26


       There are several possible explanations for the finding that installation costs have a

greater effect on adoption than energy prices. One is that current prices may be an imperfect

proxy for expectations of future prices, so that consumers are uncertain whether high prices at

the time of adoption to persist. Another possibility is that consumers are credit constrained, thus

making access to credit an important part of any diffusion policy.         As no one consensus

explanation has emerged in the literature, better understanding the energy paradox is a fruitful

topic for future research.



B. Diffusion Across Countries

       Nearly all of the papers cited so far focus on highly developed economies. This is not

surprising, as these countries were the first to enact environmental protections and most R&D

expenditures occur in these countries. In 2002, global R&D expenditures were at least $813

billion. 77 percent of this R&D was done in the OECD, with 45 performed by the United States

and Japan alone (National Science Board, 2008). Focusing specifically on climate-friendly

technologies, Dechezleprêtre et al. (2009) examine patents pertaining renewable energy

technologies, carbon capture and storage, and energy efficiency technologies for buildings,

lighting, and cement manufacture. Their data cover the years 1978-2003, and include patents

from 76 countries. The US, Japan, and Germany account for two-thirds of the innovations in

their sample.

       Dechezleprêtre et al. find some evidence of innovation in emerging economies. As a

whole, emerging economies accounted for 16.3% of climate-friendly innovations in 2003.

China, South Korea, Russia, and Brazil are all among the world’s top 10 inventors, ranked by the

average percentage of innovations from 1998-2003 in each technology.             Interestingly, the

technologies most prevalent in these countries are cement manufacture, geothermal, and biomass
                                                                                                            27


technologies. Of these technologies, cement manufacture and geothermal innovations take place

mostly on a local scale, with less than 15% of these patents appearing in multiple countries. This

is consistent with the nature of these industries, which typically serve local markets and, in the

case of geothermal, may face different technological needs depending upon local conditions.

           Given the concentration of R&D efforts in high-income countries, technology transfer

will be particularly important for addressing climate change.                          Rapid economic growth in

countries such as China and India not only increases current carbon emissions from these

countries, but results in high emission growth rates from these countries as well. For instance, in

1990, China and India accounted for 13 percent of world carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. By

2006, that figure had risen to 25 percent, and it is projected to rise to 34 percent by 2030 (Energy

Information Administration, 2009).                  Overall, the U.S. Energy Information Administration

projects that CO2 emissions from non-OECD countries will exceed emissions from OECD

countries by 77 percent in the year 2030 (Energy Information Administration, 2009). While

international technology transfer has received much attention in the broader economic literature,

few applications focus specifically on environmental technologies.8

           In the broadest sense, environmental technological change is addressed in literature on

trade and the environment. There, economists decompose the effect of international trade on

environmental quality in developing countries into three components. First, scale effects account

for increased pollution levels due to the greater wealth and increased economic activity that

follows international trade. Second, composition effects refer to reductions in pollution resulting

from a preference for cleaner goods that develops as countries become richer. Third, technique

effects refer to emission reductions that occur because trade expands access to cleaner



8
    For a general review of the literature on international technology transfer, see Keller (2004).
                                                                                               28


technologies (Esty 2001, Copeland and Taylor 2003). Attempts to identify this technique effect

can be seen as examples of technology transfer.

       Because most pollution control technologies are first developed in industrialized

countries, and because environmental regulations are needed to provide incentives to adopt these

technologies, Lovely and Popp (2008) focus on the adoption of environmental regulation as the

first step in the international diffusion of environmental technologies. They study the adoption

of regulations limiting emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides at coal-fired power plants

in 39 countries. Their sample includes both developed and developing countries. While the

adoption of pollution control technologies within a country responds quickly to environmental

regulation, they find that adoption of the regulations themselves follows the typical S-shaped

pattern noted in studies of technology diffusion.      In their work, they focus on access to

technology as an important factor influencing regulatory adoption.         As pollution control

technologies improve, the costs of abatement, and thus the costs of adopting environmental

regulation, fall. As such, they find that, over time, countries adopt environmental regulation at

lower levels of per capita income. Moreover, they find that openness to international trade is

important for providing access to these technologies, providing support for the technique effect

discussed earlier.

       Similarly, Hilton (2001) finds that late adopters of regulation can learn from early

adopters. Using data on 48 nations, he looks at the time it took each country to eliminate lead

from fuel. This time is measured from the time that each country first began phasing out lead in

fuel to the time in which the country achieved lead levels at or below 0.5 grams of lead per

gallon. Countries that began the process after 1979 completed the lead phase-out five years

faster, on average, than those beginning before 1979. Moreover, among those countries that did
                                                                                                29


not completely phase out lead, countries that begin the phase-out process earlier achieve greater

reductions. Hilton concludes with evidence that late adopters are able to move more quickly

because they benefit from lessons learnt by early adopters.

       Another important finding is that adaptive R&D will often be necessary to suit

technologies to local markets.     Popp (2006b) finds innovation responds to policy even in

countries that adopt regulations late, suggesting that these countries do not simply take advantage

of technologies “off the shelf” that have been developed elsewhere. Instead, late adopters often

undertake adaptive R&D to fit the technology to local markets. As evidence, Popp finds that

these later patents are more likely to cite earlier foreign rather than domestic inventions.

Lanjouw and Mody (1996) find similar evidence that the environmentally-friendly innovations

that do occur in developing countries are smaller inventive steps, typically done to modify

existing technologies to local conditions. Foreign knowledge serves as blueprints for further

improvements, rather than as a direct source of technology. When policymakers consider the

potential for technological change to reduce environmental impacts in developing countries, they

must make allowances for adaptive R&D to fit technologies to local conditions, or else be

prepared for less than desired results when the transferred technology is not a perfect fit for the

local market.

       In contrast to pollution control technologies, energy efficiency technologies will diffuse

even without environmental policy in place, as they offer users the opportunity of cost savings.

As an example, Fisher-Vanden et al. (2006) use a panel of 22,000 Chinese large and medium

enterprises to study improvements in energy efficiency. Between 1997 and 1999, total energy

use fell by 17%. 54% of this decline can be explained by price changes. Technological change,
                                                                                                       30


measured by firm-level R&D, accounts for 17% of this change, and changes in ownership

account for another 12%.

           These studies have several implications for climate policy.             Most importantly, they

emphasize the potential value of environmental regulations to promote transfer of climate-

friendly technologies to developing countries.                   Such technologies have external benefits.

Without policies to internalize these benefits, demand for climate-friendly technology transfer

will be low. These studies also emphasize, however, that the current lack of emission reduction

commitments from developing countries is no different than the approach taken by developing

countries with other pollutants. Developed countries have traditionally acted first, after which

the resulting technological innovations made it easier for developing countries to adopt

regulations at a later date. There is no reason to expect climate policy to be any different.

           Instead, current policy incentives for technology transfer are linked to emission reduction

commitments among developed countries, through the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).

CDM allows polluters in industrialized countries with emission constraints to receive credit for

financing projects that reduce emissions in developing countries. Because carbon emissions are

a global public good, CDM can help developed countries reach emission targets at a lower total

cost, by allowing developed country firms to substitute cheaper emissions reductions in

developing countries for more expensive reductions in the home country.                    For developing

countries, technology transfer and diffusion of clean technologies may be an additional benefit

from CDM.

           Related to technology transfer is a concern often raised by critics of CDM – the problem

of “low-hanging fruit.”9 The low-hanging fruit critique follows from the economic principle of

diminishing returns. Proponents of the “low-hanging fruit” theory worry that if developed
9
    See, for example, references in footnote 1 of Narain and van’t Veld (2008).
                                                                                                                31


countries receive credit now for performing the cheapest emissions reductions options in

developing countries, these options will be unavailable for later use by developing countries. As

such, these countries will be worse off when later attempting to reduce emissions on their own,

and will be less willing to agree to binding emissions reductions at a later date.10 In essence,

such projects move a country to a higher point on their marginal abatement cost curve, as shown

by the first marginal abatement cost curve (MAC0) in Figure 2.

                                  [INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]

        However, technology transfer can counteract the impact of diminishing returns. While it

is true that the costs of additional emissions reductions at a given time will increase as more

projects are completed, the arrival of new technologies provide new opportunities for emissions

reductions, so that the future costs of reducing emissions can be lower. As these technologies

become available in developing countries, the costs of emissions reductions will fall. This shift

will partially (MAC1 in Figure 2) or completely (MAC2 in Figure 2) offset the low-hanging fruit

problem. By lowering future marginal abatement costs, such technology transfers also increase

the possibility that developing countries will agree to future emission constraints.

        For CDM to help contribute to these falling costs, it is important that projects (a) include

a component of technology transfer, and (b) that this transfer include spillovers to the recipient

country, rather than just be a transfer of equipment, so that the benefits can potentially reduce

marginal abatement costs for future related projects.                Dechezleprêtre et al. (2008) provide

evidence of the potential of CDM to provide such benefits, asking how many CDM projects



10
  Note that developing countries can be compensated for future cost increases, so that CDM projects become
mutually beneficial. Indeed, since such projects require the voluntary agreement of all parties, one would expect
such compensation to take place (Narain and van’t Veld, 2008; Rose et al. 1999). However, even if compensation is
received, so that the recipient country isn’t made worse off, the developing country recipient may still delay
undertaking their own emissions reductions and participating in future treaties if the easiest options for lowering
emissions have already been exhausted.
                                                                                                                 32


transfer “hardware”, such as equipment or machinery, as opposed to “software”, which they

consider to be knowledge, skills, or know-how. That is, how often do CDM projects transfer

knowledge and skills that not only allow a developed country investor to meet emission

reduction credits, but also enable the recipient developing country to make continual

improvements to their own emission levels? Dechezleprêtre et al. look at 644 CDM projects

registered by the Executive Board of the UNFCCC. They find that 279 projects, or 43%, involve

technology transfer.11 Of these, 57 transfer equipment, 101 transfer knowledge, and 121 transfer

both equipment and knowledge. A project is more likely to include technology transfer if it is

larger, if the project developer is a subsidiary of a company in a developed country, and if the

project includes one or more carbon credit buyers. Before credits for a project can be sold, the

emission reductions must be certified. Because they have an interest in obtaining emission

credits, credit buyers help to facilitate this process. Emphasizing the importance of adaptive

R&D, Dechezleprêtre et al. find that the technological capacity of a country enhances technology

transfer, by making the recipient better able to absorb new knowledge.



IV. Conclusions

        Technological advances in the way that energy is generated and delivered will play an

important role in efforts to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions. As this review demonstrates,

well-designed climate policy can help shape the development of these technologies. These

policies must address market failures pertaining both to the environmental externalities of

greenhouse gas emissions and knowledge spillovers. This will require a menu of policy options.

Simply providing R&D support is not sufficient, as without environmental policy, there is little


11
  However, these projects are among the most significant CDM projects, as they account for 84% of the expected
emissions reductions from registered CDM projects.
                                                                                                 33


incentive to adopt clean technologies. At the same time, while broad-based environmental

policies such as a carbon tax or cap-and-trade scheme provide an overall framework for emission

reductions, this review suggests that other market failures remain important. Private firms will

focus on technologies most likely to generate short-term profits.         For instance, renewable

portfolio standards are likely to promote wind energy at the expense of solar, as wind is currently

the most cost-effective renewable option. Similarly, because improving electricity transmission

efficiency systems benefits all technologies, private innovators are likely able to capture only a

small portion of the social benefits of such innovation. Long-term benefits, spillovers, and

uncertain R&D returns all suggest a potential role for public R&D support, either through direct

financing or targeted policy incentives.

       Finally, once technologies are available, government intervention can also increase the

rate of diffusion relative to that in the private market. As the research in Section III shows, even

energy innovations with relatively short payback periods diffuse slowly. This suggests that

simply getting the prices right through policies such as a carbon tax will not be sufficient.

Moreover, while most clean technology research occurs in high-income countries, carbon

emissions are growing more rapidly in the developing world. As such, future policy efforts will

also need to pay more attention to the incentives provided for technology transfer across borders.
                                                                                             34


                                         Literature Cited

Acemoglu D. 2002. Directed technical change. Rev. Econ. Stud. 69: 781-809

Acemoglu D, Aghion P, Bursztyn L, Hemous D. 2009. The environment and directed technical

       change. NBER Working Paper #15451.

Anderson ST, Newell RG. 2004. Information programs for technology adoption: the case of

       energy-efficiency audits. Resource Energy Econ. 26 (1): 27-50

Barrett S. 2009. The coming global climate-Ttchnology revolution. J. Econ. Perspect. 23 (2): 53-

       75.

Bauman Y, Lee M, Seeley K. 2008. Does technological innovation really reduce marginal

       abatement costs? Some theory, algebraic evidence, and policy implications. Environ.

       Resource Econ. 40: 507–27

Bazelon C, Smetters K. 1999. Discounting inside the Washington beltway. J. Econ. Perspect. 13

       (4): 213-28

Binswanger H, Ruttan V. 1978. Induced Innovation: Technology Institutions and Development.

       Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD

Brunneimer S, Cohen M. 2003. Determinants of environmental innovation in US manufacturing

       industries. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 45: 278-93

Copeland BR, Taylor MS. 2003. Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence. Princeton

       University Press, Princeton, NJ

David P. 1997. A contribution to the theory of diffusion. In P. David, ed., Behind the Diffusion

       Curve. Westview Press, Boulder
                                                                                              35


Dechezleprêtre A, Glachant M, Hascic I, Johnstone N, Ménière Y. 2009. Invention and transfer

       of climate change mitigation technologies on a global scale: A study drawing on patent

       data. Work. Pap. CERNA, Paris, France

Dechezleprêtre A, Glachant M, Ménière M. 2008. The clean development mechanism and the

       international diffusion of technologies: An empirical study. Energy Pol. 36: 1273-83

Energy Information Administration. 2009. International Energy Outlook 2009, U.S. Department

       of Energy, Washington, DC.

Esty DC. 2001. Bridging the trade-environment divide. J. Econ. Perspect. 15 (3): 113-30

Fischer C. 2008. Emissions pricing, spillovers, and public investment in environmentally

       friendly technologies. Energy Econ. 30 (2): 487-502

Fischer C, Newell R. 2008. Environmental and technology policies for climate mitigation. J.

       Environ. Econ. Manage. 55 (2): 142-62

Fischer C, Parry IWH, Pizer WA. 2003. Instrument choice for environmental protection when

       technological innovation is endogenous. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 45 (3): 523–45

Fisher-Vanden K, Jefferson G, Ma J, Xu J. 2006. Technology development and energy

       productivity in China. Energy Econ. 28 (5/6): 690-705

Freeman R, Van Reenen J. 2009. What if Congress doubled R&D spending on the physical

       sciences? In Josh Lerner, Scott Stern, eds. Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 9,

       University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL

Gerlagh R. 2008. A climate-change policy induced shift from innovations in carbon-energy

       production to carbon-energy savings. Energy Econ. 30: 425-48

Gerlagh R, van der Zwaan B. 2006. Options and instruments for a deep cut in CO2 emissions:

       Carbon dioxide capture or renewables, taxes or subsidies? Energy J. 27 (3): 25-48
                                                                                           36


Geroski P. 1995. Markets for technology: Knowledge, innovation, and appropriability. In Paul

       Stoneman, ed, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, 90-

       131. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers

Gillingham K, Newell RG, Pizer WA. 2008. Modeling endogenous technological change for

       climate policy analysis. Energy Econ. 30 (6): 2734-53.

Griliches Z. 1957. Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technical change.

       Econometrica 48: 501-22

Hall BH. 1996. The private and social returns to research and development. In Smith and

       Barfield, eds., Technology, R&D and the Economy. The Brookings Institution and

       American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC 140-62

Hamamoto M. 2006. Environmental regulation and the productivity of Japanese manufacturing

       industries. Resource Energy Econ. 28: 299-312

Harrington W, Morgenstern RD, Nelson P. 2000. On the accuracy of regulatory cost estimates. J.

       Pol. Analysis Manage. 19 (2): 297-322

Hicks J. 1932. The Theory of Wages Macmillan, London

Hilton FH. 2001. Later abatement, faster abatement: Evidence and explanations from the global

       phaseout of leaded gasoline. J. Environ. Devel. 10 (3): 246-65

Holdren JP. 2006. The energy innovation imperative: Addressing oil dependence, climate

       change, and other 21st Century energy challenges. innovations. 1: 3-23

International Energy Agency. 2009a. How the Energy Sector Can Deliver on a Climate

       Agreement in Copenhagen, OECD/IEA, Paris, France.

International Energy Agency. 2009b. CO2 Emissions From Fuel Combustion, OECD/IEA, Paris,

       France.
                                                                                              37


International Energy Agency. 2008. CO2 Emissions From Fuel Combustion, OECD/IEA, Paris,

       France.

International Energy Agency. 2006. Renewable energy: RD&D priorities, insights from the IEA

       technology programmes, OECD/IEA, Paris, France.

IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth

       Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. B. Metz, O.R.

       Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer, eds. United Kingdom and New York, NY,

       Cambridge University Press, Cambridge

Jaffe AB. 1986. Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D:           Evidence from firms’

       patents, profits and market value. Amer. Econ. Rev. 76: 984-1001

Jaffe AB, Lerner Josh. 2001. Reinventing public R&D: Patent policy and the commercialization

       of national laboratory technologies. RAND J. Econ. 32 (1): 167-98

Jaffe AB, Palmer K. 1997. Environmental regulation and innovation: A panel data study. Rev.

       Econ. Statist. 79: 610-19

Jaffe AB, Stavins RN. 1994. The energy paradox and the diffusion of conservation technology.

       Resource Energy Econ. 16: 91-122

Jamasb T. 2007. Technical change theory and learning curves: Patterns of progress in electricity

       generation technologies. Energy J. 28 (3): 51-71

Johnstone N, Hascic I, Popp D. 2009. Renewable energy policies and technological innovation:

       Evidence based on patent counts. Environ. Resource Econ. In press

Jones C, Williams J. 1998. Measuring the social return to R&D. Quart. J. Econ. 113: 1119-35

Keller W. 2004. International technology diffusion. J. Econ. Lit. 42: 752-82

Kemp R. 1997. Environmental Policy and Technical Change. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar
                                                                                               38


Kerr S, Newell RG. 2003. Policy-induced technology adoption: Evidence from the U.S. lead

       phasedown. J. Ind. Econ. 51 (3): 317-43

Klaassen G, Miketa S, Larsen K, Sundqvist T. 2005. The impact of R&D on innovation for wind

       energy in Denmark, Germany and the United Kingdom. Ecological Econ. 54: 227-40

Lanjouw JO, Mody A. 1996. Innovation and the international diffusion of environmentally

       responsive technology. Res. Pol. 25: 549-71

Levin RC, Klevorick Alvin K, Nelson Richard R, Winter Sidney G. 1987. Appropriating the

       returns from industrial research and development. Brookings Papers on Economic

       Activity. 3: 783-820

Lovely M, Popp D. 2008. Trade, technology and the environment: Why do poorer countries

       regulate sooner? NBER Working Paper #14286

Magat WA. 1978. Pollution control and technological advance: A dynamic model of the firm. J.

       Environ. Econ. Manage. 5: 1-25

Magat WA. 1979. The effects of environmental regulation on innovation. Law Contemp. Prob.

       43: 3-25

Mansfield E. 1996. Estimating social and private returns from innovations based on the

       Advanced Technology Program: Problems and opportunities. NIST GCR 99-780.

       Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology

Mansfield E. 1977. Social and private rates of return from industrial innovations. Quart. J. Econ.

       91: 221-40

McDonald A, Schrattenholzer L. 2000. Learning rates for energy technologies. Energy Pol. 29:

       255-61
                                                                                            39


Milliman SR, Prince R. 1989. Firm incentives to promote technological change in pollution

       control. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 17: 247-65

Narain Urvashi, van’t Veld Klaas. 2008. The Clean Development Mechanism’s low-hanging

       fruit problem: When might it arise and how might it be solved? Environ. Resource Econ.

       40: 445-65

National Research Council. 2001. Energy Research at DOE: Was it Worth It? National Academy

       Press

National Science Board. 2008. Science and Engineering Indicators 2008. Arlington, VA:

       National Science Foundation. Chapter 4: Research and Development: Funds and

       Technology Linkages

National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resources Statistics. 2008. Research and

       Development in Industry: 2004. Detailed Statistical Tables NSF 09-301. Arlington, VA.

       Available at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf09301/

Newell R, Jaffe A, Stavins R. 1999. The induced innovation hypothesis and energy-saving

       technological change. Quart. J. Econ. 114 (3): 941-75

Pakes A. 1985. On patents, R&D, and the stock market rate of return. J. Polit. Economy. 93 (2):

       390-409

Popp D. 2009. Exploring the links between innovation and diffusion: Adoption of NOX control

       technologies at U.S. coal-fired power plants. Environ. Resource Econ. Forthcoming

Popp D. 2006a. R&D subsidies and climate policy: Is there a ‘free lunch’? Climatic Change 77

       (3-4): 311-41
                                                                                             40


Popp D. 2006b. International innovation and diffusion of air pollution control technologies: The

       effects of NOX and SO2 regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany. J. Environ. Econ.

       Manage. 51 (1): 46-71

Popp D. 2006c. They don't invent them like they used to: An examination of energy patent

       citations over time. Econ. Innovation New Tech. 15 (8): 753-76

Popp D. 2004. ENTICE: Endogenous technological change in the DICE model of global

       warming. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 48: 742-68

Popp D. 2003. Pollution control innovations and the Clean Air Act of 1990. J. Pol. Analysis

       Manage. 22: 641-60

Popp D. 2002. Induced innovation and energy prices. Amer. Econ. Rev. 92 (1): 160-80

Popp D, Newell RG. 2009. Where does energy R&D come from? Examining Crowding Out

       from Environmentally-Friendly R&D. NBER Working Paper #15423

Popp D, Newell RG, Jaffe AB. 2009. Energy, the environment, and technological change. NBER

       Working Paper #14832, (forthcoming in the Handbook of Economics of Innovation.)

Rose A, Bulte E, Folmer H. 1999. Long-run implications for developing countries of joint

       implementation of greenhouse gas mitigation. Environ. Resource Econ. 14: 19-31.

Rose N, Joskow P. 1990. The diffusion of new technologies: Evidence from the electric utility

       industry. RAND J. Econ. 21: 354-73

Schneider S, Goulder L. 1997. Commentary: achieving low-cost emissions targets. Nature 389 (4

       September): 13-4

Snyder LD, Miller NH, Stavins RN. 2003. The effects of environmental regulation on

       technology diffusion: The case of chlorine manufacturing. Amer. Econ. Rev. 93 (2): 431-

       35
                                                                                             41


Söderholm P, Klaassen G. 2007. Wind power in Europe: A simultaneous innovation-diffusion

       model. Environ. Resource Econ. 36: 163-90

Söderholm P, Sundqvist T. 2007. Empirical challenges in the use of learning curves for assessing

       the economic prospects of renewable energy technologies. Renewable Energy. 32: 2559-

       78

Taylor MR, Rubin ES, Hounshell DH. 2003. Effect of government actions on technological

       innovation for SO2 Control. Environ. Sci. Tech. 37: 4527-34

Ulph D. 1998. Environmental policy and technological innovation. In: C. Carraro and D.

       Siniscalaco, eds. Frontiers of Environmental Economics Edward Elgar, Cheltenhsam, UK
                                                                                                42



     Figure 1 – Number of EPO Patent Applications for Renewables by Type of Technology




Source: Based on data from Johnstone et al. (2009)

The figure shows the number of European Patent Office (EPO) applications for patents

pertaining to various renewable energy technologies, sorted by the year of application. Patent

counts for wind and solar technologies are on the left vertical axis, with counts for the remaining

technologies on the right vertical axis.
                                                                                                 43


                  Figure 2 – Low-Hanging Fruit and Knowledge Spillovers

    $
                                                               MAC0




                                                                    MAC1




         $1                                                                    MAC2




         $0




                        A0            A1
                                                                        Emission
                                                                        Reductions
                                                                        (Abatement)


In Figure 2, the marginal abatement cost curve MAC0 represents the costs associated with current
technologies in developing countries. Initial abatement levels are A0, with marginal costs $0. A
sponsored project increases abatement to A1, raising the marginal abatement cost to $1. As a
result, future abatement efforts by developing countries will cost more – the “low-hanging fruit”
effect. This cost increase can be offset if technology transfer results in spillovers that lower the
marginal abatement cost. Here, MAC1 represents a shift which partially offsets the “low-
hanging fruit” effect, while MAC2 represents a shift where new technologies completely offset
the “low-hanging fruit” effect, so that further abatement is possible at a marginal abatement cost
less than $0.
