                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  PEER MIGRATION IN CHINA

                                            Yuyu Chen
                                           Ginger Zhe Jin
                                             Yang Yue

                                        Working Paper 15671
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15671


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




This project is a collaborative effort with a local government of China. We would like to thank Hongbin
Cai, Wei Li, Brian Viard, Roger Betancourt, Loren Brandt, Judy Hellerstein, John Ham, Matthew
Chesnes, Seth Sanders, V. Joseph Hotz, Duncan Thomas, Francisca Antman and Hillel Rapoport for
helpful comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Yuyu Chen, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Yang Yue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Peer Migration in China
Yuyu Chen, Ginger Zhe Jin, and Yang Yue
NBER Working Paper No. 15671
January 2010, Revised September 2010
JEL No. J6,O12,R23

                                               ABSTRACT

We aim to quantify the role of social networks in job-related migration. With over 130 million rural
labors migrating to the city each year, China is experiencing the largest internal migration in the human
history. Using instrumental variables in the 2006 China Agricultural Census, we find that a 10-percentage-point
increase in the migration rate of co-villagers raises one's migration probability by 7.27 percent points,
an effect comparable to an increase of education by 7-8 years. Evidence suggests that most of this
effect is driven by co-villagers helping each other in moving cost and job search at the destination.


Yuyu Chen                                              Yang Yue
Guanghua School of Management and IEPR                 Guanghua School of Management
Peking University                                      Peking University
Beijing, China                                         Beijing, China 100871
chenyuyu@gsm.pku.edu.cn                                shananyueyang@gmail.com

Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu
1. Introduction
         In the past 20 years, China has witnessed an explosive growth of labor migration. Cai (1996)
estimates that 34.1 million workers had left their rural home for urban jobs in 1990. This number
increased to 67 million in 1999 (Huang and Pieke 2003), 131.81 million in 2006, and 140.41 million in
2008.1 According to Young (2003), a rising labor participation rate, most of which is attributable to the
transfer of labor out of agriculture, accounts for nearly one-ninth of the 7.8% annual GDP growth of
China.2 However, due to residence permit and other institutional barriers in China, most migrating
workers do not migrate permanently to the city (Zhao 1999a & 1999b). They leave families at home and
travel between rural home and urban job every year. This leads to a number of social issues including
traffic congestion, lack of labor protection, child development problems, elderly care, and a link of macro
risks between origin and destination.3 To better understand these implications, it is important to examine
not only what factors drive migration but also the relative importance of these factors.
         Using China as an example, this paper aims to quantify the role of social networks in job-related
migration. Classical theories argue that an individual will migrate if the discounted present value of
income gains exceeds the cost of migration (Sjaastad 1962 and Becker 1975). These models emphasize
geographic attributes (e.g. distance to destination), individual characteristics (e.g. age and education) and
market factors (e.g. wage gap and land ownership).4 A more recent literature explores the role of social
interactions in migration. In theory, social networks could generate a snowball effect in the dynamic
pattern of migration (Carrington et al. 1996), but empirical evidence on the causal effects of social
network is difficult to establish, partly because of data limit, partly because people in the same social
network may influence each other thus subject to a well known “reflection” problem (Manski 1993).
         Migrants, when asked directly, often cite social network as one of the major reasons for labor
migration. Conversely, potential migrants often cite lack of social networks as a hurdle of migration.5
Either way, the survey evidence is qualitative and does not precisely measure the effects of social
networks. In complement, several papers have attempted to identify the role of social networks from

1
  The latter two numbers are based on National Bureau of Statistics reports accessed at
http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjgb/nypcgb/qgnypcgb/t20080227_402464718.htm and
http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjfx/fxbg/t20090325_402547406.htm on September 1, 2010. In these reports, migrating
workers are defined as rural labors that have migrated for jobs out of the residential township for at least one months
during the calendar year.
2
  Young (2003) calculates the annual 7.8% GDP growth based on published data from 1978 to 1998. He shows that
the deflated annual growth is 6.1%, of which 0.9% can be attributable to the increase of labor participation. 0.9% is
approximately one-nine of 7.8%.
3
  For example, the Chinese railway system has accommodated 192 million passenger-trips during the 40-day rush of
2009. A significant part of the traffic is driven by rural migrants going home before the Spring Festival and
returning to urban work after the festival ( http://news.xinhuanet.com/newscenter/2009-
02/19/content_10849579.htm).
4
  See surveys of migration in Rosenzweig (1988), Borjas (1994) and Lucas (1997).
5
   See evidence in Hare and Zhao (2000), Mallee (2000), Meng (2000), Chen (2005), and Du, Park and Wang (2005).


                                                          2
observational data (Munshi 2003, Mckenzie and Rapoport 2007, Woodruff and Zenteno 2007, Chen et al.
2008). To separate social networks from confounding factors, they use historical rainfall or historical
migration rate of the sending community as an instrument (IV) for previous migrants. Strictly speaking,
these community-level IVs could affect both previous and current migrants in the same social network,
hence does not solve the identification problem.
         Individual-level data plus the institutional context of China allow us to better identify the effects
of social networks on whether and where to migrate. Based on 5.9 million individual observations from
the 2006 China Agriculture Census, we presumably observe every one that has a residential permit
(hukou) in a continuous rural area, including those who have migrated for remote jobs. Because many
agricultural, governmental and social activities are organized by village, Chinese village is a natural unit
of social network. We refer to people residing in the same village as co-villagers, neighbors or peers.6
         When a villager migrates to the city and comes back for holiday or family visit, the information
he has about the destination spreads out fast to the co-villagers. Since many Chinese cities impose barrier
to entry for rural migrants, having an acquaintance at the destination implies a substantial reduction of
moving cost. These arguments suggest that migrants should cluster by village. Consistently, we observe
migration rate varies greatly across nearby villages but migrants from the same village tend to cluster at
the same destination for the same industrial sector. The degree of clustering is much more significant
within a village than across villages in the same county or in the same township.
         Of course, a cluster of economic actions does not necessarily imply one’s action affects the action
of other people in the same network. Clustered migration may be driven by villagers having similar
individual characteristics or facing similar institutional environments. Even if we rule out these correlated
effects, the migration decision of one villager may add peer pressure on non-migrants or create general
equilibrium effects within the village (e.g. land redistribution), both of which could influence the
migration of co-villagers. How to distinguish these alternative explanations from the role of social
networks in information and cost sharing is the main challenge of our empirical analysis.
         We construct individual-level IVs that arguably affect individual A’s migration decision but not
that of B directly except for the social interactions between A and B. Specifically, in order to
accommodate boy preference in rural areas, the central government of China issued “Document 7” on
April 13, 1984, allowing rural households to have a second baby if the first child is a girl. Not only does
this policy minimize sex selection on the firstborns7, it also implies that rural households with a girl
firstborn are more likely to have a second child and less likely to have any boy. Because of this effect on


6
  Later, we also expand the “peer” definition to people in the same township or narrow “peers” to villagers with
same age, gender, education or surname.
7
  Sex selection may take several forms ranging from selective abortion, abandon of newborns, to infanticide.


                                                         3
family size and children’s gender composition, having a girl firstborn tends to encourage adult males
(fathers, grandfathers, uncles) to migrate but hinder adult females (mothers, grandmothers, aunties) from
migration. Based on these empirical patterns, we construct IVs for neighbors’ migration decision using
the gender of neighbors’ firstborn and the number of male and female labors in neighboring households.
The key assumption is that one household’s fertility outcome and family structure do not directly affect
the migration decision of its neighbors. To validate this assumption, we consider a number of scenarios
that may violate this assumption and perform robustness check accordingly.
           Our IV results suggest that 10 percentage point increase in the percent of neighbors migrating out
of a village will increase one’s own migration probability by 7.27 percentage points. This effect is
comparable to an increase of education by 7-8 years.8 The importance of peer migration is also reflected
in dynamics. If we ignore other long run considerations (e.g. aging), simulation shows that a village
starting with a 1% of migration in the first year will reach a migration rate of 6% by the fifth year and
over 60% by the eleventh year.
           Social interactions may arise because co-villagers use social network to reduce moving cost and
obtain job information at the destination, or because of peer pressure and general equilibrium effects at
the origin. These two explanations can be separated because only the former implies that (1) migrants
from the same village cluster at the same destination for the same type of jobs, and (2) the strength of the
social interactions is greater for the origins that are more deprived of job information. We find evidence
on both predictions: there is a strong within-village cluster by destination and industrial sector, and the
impact of peer migration is greater in origins that are further away from the provincial capital. After
ruling out organized migration as the third explanation, we conclude that social network is the dominant
force driving migration clusters. At the end of the paper, we argue that clustered migration could have
profound implications on a number of socio-economic issues in China.
           The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief literature review. Section
3 describes the background and data. Section 4 lays out a basic specification and reports the IV results.
Section 5 separates the social network effects in cost and information sharing from other explanations.
Section 6 simulates the snowball effect of peer migration and discusses the implications that clustered
migration may have on rural and urban development. A brief conclusion is offered in Section 7.


2. Literature Review
           The existing literature has stressed the importance of social networks in both migration and job
search, but empirical evidence lags behind theory. In job search, Calvo-Armengol and Jackson (2004)
show that job information sharing within a social network can explain why employment rate varies across

8
    The average education of adult labor in our data is 7 years.


                                                             4
networks, why unemployment rate persists in some networks, and why inequality across networks can be
long lasting. Their model implies that a public policy that provides incentives to reduce initial labor
market dropout could have a positive and persistent effect on future employment. 9 In a similar spirit,
Carrington et al. (1996) establish a dynamic model of labor migration in which earlier migrants help later
migrants to reduce moving costs at the same destination. In their model, migration occurs gradually but
develops momentum over time. It explains why migration tends to cluster by geography and why
migratory flows may increase even as wage differentials narrow.
           In comparison, numerous facts of migration are consistent with the social network theory, but
causal links are difficult to establish. For example, many surveys find that having friends or relatives at
the destination is positively correlated with one’s migration decision (Caces et al. 1985, Taylor 1986,
Zhao 2003). On life after migration, US immigrants are shown to be more geographically concentrated
than natives of the same age and ethnicity and often employed together (Bartel 1989, LaLonde and Topel
1991). All these findings suggest that peer migrants may help improve job information and reduce
moving costs. But they are also consistent with the alternative explanation that kins, friends, and co-
villagers share common preferences and therefore make similar migration decisions.
           Researchers have used three ways to identify social network effects from confounding factors:
one is controlling for a large number of group fixed effects (say census block group as in Bayer et al.
2008) and then exploring employment cluster by a smaller unit (say census block) within the controlled
group. The underlying assumption is that there is no unit-level correlation in unobserved individual
attributes after taking into account the broader group. 10 This method alone is unlikely to succeed here, as
co-villagers may have similar unobserved attributes and these attributes are likely to differ across villages.
           The second approach hinges on random assignment of neighbors. For example, the Moving to
Opportunity (MTO) program provides housing vouchers to a randomly selected group of poor families in
five US cities. Instead of examining whether an exogenous change of neighborhood affects individual
behavior and economic outcomes (Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007), we focus on closely-knit, long-
established networks (village) and examines how an exogenous shock to some members of a network
affect the behavior of others in the same network.
            We follow the third identification approach of instrumental variables (IV). We argue below that,
under careful sampling, one’s firstborn outcome and family structure are related to one’s own migration
decision but do not affect neighbors directly. Similar identification strategy has been pursued in settings
other than migration and social network effects (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1980, Angrist and Evans 1998,



9
    See Ioannides and Loury (2004) for a detailed review on the effects of social networks in job search.
10
     Similar identification strategy has been used in Aizer and Currie (2004) and Bertrand et al. (2000).


                                                            5
Maurin and Moschion 2009, and Qian 2009).11 Within the migration literature, our IVs are more suitable
for identifying the social network effects than several community-level IVs used before. For example,
Munshi (2003) uses rainfall in the origin as an IV for the prevalence of Mexico migrants from that origin
in the US, and finds that the more established migrants there are, the better the employment status is for a
new migrant from the same village. As Munshi (2003) acknowledges, lagged rainfall may affect current
employment outcomes at the origin hence the current migration decision. This is why he focuses on the
network effect on employment conditional on a person has migrated to the US, not the migration decision
itself. Mckenzie and Rapoport (2007) use historic migration rate as an IV for the stock of migration in the
sending village and study how migration prevalence affects an individual’s current migration decision and
the income inequality within the village. To the extent that historic migration rate (like historical rainfall)
affects everyone at the origin, it is difficult to distinguish it from other unobserved village attribute. In
comparison, our IVs vary across both villages and individuals. After using IVs, we are similar to Bayer et
al. (2008) in that we examine whether the destination and industrial sector of migrants indicate any social
network effects by controlling for the fixed effects of a larger area (county or township).
        Chen et al. (2008) use a smaller dataset and a different IV to address the same research question
as in this paper. Denoting the individual under study as A, their IV is the political identity of A’s father in
the Mao era. While this variable is likely correlated with A’s social ties within the same village (hence
A’s migration decision if social ties matter), it is unclear why it is correlated with the neighbors’
migration tendency and why it should be excluded from the main regression. Since Chen et al. (2008) do
not report the IV coefficients, we cannot compare our IV results with theirs. But our OLS results are
similar to theirs, suggesting that the findings reported in our study is not specific to our sample area.


3. Background and Data
        Labor market Appendix A describes the trend of rural-to-urban migration and the restrictions
that migrants face under the hukou system. Despite the large flow of migrants, rural and urban workers
are not close substitutes (Zhao 2005 and Cai, Park and Zhao forthcoming). Most rural-to-urban migrants
are unskilled, do not have families in the city, and concentrate in dangerous, dirty or low-pay jobs.
        The labor market for rural-to-urban migrants is also plagued by the lack of information. After
surveying 439 rural migrants in the city of Chang Sha in Spring 2004, Chen (2005) finds that most

        11
            Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) use twins as an exogenous shock to study of the quantity-
quality tradeoff in family fertility; Angrist and Evans (1998) use the sex composition of the two eldest
siblings as an instrument to identify the effect of family size on mother’s labor market participation; and
Maurin and Moschion (2009) studies a French mother’s labor market participation in association with neighbors’
participation, using the sex composition of neighbor’s eldest siblings as the IV. In a recent study that evaluates
the effect of family size on school enrollment, Qian (2009) instruments family size by the interaction of
an individual’s sex, date of birth and region of birth.


                                                        6
migrants found the job via informal channels: 57.2% relied on the introduction of relatives, friends, or
migrants from the same origin; 13.2% contacted potential employers directly; 6.1% responded to
employer recruitment (excluding mass media ads); 1.9% were self-employed; and only 1.4% found a job
via advertisements on TV, newspapers or billboards. The fraction of government-organized migration is
even smaller (0.5%). When asked how easy it is to find a job in the city, 44.5% answered difficult or very
difficult. For the biggest hurdle of job search, 38.3% mentioned the lack of a social network and 25.1%
mentioned the lack of job information. Instead of surveying people that have migrated to the city, Du,
Park and Wang (2005) asked 582 rural households in four western counties to list the most important
factors that affected their migration decision in 2000. The lack of information and social networks is the
third most mentioned factor determining men’s migration, lagging behind agricultural labor demand and
low education. 12 As an indirect evidence for the help of social networks, Bao et al. (2007) find that inter-
province migration rate increases with the size of the same-origin migrant network in the destination.
         Local governments play a limited role in matching rural migrants and urban employers. For
example, most government organized job markets are held in a conference center within the city. Rural
migrants must go to the city first before attending these job markets. At the other end, origin governments
could contact far-away employers and organize rural residents to migrate conditional on job offers. But
according to the 2003 rural survey conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics, only 3.3% of the 113.9
million rural migrants were employed via government-organized migration (Jian 2005). The rest relied on
friends and relatives (41.3%) or self search (55.4%). These numbers suggests that social networks and
other informal channels play a dominant role in determining whether, when and where to migrate.
         Probably because of the information problem (and lack of labor protection for migrants), 2004
witnessed a significant shortage of migrating labor. According to the estimates from the Department of
Labor in September 2004, roughly 10% of positions were left unfilled in the Pearl River triangle area and
the labor shortage was concentrated in low-pay, skillful, and labor-intensive jobs such as toy and
electronic assembly. This event suggests that many employers in coastal provinces did not foresee the
short supply of migrant labor. In response, the central government issued a new policy in 2006 aiming to
improve job information and training opportunities for migrating labor. In Section 5, we will discuss
whether government-organized migration is a valid explanation for the observed migration patterns.



12
   The four most important factors for men are (1) agricultural labor demand (25.9 percent), lack of education or
skills (25.3 percent), lack of information and social networks (18.3 percent), and inability to finance transportation
and search costs (14.1 percent).. The three most important factors for women are (1) unwillingness to be separated
from children (46.2 percent), agricultural labor demand (21.0 percent), and lack of education or skills (12.7 percent).




                                                          7
         Fertility policy Since 1984, the central government allows rural households to have a second
child if the firstborn is a girl, but leaves policy implementation to local governments. Appendix B
describes the implementation guidance in our data province. The second-child policy has several
implications. First, there should be little gender selection in the firstborns if every family with a girl
firstborn is allowed to have more children. 13 Second, conditional on a girl firstborn, households with a
strong boy preference will increase family size and try to get a boy in the second birth. Both implications
are confirmed in Ebenstein (2009). He shows that the sex of firstborn is balanced (51% being boy) and
has changed little between 1982 and 2000, hence the imbalance between male and female as observed in
Sen (1990) is mostly driven by gender selection for the second and later-borns. As detailed in Section 4,
the gender-specific fertility policy generate exogenous variations in family size and gender composition
of children, which are important factors to be considered in one’s migration decision but not that of
neighbors. This allows us to use the outcome of neighbors’ firstborn to construct IV for neighbors’
migration. As documented in Li, Zhang, and Zhu (2005), China’s one-child policy is only applicable to
the Hans, which represent 92% of the Chinese population. We do not know whether an individual is a
minority or not but we do know whether a village is a gathering place for minorities. Later on we report
robustness checks excluding minority villages.
         Data Description The National Bureau of Statistics of China has organized local governments to
conduct two rounds of the China Agricultural Census (CAC) in 1996 and 2006 respectively. The CAC is
designed to cover every individual that resided or had registered residence in every village at the time of
interview. The exhaustive nature of CAC allows us to have a clear boundary of social networks by
village. It also allows us to test if a boarder definition of social network yields different results.
         Drawn from the 2006 CAC, our data cover all the rural residents in a poor area of China as of
December 31, 2006. In collaboration with the local government, we are not allowed to reveal the
geographic location, but the studied area belongs to an inland province whose per capita income is
significantly lower than the national average. In total, we observe 5.9 million individuals in 1.4 million
households and 3,986 villages. These villages belong to 250 townships and spread across 8 counties. The
                                                         2                                       2
size of the whole census area is roughly 16,000 km total, with on average area of 4 km per village.
Compared to other migration data that often contain a limited sample of households from a small number
of communities14, we can define who and who are in the same network, the demographics of network



13
   In theory, the policy may even encourage sex selection towards girl in the firstborn, but such selection is unlikely
to happen in our study area given (1) the strong boy preference and (2) the large faction having a second child after a
boy firstborn (despite fines).
14
   For example, the Mexican Migration Project used in both Munshi (2003) and Mckenzie and Rapoport (2007)
surveys 57 rural communities and 200 households per community. The data used in Chen et al. (2008) – the 2002


                                                             8
members, and the migration decision of each member. The exhaustive nature of the data allows us to
measure the migration rate of neighbors more precisely.
         The main part of the data was collected at the household level. The household head was asked to
enter information for every family member. If a resident was away from home at the time of interview,
his/her information was still collected from the household.15 By this design, we observe detailed
household information including how many individuals reside in the household, their relationship to the
household head, their age and gender composition, the amount of contract land, the amount of land in use,
ownership of housing, the self-estimated value of house(s), ownership of durable goods, the availability
of electricity, water and other amenities, the number of household members that receive government
subsidies, and engagement in various agricultural activities. Individual level data are limited to age, sex,
education, employment, industrial sector, and the number of months away from home for out-of-township
employment in 2006. Since a child in the studied area may get married as early as 17 and daughters often
leave their own home after marriage, we restrict the child definition to age 0-16.
         One data complication is that, although for over 99% of households we can infer spouse- or
parent-child relationship via his/her reported relationship to the household head, we may not observe all
the adult children (age at or above 17) because some of them may have married away and established
their own households. This is a common problem in household surveys (see for example Angrist and
Evans 1998). In our data, 9.99% of the households report three or more generations, 82.03% report two
generations, and 7.98% report one generation. Out of the 1.19 million households that have at least two
generations, 0.856 million (or 71.69%) report children under age 16. To minimize the potential missing
problem of adult children, our IV construction focuses on the 0.661 million households that report the
oldest child (living in the households) at or under age 16. For the other households, we code each adult’s
own fertility information as missing. 16
         We argue that the missing-adult-children problem does not prevent us from calculating the
average percentage of multiple birth or the average gender of firstborns at the village level, as long as the
real values of these variables are uncorrelated with whether a household reports a child over age 16 or
not. This is a reasonable assumption because the missing values are mostly driven by the age and cohort
of the adults under study. To justify this assumption, we will present results including only the
households that have household head’s age at or under 35. We also report results including only two-adult


Chinese Household Income Project Survey -- covers more counties than our data (121) but their sample consists of
9200 households in 961 villages. This implies that on average they observe no more than 10 households per village.
15
   If a whole household has migrated but still holds hukou in the village, the village head will fill the form for the
household.
16
   To be precise, out of the 576352 adult labors for which we code the gender of firstborn as missing, 576101 (or
99.96%) is because they report a child over age 16 and therefore we cannot determine with the reported oldest child
is the real oldest child.


                                                          9
families, to address the less than 1% possibility that a household structure may be too complicated for us
to infer who is whose child. Another implication from the lack of full fertility history is that our village-
average calculation for both peer migration rate and its instruments may introduce large measurement
errors if the village is small. We drop 36 (<1%) villages that have less than 100 adults of age 17-60.
         Supplemental data were collected at the village level including the size of the village in both
arable land and registered population, whether the village is a place for minority gathering, the distance to
the nearest bus station17, access to water, electricity and other amenities, and whether the village has a
national poverty status (as designated by the Central government). 18 The data also include several
township level variables, including the number and nature of township-village-enterprises, the distance
between the township and county center, whether there is a highway exit within the boundary of the
township, and registered population of the township.
         Above all, the 2006 CAC data is especially suitable for studying social network effects in
migration because we observe one’s own migration as well as the migration decision of almost all the
other adults in the same village. One shortcoming is that we only observe the migration decision at the
time of data collection and cannot identify who have migrated long before 2006 and who just started to
migrate in 2006. For this reason, the social network effects identified in this study only reflect a cluster of
self and peer migration, which could be driven by a group of adults migrating together or some migrants
migrating early and then helping others to migrate afterwards. Similarly, we only observe where a
migrant migrates to as of December 31, 2006; we don’t know whether s/he has moved directly to the
destination, or stepwise from the village to an intermediary location first and then from to the destination.
         Sample Construction We focus on adults between age 17 and 60. Individuals that have non-rural
Hukou and in-school students are dropped from the sample. Dropping 36 villages that have less than 100
adults, our final sample consists of 3.3 million adults in 3950 villages. These villages belong to eight
counties, which allow us to examine village-by-village differences within each county. In theory, we can
also impose township fixed effects and focus on village variations within the same township. However,
since on average we have only 15 villages per township and these villages are geographically adjacent to
each other, township fixed effects will absorb a large amount of heterogeneity across villages. This could
be unnecessary given our IV strategy. In light of this, we control for township variables in the main
specification (with county fixed effects) but apply township fixed effects for a robustness check.
         The CAC questionnaire asks explicitly how many months a respondent has been away from the
residential village for out-of-township employment during 2006. One month away from home is defined

17
   The exact question is to the nearest bus/rail/dock station, but there is no railway station or major river in the
studied area.
18
   Due to potential measurement errors in the registered population, we calculate the number of adults per village
from our study sample and use it to proxy village population.


                                                          10
as being away for more than 15 days in that month. Based on this question, we define an adult as a
“migrant” if s/he has been away for at least one month in 2006. This definition yields 17.08% of adults in
our sample being migrants in 2006. As shown in Appendix Figure A2, the majority of migrants report that
they stay away from home for at least 10 months a year. This suggests that most migrants live and work
in a far-away place and only come back home for short visits. An alternative definition of migration as
six-or-more months away from home renders very similar results. Each migrant is also required to report
the migration destination and industrial sector. Destination is reported by whether the migrant works in or
out of the studied area if it is within the same province, and by province if it is out of the studied province.
Industrial sector is reported in the category of manufacturing, construction, services, or other.
         Data Summary Table 1 reports summary statistics for major migration destinations. In addition
to the percent of migrants going to each destination, we report the number of bus/railway hours needed to
transport to each destination from the center of the studied area19, as well as the relative income across
destinations. Scaling the 2006 per (rural) capita income of the studied area to one, Table 1 shows that
almost all the destinations have significantly higher per capita income than the studied area; some are
even eight or ten times higher.20 Consistent with the literature, the most attractive destinations are either
high-income or within a short distance. However, income gap and distance do not explain everything. For
example, destination F has the highest income per capita in the list. The next highest-income destination
(A) is almost the same distance from the sampled area as F, but the percent of migrants to A (27.86%) is
much higher than to F (1.92%). Apparently other forces are at work when people decide where to migrate.
         Appendix Table A1 reports summary statistics for the individual, household, village, and
township-level variables by migration status. Consistent with the literature, migrants are on average 10
years younger, have one more year of schooling, and are more likely to be male and the head of
household. Figure 1 reports the percent of migration by age and gender. It is clear that young adults aged
20-25 are most likely to migrate. Migration tendency declines sharply after age 30. The percent of
migration is similar for men and women before age 22, but men are significantly more likely to migrate
after 22, probably because married women stay home for childbearing, child care and elderly care.
         It is worth noting that both migrants and non-migrants have a similar percent of girl firstborn
(both 49%) on average, which raises a concern that the gender of girl firstborn may not have enough
statistical power to be a good IV. As shown later, this impression is incorrect because a girl firstborn have
opposite effects on adult males and females: female labors are less likely to migrate conditional on having

19
   Since there is no railway station in the studied area, we first compute the bus hours from the area center to the
province capital and add that to the number of railway hours from the province capital to other provinces.
20
   The comparison is based on China National Statistical Book, so the income difference may reflect differences in
observable attributes. For example, a rural migrant to A may not expect to earn the average income in A because he
is less educated and does not have full access to all the job opportunities of his education level due to hukou
requirement in some city jobs. In this sense, Table 1 is only suggestive.


                                                         11
a girl firstborn while male labors are more likely to migrate. As Table A2 does not distinguish male and
female labors, it is not surprising to see a similar percent of girl firstborn in migrants and non-migrants.
           In terms of family structure, Table A2 shows that migrants are more likely to come from a
household that has fewer children under age 16. Interestingly, the probability of having any boy is 41%
for migrating households, which is much lower than that of non-migrants (51%). This difference suggests
that migration may be related to the boy preference, as parents that prefer boys may want to give better
child care to boys, or parents with boys may feel less necessary to work and save for themselves because
their sons will provide elderly care in the future. Table 4 explores these channels in more details.
           As expected, both capital ownership and ease to transport differ between migrants and non-
migrants. Migrants are more likely to have a lower house value and some outstanding loans, but their
contracted land (at the household level) is no less than that of non-migrants. The latter is masked by the
difference in the number of adults within a household. At the village level, migrants do have less land per
adult. As we would expect, migrants have less land in use than non-migrants because they spend the
most time away from home. In terms of transportation, migrants are 13% closer 21 to the nearest bus
station, and they are more likely to live in a village with more access to drivable road.
           Migration clusters All the social network theories predict heterogeneity across networks, Figure
2 shows that migration rate per village ranges widely from 0% to 50%. For the same reason, Panel D of
Table A2 reports by one’s migration status the percent of co-villagers that migrate in 2006 excluding
adults in own household. Clearly, migrants are more likely to come from high-migration villages.
           Our first attempt to separate social interactions from omitted variables is taking a village as the
unit of observation and regressing migration percentage per village on village level variables including
village population, whether the village is a poverty village, whether the village is a minority gathering
place, average house value, average people per household, average age, average gender, land per
household, average education of adults, distance to the nearest bus/rail/dock station, and township fixed
effects. With an R-square of 0.578, this regression suggests that village-level observables only explain
57.8% of the cross-village variation in migration. Figure 3 plots the histogram of residuals. The
comparable dispersion of Figures 2 and 3 confirms that a large fraction of across-village migration
variations are driven by something else other than fundamental socio-economic difference across villages.
           The cluster pattern of migration is more striking if we examine the distribution of migrating
destination and industrial sector within each village. For example, the first row of Table 2 shows that, if
we single out the most common industrial sector within each village, 75.1% of same-village migrants
work in that sector. This number is much higher than what we would get if we repeat the exercise by
township (51.93%), county (46.12%) or the whole area (46.48%). Similarly, the percent of migrants to

21
     This percentage is computed by 1- (avg distance of migrants)/(avg distance of non-migrants) = 1-5.35/6.16.


                                                          12
the most common destination is more concentrated by village (63.8%) than by township (39.82%), county
(31.86%), or the whole area (27.86%). The rest of Table 2 shows that same-village migrants are more
clustered by the combination of destination, sector and surname than migrants from the same township or
the same county. All these statistics support the conjecture that each village is a closely-knit social
network and people interact with each other much more within the village than across villages. Given the
facts that the average area per village is only 4 km2 and villages in the same township are adjacent by
definition, the migration clusters shown here is similar to the employment clusters documented in Bayer
et al. (2008). In Bayer et al. (2008), workers residing in the same census block tend to work in the same
census block, as compared to residents of nearby census blocks. However, unlike Bayer et al. (2008), we
use IV to further control for potential omitted village attributes.
        The last panel of Table A2 reports summary statistics for the percent of same-village adults that
have a girl firstborn (conditional on the first birth is not a multiple), and the percent of same-village adults
whose first birth is a multiple, both excluding adults in own household. Although the mean of these two
variables are only different in the third decimal point across migrants and non-migrants, the t-statistics for
the test of equal mean is very large (777.1 and 52.4) thanks to the large sample. As shown in Table 4, the
correlation between one’s migration decision and whether this individual has a girl firstborn is highly
significant, once we account for the gender of the adult under study.


4 Basic Specification with Instruments
        For an individual i in household h, village v, township t and county k, the basic specification is:
                  yi  k   xi   xh   xv  xt   yi|v   i                                    (1)

where yi is a binary variable indicating whether individual i is a migrant in 2006;  k denotes county

fixed effects; xi denotes i’s individual attributes such as age, gender, year of schooling, whether the

firstborn singleton is a girl, whether the first birth is multiple, whether the second birth is multiple, as well
as the minimum and maximum ages of own children. As discussed before, the variables on own children
have missing values because some individuals do not have first or second birth, some individuals report
children over age 16 which by our definition entails missing for firstborns, or some family structures are
too complicated to pin down who is whose child (less than 1% of the sample). Later we show robustness
checks using the sample of household heads under age 35 or the sample of two-adult families only.
        We control for a long list of household attributes in xh , partly because most of our demographic

variables are collected at the household level, partly because migration decisions may be made by the
household as a whole instead of by each individual separately. Within xh , the key variables are the

number of family members by age group (0-7, 7-16, 17- 23, 24-44, 45-59, 60+), whether there is at least


                                                        13
one boy (aged 0-16) in the household, the amount of contract land, the debt status of the household, and
the prevalence of the household head’s surname in the village. The last one captures the household’s
political status and extent of social networks within the village. We do not control for the amount of land
in use by household because this could be a result of migration. In section 5, we will examine how land in
use of non-migrants correlates with the degree of peer migration. The most important village level
variables ( xv ) includes the distance to the nearest bus/rail/dock station, access to drivable roads, the total

adult population, and the total acreage of arable land. The latter two attempt to capture the degree of land-
population pressure in the village. Township level variables ( xt ) include the number of township-village-

enterprises, the presence of highway exit(s) in the township, and the registered population.

        The center of interest is the coefficient (  ) on the degree of peer migration in the same village
( y i|v ), where y i|v is measured by the percent of same-village adults that migrate in 2006 (exclude all

adults in household h). Equation (1) is estimated by a linear probability model. Errors are clustered by
village (v) and adjusted for heteroscadasticity. To the extent that omitted variables may capture similar
socioeconomic status, similar preference or common environment , we expect OLS > 2SLS .


        Validity of Instruments We propose three IVs for peer migration ( y i|v ): (1) the percent of

same-village adults whose first birth involves two (or more) children; (2) the percent of same-village
female labors that reside in the households with a girl firstborn; and (3) the percent of same-village male
labors that reside in the households with a girl firstborn. All three IVs are conditional on the households
for which we can clearly define the oldest child, excluding household h. We focus on firstborns only,
because births of higher order are more likely subject to sex selection (Ebenstein 2009).

        Both IV #2 and #3 capture the presence of girl firstborns, but we construct them separately
because having a firstborn girl tends to encourage male adults of that household to migrate for work but
discourage females from migration. Capturing this differential effect allows us to account for the fact that
a household may have an uneven number of male and female labors as adult labors include not only the
parents of the children, but also their uncles, aunties and grandparents if these adults live in the same
household. Given the opposite effect of girl firstborn on male and female labors, exploiting the variations
in adult gender enhances the strength of IV.

        Specifically, consider a village of four households: A, B, C and D. Household A has three adults:
a husband, a wife, and the husband’s younger sister. Assume A has a girl firstborn. Household B is a
nuclear family with a husband, a wife and a firstborn of boy. Household C has a husband, a wife, the


                                                       14
husband’s father (below age 60), and a firstborn of boy. From D’s point of view, there are 4 female labor
in neighboring households, 2 of which are in the household A with a girl firstborn. So the percent of
female labor in the households with girl firstborns is 2/4. By the same logic, the percent of male labor in
the households with girl firstborns is 1/4. These two percents are different because households A and C
contain adult members other than the immediate parents of the firstborn. In our data, among households
that have children (age 0-16) and adult labor (age 17-60), 0.90% involve adult siblings like A, 11.85%
involve grandparents like C. This suggests that most variations between IV #2 and #3 come from three-
generation households.

         The validity of the instruments relies on two assumptions: first, the gender of -i’s firstborn and
whether -i has multiples in the first birth must be correlated with -i’s own migration decision; second,
these variables must be uncorrelated with the other households’ migration decision in the same village. In
the absence of sex selection22, the occurrence of twins, triplets, or a girl in the firstborn should be out of
the control of a household. However, this does not automatically imply the second assumption holds
because we encounter several measurement errors and the gender composition of adults within a
household could be an endogenous choice conditional on fertility outcome.

         The most primary measurement error lies in the definition of firstborn. Since our data capture a
one-time snapshot, the oldest child in our sample may not be the first birth if some elderly sibling(s) has
grown out of age 16 or died before the data collection time. Conditional on households reporting the
oldest child under age 17 alleviates but does not solve the problem. There might be some sex selection in
favor of boys in the observed oldest child, even if the actual firstborns are balanced in sex. While we
cannot rule out such sex selection, it is comforting to note that the percent of singleton girl in the observed
first births (48.60%, versus 50.70% for singleton boy) is close to the natural ratio (James 1987 and Cai
and Lavely 2005). Consistent with Ebenstein (2009), we also find significant gender differences in second
and later-children. As shown in Table 3, households with a girl firstborn are more likely to have a second
child (71%) than those with a boy firstborn (68%). 23 Moreover, the second and later births are more likely
to have (at least one) boy if the firstborn is a girl (87%) than otherwise (64%). Put it another way, the
probability of having (at least one) boy and having (at least one) girl after firstborn is very close if the
firstborn is a boy (64% vs. 64%), but far away if the firstborn is a girl (87% vs. 52%). All these numbers
are larger than 50% because they include children born after the second births. In particular, 16.37% of all

22
   In a rural area as poor as our sample, there is no fertility treatment service.
23
   The high percentage of second-birth conditional on a boy firstborn suggests that either the fertility control is not
strict in the study area or many families are willing to pay for the monetary fine in association with a second birth
after a boy firstborn. This will not invalidate our study so long as there is a statistical difference of second birth
conditional on the gender of the firstborn.


                                                           15
children with valid firstborn data are third-born, and 5.51% are fourth or above. Combined, households
with a girl firstborn tend to have more children (2.28) than those of a boy firstborn (2.02). This confirms
the conjecture that the gender of firstborn affects family size and the gender composition of later-borns.
Another way to address the mis-definition of firstborn is computing IVs conditional on neighboring
households that have all adults aged at or below 35. As shown below, our results are robust to this
alternative definition.
        The second measurement error is that we may miscount two close-by births as twins because our
data only report age in years instead of months or days. This data problem may lead to (1) an over-
estimate on the percent of multiple births, and (2) a higher-than-natural rate of mixed gender in these
multiples. The latter could occur if a girl first-born in January motivates the birth of a subsequent boy in
November or December. To check these concerns, we find that among all the first births the likelihood of
having two or more children at the same age is 0.70%, which is consistent with the natural probability of
multiple births in both the international literature (James 1987) and the period of time in China before the
implementation of one-child policy (Cai and Lavely 2005). Regarding gender mix, the percent of multiple
firstborns with mixed gender (0.27%) is slightly higher than that of all boys (0.24%) and all girls (0.19%).
To address the potential measurement issue, later we show that our IV results are robust to (1) not using
the percent of neighboring households having multiples as an IV; and (2) restricting the calculation of IV
to the households whose oldest same-age children are all boys.
        Even if the fertility outcome of firstborns is exogenous, one may argue that the number of female
or male labors in a household is correlated with the fertility outcome or adult composition in another
household. This could happen if the two household heads are close relatives. For example, consider two
middle-age brothers who have a mother of 55 years old. If one brother has a girl firstborn, he may invite
the mother to live in and take care of the baby so that he can migrate out for work. This change of living
arrangement may leave the other brother more (or less) likely to migrate. This story generates a potential
correlation between one brother’s error term and his IVs. Our data do not indicate blood relationship. As a
robustness check, we restrict IVs to neighboring households that have different surnames as the studied
household. While this solution is imperfect, a robust finding helps address the econometric concern.
        A related concern is that the fertility outcome of two households may be correlated directly either
because genetic links or peer effects in fertility. This does not generate a problem for our IV strategy if we
control for the number of children and gender mix in one’s own household and such control is sufficient
to capture all the correlations between one’s own migration decision and fertility outcome. However, an
econometric bias could arise if the actual relationship of migration and fertility is non-linear. Restricting
IVs to neighboring households with different surnames may limit the genetic link of fertility; and running
the same specification without controlling for self fertility may provide a robustness check.



                                                      16
        The discussion above focuses on a potential correlation between the IVs and the error term. The
other assumption for the IV validity is that individual –i's fertility outcome must be correlated with -i’s
own migration decision. As a first test, we regress -i’s migration status ( y i ) on the gender of -i’s

firstborn, controlling for nothing else but county fixed effects. As shown in Table 4 Column 1, this adult-
level regression suggests a significant, positive correlation between adult’s migration and whether the
household has a girl firstborn. This correlation hardly changes if we add -i’s age, education and distance
to the nearest bus station in the regression (Column 2).
        The third column of Table 4 includes an interaction of -i being female and having a girl firstborn.
Results suggest that having a girl firstborn tends to affect men and women in opposite ways: men (fathers,
uncles and grandfathers) are more likely to migrate, probably because they need to earn more income for
an increased family size; women (mothers, aunties and grandmothers) are less likely to migrate, probably
because they have to stay home to bear the second child and take care of young children. Note that the
separate correlation for men and women are 4-6 times larger than the pooling effect, which explains why
our IVs exploit the adult gender composition in the households with a girl firstborn.
        In addition to the need of females at home for childbearing and child care and the demand for
males to earn more financial resources away from home, the correlation between migration and having a
girl firstborn may be also driven by the possibility that households with boys have different preferences
for income and time. A household with strong boy preference may be more willing to take close care of
boys, which implies a smaller tendency to work away from home. Alternatively, households with a boy
may want to accumulate more wealth so that they can build a house when the boy is ready to marry; and
migration is one way to achieve the goal. One may also argue that because parents rely on their sons for
elderly care, they may have fewer incentives to work away from home and save for themselves if they
have sons. Tan (2003) suggests somewhat the opposite: while parents may still have such perception in
their mind (which justifies the boy preference in fertility), parents’ actual economic return from sons is no
higher than that of daughters. The main reasons are (1) adult sons tend to give less percent of their own
income to the parents, (2) more and more adult sons do not live with parents after marriage, and (3)
daughters also offer elderly care to the parents, especially if the parents have no sons.
        As shown in Columns 4-6 of Table 4, a household that has a girl firstborn is likely to have a
larger family size, a greater number of children, and a smaller likelihood of having any boy. To the extent
that the family size and gender mix of children affect -i’s migration decision via the above-mentioned
channels, -i’s migration decision is correlated with whether -i’s first singleton birth is a girl and whether -i
has had a multiple birth(s). We will recheck these correlations in the 2SLS results as we control for one’s
own household composition and gender mix of own children directly in Specification (1).




                                                       17
           Conditional on the IV validity, one may suspect a weak IV problem as the percent of girl
firstborns should be close to 50%, especially for large villages. 24 As a first check, we note that the percent
of girl firstborns ranges from 17.7% to 78.5% at the village level, the median number of adult labors per
village is roughly 800, and the distribution of village size is 30.1% with 100-1000 adults, 48.8% with
1000-2000, 15.88% with 2000-3000 and 5.19% with 3000+. This suggests that we will have fair amount
of variation in our instruments. To be sure, the IV results reported below are accompanied with a
conditional likelihood ratio (LR) test for weak instruments.25
           Key results The key results of specification (1) are presented in Table 5. In addition to the OLS
results in Column (1), we present three columns of IV estimates: the first using the percent of same-
village adults having multiples in the first birth as the only IV for the percent of peer migration in the
same village; the second using the percents of female and male labors residing in the households with a
girl firstborn as IVs; and the third using all three IVs. As shown in Panel A, all three IVs are highly
significant and have expected signs in the first stage. In particular, peers having multiple firstborns
increase the propensity of peer migration, while more female (male) labors residing in the girl-firstborn
families have a negative (positive) effect on peer migration.
           Panel B of Table 5 shows the key 2SLS estimates, while other coefficients from the same
specification are reported in Appendix Table A2. One consistent finding across the four columns is that
migrants are younger, more educated, and have more access to drivable roads. They are also more likely
to be male, and have less house value and less contract land. These patterns are consistent with the
existing literature on both international migration (Rosenzweig 1988, Lucas 1997) and internal migration
within China (Zhao 1999a & 1999b). The number of household members in any age group has a positive
effect on migration, suggesting that the need for more resources to support a large family dominates the
need to take care of family members. The coefficient of having a boy in the household is negative,
suggesting that boy preference may hinder migration because the demand for extra fertility is lower,
parents (and grandparents) want to spend more times with boys, or they can rely on their sons (and
grandsons) to provide elderly care and therefore have fewer incentives to work and save for themselves.
           The key 2SLS coefficient for the effects of peer migration,  , is 0.631 in column (2) and
increases moderately to 0.768 (column 2) and 0.727 (column 3) if we change IVs. These magnitudes are
economically large, implying that 10 percentage point increase in the proportion of peer migration has the
same influence as an increase of education by 7-8 years. All three estimates are smaller than the OLS

24
     Similar argument applies to the percent of multiple birth.
25
     We adopt conditional LR because it is more robust than Anderson-Rubin and score tests (Andrews and Stock
2007).




                                                        18
estimate (0.930), which suggests that OLS tends to over-estimate the actual magnitude of social

interactions because omitted individual or community variables affect self and peer migrations in similar
ways. All three 2SLS estimates pass the conditional likelihood ratio test for weak instruments, with tight
intervals of  well above zero. As reported in Panel C, the reduced form regressions corresponding to
columns (2) to (4) show similar statistical significance, which suggest that one’s own migration decision
is indeed correlated with neighbors’ fertility outcome and family composition. An over-identification test
for the three IVs yields an F-statistics of 147.9 with p-value less than 1%. One explanation is that the IVs
affect different parts of peers hence implying different types and magnitudes of social interactions.
        Taking Table 5 Column (4) as the preferred specification, the 2SLS estimate suggests that every
one percentage point increase in the percent of same-village adults migrating away will increase one’s
own migration probability by 0.727 percentage point. Two factors may explain this seemingly large
effect of social interactions: First, most Chinese rural-to-urban migrants leave families at the origin and
therefore have plenty of opportunities to communicate with people in the same village. Second, due to the
lack of job information via formal channels, potential migrants must rely on friends, relatives, and other
social networks. Given the geographic sparseness of rural areas, current migrants in the same village is
likely the most important source of job information in remote destinations.
        Robustness Checks The following robustness checks ensure that the reported effects of social
interactions are not driven by sample selection, variable construction, or invalid instruments.
        To address the concern that working away from home for 1-2 months is not migration, we
redefine migration as working away for at least 6 months. Column (2) of Table 6 shows that the 2SLS
coefficient (using all three IVs) is similar (0.674 vs. 0.727). The concern of omitted variables at the
township level leads us to replace county fixed effects with township fixed effects in the specification
with all three IVs. The key coefficient is similar (0.789) and remains significant at 1%. Column (4)
excludes own fertility outcomes from the right hand side, to address the concern that there may be direct
peer effects in fertility and linear specification is not sufficient to control for the impact of self fertility on
self migration. This concern is ungrounded, as the key coefficient is very similar (0.741 vs. 0.727).
        Regarding the IV validity, Table 6 Column (5) reports that conditioning the percent of neighbors’
multiple birth on all-boy twins yields a similar coefficient of peer migration (0.681) as compared to 0.631
in the Column 2 of Table 5. To address the measurement issue of firstborns, Column (6) of Table 6
restricts the percent of peers having a girl firstborn to the households that have all adults aged at or below
35. The magnitude of the key 2SLS result is lower than before (0.622 versus 0.768) but remains
significant. Column (7) of Table 6 limits the percent of peers having multiples or a girl firstborn to the
households that have a different surname as the one under study. Obtaining similar results (0.810) in this
specification suggests that the observed correlation between self and peer migration is not driven by


                                                        19
households being close relatives. In all these checks, the key coefficient has a larger standard error than
the main results, as the alternative IVs utilize fewer variations in the data.
        Additional robustness checks consider two extra groups of peers. The first group is the adults that
live in the same township but not in the same village. Since township covers a set of adjacent villages,
same-township adults may communicate across villages. Column (8) of Table 6 reports the 2SLS
estimates including both the percent of peer migration in the same village and the percent of peer
migration in the same township but different villages. Both are instrumented by all three IVs constructed
for the relevant peers. Results suggest that peers from same township but different villages have a positive
effect on one’s own migration decision, but its magnitude (0.0108) is smaller than that of same-village
peers (0.782) and statistically close to zero. This confirms a definition of social network by village.
        In Column (9), we add information about the second peer group, namely the percent of migration
for the adults that live in the same household. In theory, migration within a household may be positively
correlated due to social interactions or unobserved household factors. The correlation could also be
negative if the household makes individual migration decisions jointly (for example, insurance concern
may motivate the household to diversify in agricultural and non-agricultural activities), or if there are
unobserved individual factors that are different across family members. Unfortunately, the gender of
firstborns and the occurrence of multiple births are applicable to both parents, hence we cannot use them
for the percent of same-household adults that migrate. For this reason, the regression reported in Column
(8) includes same-household migration, but do not use any IV for this variable. Although we still use IVs
for peers outside the household, the coefficient on same-household peers does not necessarily identify the
causal effect within a household. Keeping this in mind, Column (8) suggests that there is some positive
correlation in the migration decisions of self and other household members, but its magnitude is lower
than the effects from other people in the same village. The relatively smaller coefficient on the percent of
same household migration indicates that insurance concern may be one non-trivial factor in the migration
decisions within a household.
        To address concerns on potential sample selection, Column (10) of Table 6 conditions the
analysis sample on the households that have only two adults. These households have a simple relationship
among family members, which allow us to clearly define fertility history. The effect of peer migration is
slightly lower for this sub-group of population (0.604 vs. 0.727 for full sample), probably because two-
adult families have a hard time finding live-in help for child care which is much needed if parents stay
away from home for a long time. The last column of Table 6 excludes minority (non-Han) gathering
villages because minorities are not subject to the one-child policy and minorities are much less likely to
migrate than the Hans. The 2SLS effect of peer migration changes little (0.710 vs. 0.727).




                                                      20
        In an unreported table, we also explore whether the 2SLS effect of peer migration is non-linear.
We first regress self migration on all the control variables in Specification 1 and refer to the residual from
as resid1. We then regress each IV on the same control variables and name its residual as resid2, resid3,
and resid4. In the third step, we regress resid1 on a quadratic function of resid2, resid3, and resid4. The
results suggest that all three IVs affect one’s migration decision non-linearly. The effect from the percent
of neighbors having multiple birth in the firstborn is concave and its positive sign disappears when the
percent of multiples reaches 3.4%. This is very high considering the average is 0.7% in our sample. The
effects from the percentages of female and male labors residing in the households with a girl firstborn are
always positive and slightly convex, starting from nearly 0.8.


5. Mechanisms of Social Interactions
        The IV results presented above help identify social interactions from omitted individual or
village-level variables, but they do not identify the mechanisms underlying these social interactions. This
goal of this section is empirically identifying three types of social interactions.
        The first is the social network effects as argued in Calvo-Armengol and Jackson (2004) and
Carrington et al. (1996): migrants that belong to the same social network may help each other reduce
migration cost and identify job opportunities at the destination. For example, if a young female migrant
performs well in a manufacturing factory, the employer may ask her to help find new employees like her.
Since most rural migrants have limited social networks in the city, most likely she will pass this
information to her peers at home. Even if the factory that the migrant is working for does not need new
employees, she may hear about job opportunities in similar factories in the same city. Such information is
useful for peers to consider when they decide whether and where to migrate. If peers migrate together to
one city, they often share housing, which makes it easy to exchange job information during job search.
        Social network theories imply that migrants from the same village should be more likely to
cluster in the same destination and same industrial sector. This statement also implies that the village
level cluster must differ substantially across villages, even though these villages are observationally
similar. Table 2 already presents evidence in support of this prediction. To the extent that one is most
familiar with job opportunities that are specific to one’s own age, gender and education group, or one is
more willing to share job information with relatives, the social network effects should be the strongest
among villagers of same age, gender, education and surname. The strength of the social network effects
also depends on alternative channels of information, which predicts that they should be higher in the
remote villages that have limited access to road or remote job information.
        The second type of social interactions is peer pressure at the origin. Suppose inside a village,
migration is viewed as a positive signal of ability. Observing more peers migrating out of the village



                                                      21
could leave a non-migrant feel inferior. If such pressure exists, we should see stronger peer effects within
similar age, gender and education, but not necessarily within the same destination for the same sector.26
         Unlike the above two mechanisms which both predict a positive correlation between self and peer
migration, the third type of social interaction could suggest a negative correlation: for example, the more
people migrate out of the village, the more agricultural resources and opportunities will be left for those
that stay and therefore increase the opportunity cost of migration for these people. The positive 2SLS

found in our main specification suggests that this general equilibrium effect does not dominate the social
network effects or peer pressure at the origin. That being said, we can test the general equilibrium effects
directly by looking at whether a non-migrant household uses more land if it is located in a high-migration
village. Like peer pressure at the origin, general equilibrium effects focus on omitted variables at the
origin and therefore do not predict migration cluster by destination and industrial sector.
         Empirical Evidence Our empirical detection of social interaction mechanisms starts with two
revised specifications. First, suppose we classify adults into nine age groups (17-20, 21-25, 26-30, 31-35,
36-40, 41-45, 46-50, 51-55, 56-60) and individual i belongs to age group a. The following specification
examines how the percent of migration of age group 1 to 9 affects individual i’s own migration decision
conditional on the sample of age group a:
                     yi|a  k   xi   xh   xv  1 yi ,a1|v  2 yi ,a2 |v  ....  9 yi ,a9 |v   i . (2)

The percent of peer migration in group a ( yi ,a|v ) is instrumented with the three IVs as described above,

but each IV is constructed within the adults of group a in the same village. Similar specification can be
applied to grouping by other demographics such as gender, surname or education.
         Following Specification (2), Appendix Tables A3, A4, A5 and A6 report the 2SLS regression
results for adults grouped by age, gender, surname and education. A general patterns standing out of these
tables is that the effects of peer migration are the strongest for the adults within similar age, gender,
education and surname. This finding is consistent with social network effects or peer pressure but not
with the general equilibrium effects. Social interactions across different demographic groups are
occasionally significant and asymmetric: for example, males have significantly positive effects on
females and villagers aged 36-40 have significantly positive effects on those of 26-35, but the reverse
effects are close to zero. These findings could reflect some strength of social network effects, as males (or
the old) are more able to help females (the young) in a stranger community than vice versa. One
exception is that migrants between 17 and 20 have some positive influence on older migrants and the

26
  The peer pressure could be related to destination or industrial sector if going to a specific destination, say Beijing,
has a positive signaling value in the eyes of peers. In the data, destination- or industrial-specific peer pressure is not
distinguishable from the social network effects, not only because they are observational equivalent, but also because
such peer pressure is likely to rely on the help from earlier migrants to result in clustered migration.


                                                                22
effect declines with the age gap. This is probably because 17-20 is one of the prime ages of migration and
this group is more acceptable to new information. 27
         Specification 2 is applicable to the sub-samples grouped by age, gender, education and surname,
but not by destination and industrial sector. This is because destination and sector are choices made by
migrants conditional on migration. To detect social interactions by destination and sector, we return to the
full sample. Suppose there are n potential destinations and yid is denoted one if individual i migrates to

destination d, 0 otherwise. We then regress yid on the percent of same-village adults migrating to

destinations 1, 2, … n. This specification can be written as:
                      yid   k   xi   xh   xv  1 ydi1|v  2 ydi2|v  ...  n ydin|v   i .   (3)

The coefficients, {1 , 2 ,....n } , capture the correlation between self destination and peer destination,

which could be driven by social interactions, or a destination-specific omitted variable that affects both
self and peers. Unfortunately, our IVs are only relevant for whether peers migrate or not, not where to
migrate or what to do after migration. To identify social interactions by destination or industrial sector,
we must find additional IVs for each destination or each industrial sector.
         We compute the travel distance from village v to destination dj by summing up the distance of the
village to the nearest bus/rail/dock station, the distance from the station to the township it belongs to, and
the distance from the township to the destination. For destinations within the sampled province, we define
the distance as distance from village v to the provincial capital. For destinations that fall in the residual
category of “others”, we compute the distance from village v to the biggest city of an adjacent province.
                                                                                 d
Based on the distance variables, we define the instruments for y ij|v as the distance from v to dj times the

three instruments used in Specification 1. Because individual i’s decision to migrate to dj will take into
                                                                                               d
                                                                                                           d
account the distance to all alternative destinations, the 2SLS regression of yi|vj on ydi1|v ,... yij|v ,... ydin|v   
                                                                      
also controls for the distances from v to d1 ,..., d j ,...., d n directly. Since we run a regression of yi|vj for
                                                                                                                    d



each destination separately with county fixed effects, any unobserved correlation between the origin
county and the destination is already accounted for.
         It is more difficult to construct sector-specific instruments because we know nothing about the
employers of migrants. However, there are natural demographic differences across sector: most
construction workers are male, most service industry workers are female, and manufacturing jobs usually
requires more skills than construction and service jobs. All these jobs prefer young to old. In light of these

27
   Given the short history of the recent migration wave, we do not expect a stronger effect of old on young than
young on old. In fact, adults over age 30 are less likely to migrate in our sample probably because they have family
to take care of in the origin.


                                                                23
variations, we first compute the percent female, the percent of each age group (16-22,23-29, 30-39, 40+),
and the percent of each education group (6 years of schooling, 7-9, 10-12, 13+) for each village. We then
interact them with the three IVs used before as IVs for yo1i|v (manufacturing), yo1i|v (service), yo1i|v

(construction), and yo1i|v (other). Like the destination regressions, the 2SLS regression specific to each

sector controls for the percent of female, age groups, and education groups at the village level.
         Tables 7 and 8 report the 2SLS regression of Specification 3 for migration choice of destination
and industrial sector. It is apparent that migrants from the same village are highly clustered by destination
and industrial sector. All the coefficients on the diagonal (indicating the same destination or the same
sector) are positive, significant, and close to one. Two of them are even slightly bigger than one
(destinations A and B), but t-test suggests that neither of them is statistically different from one. In
contrast, most off-diagonal coefficients (indicating peer effects across destination and sector) are
insignificant, some are even significantly negative because different destinations (or sectors) are potential
substitutes. In unreported tables, we replace county fixed effects with township fixed effects in both
regressions. The results are similar: diagonal coefficients are all positive (ranging from 0.915 to 1.078)
and significant with 99% confidence; but off-diagonal ones are either negative or close to zero. This
suggests that migrants from the same village tend to cluster in destination and sector, much more than
migrants from different villages of the same township. To put these findings in context, the within-
village cluster by sector is most consistent with villagers sharing job information at or about the
destination; while the cluster by destination could be consistent with both the reduction of moving cost
and the sharing of job information.
         To address whether migrants leaves more agricultural resources and opportunities for the non-
migrants in the same village, Appendix Table 7 regresses land in use of each non-migrant household (i.e.
no adult migrates in the household) on the percent of same-village adults that migrated in 2006. We use
the same IVs (all three) for peer migration as in Specification 1. The OLS results confirm a positive
correlation between peer migration and the land use of non-migrants, but this correlation is no longer
significant once we use IVs to control for omitted individual or village-level characteristics. In unreported
tables, we try the same specification on other agricultural activities such as short-run employment for
agricultural labor, fertilizer use, and the adoption of agricultural technology. Results are similar to that of
land use: most show significant correlations with peer migration in OLS, but the significance disappears
when we use IVs. These results suggest that even if general equilibrium effects exist, they are likely to
reflect omitted characteristics, or being absorbed by remaining members of the migrating households and
do not cause significant spillovers on other households in the same village.




                                                         24
        Heterogeneous effects of peer migration So far the strong cluster of migrants by destination
and industrial sector suggests that the most likely mechanism is the social network effects: peer migrants
may help each other reduce moving costs and locate job opportunities at the same destination. Recall that
the social network theory also implies heterogeneous strength of networks: the origins that are more
difficult to travel from or have less information about the outside world should rely more on social
networks. Table 10 includes the interactions of peer migration and distance from the respondent’s
residential village to the nearest bus station, the center of the county, the center of the studied area, and
the provincial capital. In the last column we also interact peer migration with whether the respondent
resides in a village that has access to TV signals. All regressions use the same three IVs for peer
migration as in Specification 1. Results suggest that longer distance to the nearest station and county
center does not imply larger effects of peer migration. However, longer distances to the area center and
provincial center do have a positive and statistically significant effect on the strength of peer influence.
This result is sensible because the area we study is not large and provincial capital is the most important
stop if one wants to take railway or bus to other provinces. In comparison, the strength of peer migration
is not sensitive to TV access, confirming the fact that there is little job information via formal channels.
        Alternative explanation The strong clustering by age, gender, education, destination and
industrial sector could also be driven by local governments organizing group migration to a specific
destination or by far-away employers recruiting a large number of workers from the same origin. While
we cannot rule out organized efforts, they are unlikely the driving force for the following reasons.
        First of all, both the 2004 shortage of migrating labor and the 2006 nationwide promotion of
migrant labor markets, suggest that most organized efforts, if they exist, took place after 2004. In fact,
almost all the major events we can find in the government documents of the data area in terms of
organized migration happened in October 2006, as a response to the central government policy.
According to the local newspaper of our study area, 65% of the migrants that worked away from home in
2006 have migrated out of the area by 2004, and 88.5% have migrated by 2005. Among the people that
started to migrate in 2006, only 9.8% were organized by the Department of Labor in the local
governments. These numbers suggest that the majority of the migrants observed in our 2006 cross-
sectional data did not migrate because of government-organized migration or recruiting.
        Second, for the organized migration or group recruiting to explain our key empirical findings, it
must be organized at the village level because we already control for county fixed effects and results are
robust if we further control for township fixed effects. All the anecdotes we can find in the mass media
regarding organized migration or organized recruiting cover administrative units at or above the township




                                                      25
level. For example28 in 2006, a vocational high school of a sampled county has signed a two-year contract
with a city of destination A to train 1,500 adults per year. Graduates of the training program are
guaranteed to work for an electronics factory or a shoe factory in destination B. In 2007, the Chairman of
a large employer visited the sampled area and negotiated with the area government for a group labor
contract of 2,000 migrants. A large town in the sampled area has actively searched for job opportunities
since 1984 and the total number of migrants from this particular town has exceeded 21,000 by the end of
2008. All these activities, if equally effective for the whole administrative unit (area, county, or town),
should already be controlled for in our fixed effects.
         The remaining question is whether organized migration or recruiting occurs at the village level. If
such village-level activities are correlated with whether a village has more firstborns being girls or more
births being multiples, their effects will survive the instruments. In theory, this possibility is not zero: for
example, if a village has more girl firstborns and therefore has a larger family size on average, the village
head may face greater land-population pressure hence is more motivated to search for migration
opportunities. Since all the firstborns computed in our sample are under age 16 at the time of the survey,
the above story will only hold in reality if the village leader is sophisticated and forward-looking enough
to predict the land-population pressure in the future.
         This argument leads to two empirical tests: in the first test, we control for the demographics
(gender, education, and military experience) of village cadres 29, which hopefully capture some
unobserved village-level activities. As Appendix Table A8, adding cadre demographics generates no
change in our main results (0.735 versus 0.727). In the mean time, all the cadre demographics are
insignificant from zero. In the second test, we reconstruct all the IVs based on children of age 0-12
instead of 0-16. Again, results change little: the 2SLS coefficient for peer migration is 0.635 (vs. 0.727).
         To summarize, both anecdotes and empirical analysis lead us to believe that organized migration
or organized recruiting is not the main reason driving the clustered pattern of migration. The most likely
explanation is that people of the same village share job information and help each other reduce moving
costs at the destination. This conclusion is consistent with the importance of social networks as cited in a
number of individual surveys conducted within China (Section 3).


6. Potential Implications of Peer Migration
         What does peer migration imply for the migration rate in the long run? Typically, social network
effects are assumed symmetric between self and peers. This symmetric assumption is unlikely to hold in


28
   To protect data confidentially, we cannot provide precise citations for these anecdotes. They are available upon
referee request.
29
   Village cadres refer to the village head and the Communist Party leader of the village.


                                                         26
the context of migration: almost all the empirical studies on migrant networks emphasize that previous
migrants can influence non-migrants to move away; but once a migrant has moved, his or her future
migration decision is unlikely to be affected by those that stay at the origin, unless the migrant returns
permanently and reconsiders migration next year. Given the fact that only 7-8% of Chinese migrants
return home the year after moving (Sheng 2008, Zhao 2002), we suspect the social network effects
identified in our study is mostly driven by previous migrants affecting new migrants but not vice versa.
        Unfortunately, we cannot test this conjecture because our data is only cross-sectional. Rather, we
assume that the social network effects found in the study is restricted to the single direction from previous
migrants to non-migrants. Under this assumption, social network effects imply that supporting a few rural
residents to migrate to the city could lead their neighbors to do the same thing, every round embodies a
larger number of new migrants, and new migrants will influence the remaining villagers in the next round.
        To illustrate this snowball effect, we consider a village of population one. For simplicity, the
population is assumed to be homogenous (say young adults subject to the risk of migration) and never
ages. Suppose the government subsidizes 1% of the population to migrate to the city in year one. Our
peer effect estimate suggests that every 1% increase in peer migration will increase the remaining
population’s probability of migration by 0.727%. Assuming this peer influence does not change over
time, we simulate the percentage of migrating population for the next thirty year in three scenarios: first,
we assume every year 8% of the existing migrants will return to the rural area and these people will be
subject to the risk of migration as much as the non-migrant population. In the second scenario, the
likelihood of returning is 8% but only half of the returning migrants are subject to the risk of migration
next year. In comparison, the third scenario assumes all the returning migrants never migrate again.
        Figure 4 shows the simulated migration path for all three scenarios. As we expect, scenario #1
will converge to a steady province with 89% of migrants, at which time the percentage of new migrants is
equal to the percentage of returning migrants. In the other two scenarios, the returning migrants’ inertia to
migrate in the future becomes a greater countervailing force against the social multiplier effect. As a
result, the percentage of migrating population reaches the maximum of 76.8% in year 14 for scenario #2
(69.6% in year 13 for scenario 3) and gradually declines afterwards. While each of these three scenarios
are counterfactual (and inconsistent with the reality because we do not account for aging, marriage,
childbearing and other life events), they suggest that a small initiation of migration could lead to a large
wave of migration in the next few decades.
        In addition to the snowball effect, peer migration could have large, persistent, and sometimes
alarming implications for other socio-economic issues. For example, the railway traffic in the 40-day rush
around the Spring Festival sets a new record every year: the 2009 traffic is 10.6% higher than 2008, and




                                                     27
2008 is 11% higher than 2007.30 Although the central government has invested a lot to enhance the supply
of railway service, it is difficult to catch up with the soaring demand. Railway tickets are extremely hard
to get during the rush days, and many railway stations, especially those in large cities, have 24-hour
police in order to reduce crime and accidents. The clustered pattern of migration found in our data also
implies that the traffic between a migration origin and a migration destination is likely clustered, which
could create serious congestion on specific routes even if the overall market is not crowded.
        Another implication of peer migration is significant demographic change in high-migration
villages. Since migrants are more likely to be male, young and better-educated, and the peer effects are
the strongest among similar age and gender, the remaining population of high migration villages is likely
to be concentrated in children, women and the elderly. To support this argument, we group the 3,950
villages in our sample according to whether its migrants-to-adults ratio falls in the brackets: 0-10%, 10-
20%, 20-30%, or 30% and above. For each of the four village groups, we plot the headcount of migrants
and non-migrants separately at every integer age (Appendix Figures A3-A6). In all four figures, the age
distribution has small spikes every 2-3 years. One potential reason is some rural households tend to
calculate age by lunar calendar31, but this is unlikely the main driver because the birth rate recorded by the
local government by the regular calendar varies greatly from year to year.32
        Comparing the four figures, we conclude that the overall population structure is similar across
groups but because of migration, the villages that have the highest migration percentage (>30%) are
significantly short of young and middle age adults. The difference in the percent of female is less striking:
in the highest-migration villages, the percent of female adults in the remaining non-migrant population is
51%, as compared to 47.4% in the lowest migration villages. These migration-generated demographic
changes could have profound impact on agricultural productivity, child development, and elderly care.
        Lastly, there is no doubt that peer migration clustered by destination and industrial sector
establishes a strong employment link between origin and destination. This link could affect the
vulnerability of the macro economy. Take the on-going economic recession as an example. Since a
large fraction of rural migrants are concentrated in export-oriented manufacturing, the reduced
international demand in 2008 and the subsequent return of unemployed labor has created serious
problems for inland provinces. 33 This problem could be worsened by clustered migration because it
reduces the origin area’s ability to diversify the macroeconomic risk.

30
   2008 data: http://news.xinhuanet.com/video/2008-03/03/content_7704253.htm. 2007 data: http://info.cec-
ceda.org.cn/jtwl/pages/20070207_41568_7_3.html 。
31
   Some rural households count age as the number of lunar years that a person’s life has covered regardless of the
month of birth. For example, if a person was born in lunar December, she could be two year old in the lunar count
even before she reaches her first birthday.
32
   The actual birth rate in the surveyed area ranges from 1.28% (1996, 2006) to 2.00% (2003) and 2.23% (2001).
33
   http://news.xinhuanet.com/newscenter/2009-03/02/content_10928532.htm.


                                                        28
7. Conclusion
        The unprecedented labor migration in China provides an excellent opportunity to deepen our
understanding of whether, why and where laborers migrate. Constructing instruments based on whether
neighbors have a girl firstborn and whether neighbors have multiple birth(s), we find a large, positive, and
significant effect of social interactions within a village. Evidence suggests that most of the effect is driven
by co-villagers helping each other reduce moving costs and find job opportunities at the same destination.
        The social network effects found in our study implies that a policy that subsidizes a small fraction
of the rural population to migrate could have a large and persistent effect on subsequent migrations from
the same village. Interestingly, not only does the snowball effect help transfer agricultural labor to non-
agricultural activities, it could also create a number of socio-economic implications including a dramatic
demographic change in the high migration villages, transportation congestion, and increased vulnerability
to potential macroeconomic shocks. Evaluating the impact of migration on these social-economic issues
will be a promising direction for future research.


8. References
   Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie (2004) "Networks Or Neighborhoods? Correlations In The Use Of
Publicly-Funded Maternity Care In California," Journal of Public Economics 88(12): 2573-2585.
   Andrews, Donald W.K. and James H. Stock (2007) “Inference with Weak Instruments,” Advances in
Economics and Econometrics, Theory and Applications: Ninth World Congress of the Econometric
Society, Vol. III, ed. by R. Blundell, W. K. Newey, and T. Persson. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2007.
   Angrist, Joshua D and Evans William N (1998) “Children and Their Parents' Labour
Supply: Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size” American Economic Review, vol. 88(3) :
450-77.
   Angrist, Joshua D. and Kevin Lang (2004) “Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence
from Boston's Metco Program” American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 5 (Dec., 2004), pp. 1613-1634.
   Bao, Shuming, Örn B. Bodvarsson, Jack W. Hou, and Yaohui Zhao (2007) “Interprovincial Migration
in China: the Effects of Investment and Migrant Networks.” IZA Discussion No. 2924.
   Bartel, Ann P. (1989) “Where Do the New U.S. Immigrants Live?” Journal of Labor Economics 7(4):
371-391.
   Bayer, Patrick; Stephen L. Ross and Giorgio Topa (2008) "Place of Work and Place of Residence:
Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes," Journal of Political Economy, 116(6), pages
1150-1196, December.
   Becker, Gary (1975) Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis (2nd Edition), New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
   Borjas, George J. (1994) “The Economics of Immigration,” Journal of Economic Literature 32(4):
1667-1717.
   Caces, F; F Arnold; J.T. Fawcett and R.W.Gardner(1985) “Shadow Household and Competing
Auspices: Migration Behavior in Philippines” Journal of Development Economics, 17:5-25.
   Cai, Fang (1996) “An economic analysis for labor migration and mobility” Social Sciences in China
(Spring): 120–35.




                                                      29
   Cai, Fang; Albert Park; and Yaohui Zhao “The Chinese Labor Market in the Reform Era” forthcoming
in Loren Brandt and Thomas Rawski, eds., China’s Great Economic Transformation (Cambridge
University Press).
   Cai, Fang and Wang Dewen (2003) “Migration As Marketization: What Can We Learn from China’s
2000Census Data?” The China Review, Vol. 3, No. 2 : 73–93.
   Cai, Yong and William Lavely (2003) “China’s Missing Girls: Numerical Estimates and Effects on
Population Growth” The China Review, Vol. 3, No. 2: 13–29.
   Calvo-Armengol, Tony and Matthew Jackson (2004) “The Effects of Social Networks on Employment
and Inequality” American Economic Review 94(3): 426-454.
   Carrington, W.J; E. Detragiache and T. Vishwanath (1996) “Migration with Endogenous Moving
Costs” American Economic Review, 86(4): 909-30.
   Chen, Jinyong (2006) “Reform of Hukou Policy and Rural-urban Migration in China” in Fang Cai and
Zansheng Bai edited Labor Migration in Transition China 2006, Social Science Academy Press (China).
   Chen, Jun(2005)” On the Problem of Information Shortage Encountered by Peasant-workers in Job
Hunting”, Hunan Social Sciences, 2005(5): 83-85.
   Chen, Zhao; Shiqing Jiang; Ming Lu; and Hiroshi Sato (2008) “How do Heterogeneous Social
Interactions Affect the Peer Effect in Rural–Urban Migration: Empirical Evidence from China.” LICOS
Discussion Papers 22408, Centre for Institutions and Economic Performance, K.U.Leuven.
   Du, Yang, Albert Park, and Sangui Wang(2005) “Migration and rural poverty in China”, Journal of
Comparative Economics, 33:4 (2005): 688-709.
   Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez (2002): “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 118, No. 3 (Aug., 2003), pp. 815-842.
   Du, Yin (2000) “Rural Labor Migration in Contemporary China: An Analysis of Its Features and the
Macro context” in West, Loraine & Zhao, Yaohui edited Rural Labor Flows in China, Institute of East
Asian Studies, University of California.
   Ebenstein, Avraham (2009) ”Estimating a Dynamic Model of Sex Selection in China” March 2009,
job market paper.
   Fei, John C. H and Ranis Gustav (1964) Development of the Labor Surplus Economy: Theory and
Policy, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
   Hare, Denise and Shukai Zhao (2000) “Labor Migration as a Rural Development Strategy: A View
from the Migration Origin.” In West, Loraine & Zhao, Yaohui edited Rural Labor Flows in China,
Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California.
   Huang, Ping and Frank N. Pieke (2003) “China Migration Country Study” Paper presented at the
Regional Conference on Migration, Development and Pro-Poor Policy Choices in Asia, Dhaka, June 21–
24, 2003.
   Ioannides, Yannis and Linda Datcher Loury (2004) "Job Information Networks, Neighborhood Effects
and Inequality" Journal of Economic Literature 42(4): 1056-1093).
   James,W.H (1987) “The Human Sex ratio, Part1: A Review of the Literature” Human Biology 59:721–
752.
   Jian, Yulan(2005)” China's rural labor force transfer of the status quo and countermeasures”, The
Rural Economics, 2005(5): 110-112.
   Kling, Jeffrey R; Jeffrey B. Liebman and Lawrence F. Katz (2007) “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects” Econometrica 75(1) : 83–119.
   Knight, John; Song Lina and Jia Huaibin (1999) “Chinese Rural Migrants in Enterprises: Three
Perspectives” Journal of Development Studies 35: 73-104.
   LaLonde, R. J., and R. H. Topel (1991) "Labor Market Adjustments to Increased Immigration," in J.
M. Abowd and R. B. Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
   Lee, Everett S (1966) “A theory of migration” Demography 3: 47-57.



                                                30
   Lewis, W. Arthur (1954) “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour “ Manchester
School of Economic and Social Studies 22:139-91.
   Li, Hongbin; Junsen Zhang and Yi Zhu (2006) “The Effect of the One-Child Policy on Fertility in
China: Identification Based on Differences-in-Differences” Working Paper, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong.
   Liang, Qiusheng and Che-Fu Lee (2006) “Fertility and Population Policy: An Overview” in Fertility,
Family Planning, and Population Policy in China, edited by D.L. Poston, Jr; Che-Fu Lee; Chiung-Fang
Chang; Sherry L. McKibben and Carol S. Walther, published by Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.
   Lin, Justin Yifu; Gewei Wang and Yaohui Zhao “Regional Inequality and Regional Transfers in
China” in Cai Fang and Bai Nansheng edited Labor Migration in Transition China 2006, Social Science
Academy Press (China).
   Lowry, I (1966) Migration and metropolitan growth: Two Analytical Models. San Francisco: Chandler.
   Lucas, Robert E.B. (1987) “Emigration to South Africa’s mines” American Economic Review 77: 313-
330.
   Lucas, Robert E.B. (1997) “Internal Migration in Developing Countries” Chapter 13, Handbook of
Population and Family Economics, edited by M.R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark 1997, Elsevier.
   Manski, Charles F (1993) “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem
Review of Economic Studies, 60:531-542.
   Mallee, Hein (2000) “Agricultural Labor and Rural Population Mobility: Some Observations,” In West,
Loraine & Zhao, Yaohui edited Rural Labor Flows in China, Institute of East Asian Studies, University
of California.
   Maurin, Eric; Hulie Moschion (2009) “ The Social Multipiler and Labor Market Participation of
Mother” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2009 1(1): 251-272.
   Mckenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport (2007) “Network Effects and the Dynamics of Migration and
Inequality: Theory and Evidence from Mexico” Journal of Development Economics 84: 1-24.
   Mckenzie, David and Nicole Hilderbrandt (2005) “The Effects of Migration on Child Health in
Mexico” Economia 6(1): 257-289.
   Meng, Xin (2000) “Regional wage gap, information flow, and rural--‐urban migration” In West,
Loraine & Zhao, Yaohui edited Rural Labor Flows in China, Institute of East Asian Studies, University
of California.
   Men, Kepei and Wei Zeng (2003 “Prediction of China Population Over the Next 50 Years”, The
Journal of Quantitative & Technical Economics (in Chinese): F224.
   Munshi, Kaivan (2003) “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S. Labor
Market” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 549-600.
   Qian, Nancy (2009) “Quantity-Quality and the One Child Policy: the Only-Child Disadvantage in
School Enrollment in Rural China” NBER working paper #14973.
   Rosenzweig, Mark R and Kenneth L Wolpin (1980) “Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility Model:
The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment” Econometrica, January 1980a, 48(1) : 227-40.
   Rosenzweig, Mark (1988) “Labor Markets in Low-income Countries” Chapter 15 in the Handbook of
Deveopment Economics, Volume 1, edited by H. Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan, Elsevier.
   Sen, Amartya (1990) “More than 100 million women are missing” New York Review of Books 37(20):
61-66.
   Sheng, Laiyun (2008) Flows or Migration: the Economic Analysis China’s Rural Labor Flow.
Published by Shanghai Far East Publishers(China).
   Sjaastad , Larry A (1962) “The costs and returns of human migration” The Journal of Political
Economy, 1962, vol. 70, no. S5: 80-93.
   Tan, Kejian (2003) “Value Difference of Sons and Daughters to Their Families in Poverty-stricken
Areas”, Population Research (in Chinese): 2003 27(2).
   Taylor, J. Edward (1986) “Differential migration, networks, information and risk” in Migration,
Human Capital and Development, edited by O. Stark, published by JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.



                                                 31
   Wan, Chuan; Dezhu Wang and Bo Li (2004) “Debates on Temporary Residence Permit System and
Necessity for Adopting It” Chinese Journal of Population Science (in Chinese): C29.
   Wang, Dewen; Wu Yaowu; and Cai Fang (2003) “Migration, unemployment, and urban labor market
segregation in China’s economic transition” working paper, Beijing: Institute of Population and Labor
Economics, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
   White, Tyrene (1992 )“Birth Planning between Plan and Market: The Impact of Reform on China’s
One-Child Policy”, China’s Economic Dilemmas in the 1990’s: The Problems of Reforms, Modernization,
and Interdependence. Studies in Contemporary China. Armonk, N.Y.U.S.C.J.E. Committee and London,
Sharpe, 1992: 252-69.
   Woodruff, Christopher and Rene Zenteno (2007) “Migration Networks and Microenterprises in
Mexico” Journal of Development Economics 82: 509-528.
   Young, Alwyn (2003) “Gold into Base Metals: Productivity Growth in the People’s Republic of China
during the Reform Period” Journal of Political Economy, Vol 111, no. 6.
   Zhang, Weiqing (1998) Introduction to Family Planning in China (in Chinese), China Population
Publishing House.
   Zhao, Yaohui (1999a) “Leaving the Countryside: Rural-to-Urban Migration Decision in China”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 1999, 89(2): 281-286.
   Zhao, Yaohui (1999b) “Labor Migration and Earnings Differences: the Case of Rural China”
Economic Development and Cultural Change 47(4): 767-782.
   Zhao, Yaohui (2002) “Cause and Consequences of Return Migration: Recent Evidence from China”
Journal of Comparative Economics 30, 376-394.
   Zhao, Yaohui (2003) “The Role of Migrant Networks in Labor Migration: The Case of China”
Contemporary Economic Policy 21: 500-511.
   Zhao, Zhong (2005) “Migration, labor market flexibility, and wage determination
China: a review”, The Developing Economies, 43, 285-312.



Figure 1: Percent of adults that migrate in 2006, by age and gender, study sample




                                                32
            Figure 2: Histogram of migration percentage per village, raw data, study sample
            400
            300
Frequency



            200
            100
                  0




                               0             .2                .4                  .6              .8
                                                      migration rate per village

            Figure 3: Histogram of unexplained migration rate per village, after village-level regression, study sample




            Figure 4: Simulated migration

                                                  Simulated migration patterns by year

                               100%
                                   80%
                  % migrants




                                   60%                                                                                 scenario #1
                                                                                                                       scenario #2
                                   40%                                                                                 scenario #3

                                   20%
                                   0%
                                         1        4     7       10       13        16        19   22    25   28   31
                                                                                        year


                                                                                        33
Table 1: Distribution of migrants by destination, study sample
             Destination                  % migrants             Per capita income of 2006          Railway hours to
                                                          (relative to rural of the sampled area)      destination
                                                                 rural                urban
Within province
       within the sampled area              10.20%                1.00                 3.57                 0
       outside the sampled area             16.05%                0.97                 4.56                3-4
Across province
                  A                         27.86%                3.59                 8.40                 26
                  B                         20.18%                2.49                 7.57                 20
                  C                          9.68%                2.37                 6.71                 38
                  D                          4.85%                1.10                 5.07                10.5
                  E                          3.53%                2.85                 6.83                 36
                  F                          1.92%                4.47                10.98                26.5
                  G                          0.20%                1.41                 5.57                 6.5
                  H                          0.63%                1.47                 4.51                 13


Table 2: Within-village cluster of migrants, by destination, industrial sector and surname
                                                    Average        Average per           Average per        Whole
                                                        per           township              county           area
                                                      village
% of migrants in the most common sector              75.10%             51.93%             46.21%          46.68%
                                                     (0.68%)           (1.00%)             (1.71%)
% of migrants in the most common destination         63.80%             39.82%             31.66%          27.86%
                                                     (0.76%)           (0.84%)             (4.54%)
% in the most common sector, conditional on          83.80%             59.07%             54.27%          59.05%
    migrants in the most common destination          (0.59%)           (1.12%)             (5.90%)
% in the most common sector of each                  95.20%             58.33%             49.83%          47.63%
   destination                                       (0.34%)           (0.81%)             (3.26%)
% in the most common sector, conditional on          82.60%             52.80%             45.77%          43.97%
   migrants with the most common surname             (0.60%)           (0.85%)             (3.26%)
% in the most common destination, conditional        74.50%             41.31%             31.73%          26.80%
   on migrants with most common surname              (0.69%)           (1.02 %)            (4.77%)
% in the most common sector of each surname          90.10%             61.99%             48.95%          47.03%
                                                     (0.47%)           (0.76 %)           (1.52 %)
% in the most common destination of each             85.80%             51.73%             34.90%          28.67%
    surname                                          (0.56%)           (0.75 %)           (3.57 %)
N of observations                                      3950               250                  8               1
Standard error in parentheses. The percentages are computed as follows: suppose 11 migrants of a village went to two
destinations (A and B) for two sectors (X1 and X2). If 5 went to destination A with 3 in X1 and 2 in X2, and the other 6
went to B with 1 in X1 and 5 in X2, the % in the most common sector is 7/11, the % in the most common destination is
6/11 , the % in most common sector conditional on the most common destination is 5/6, and the % in the most common
sector of each destination is (3+5)/(5+6). Percentages by surname are computed similarly.




                                                         34
Table 3: Summary of adults by the number and gender of child birth, study sample
                     # of                  migrate      have       have boy      have girl   Number of     Number of
                 observations              or not      second      in second    in second    girls under   boys under
                                                       birth or     or later      or later     age 16        age 16
                                                         not         birth1        birth1
                     (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                 Panel A: All adults aged 17-60
All adults         3327996                  0.17                                                 0.58          0.68
                                           (0.38)                                               (0.80)        (0.81)
Adults with        2081151                  0.15                                                 0.92          1.08
kids                                       (0.36)                                               (0.85)        (0.78)
Adults with        1504799                  0.14        0.69         0.76          0.58          1.00          1.17
clear                                      (0.35)      (0.50)       (0.43)        (0.49)        (0.86)        (0.80)
firstborn
definition
                 Panel B: Conditional on the first-born child being single birth
firstborn is       758616      50.41%      0.14        0.68        0.64          0.64            0.55          1.52
boy                                       (0.35)      (0.46)      (0.48)        (0.48)          (0.70)        (0.67)
firstborn is       734495      48.81%      0.14        0.71        0.87          0.52            1.48          0.80
girl                                      (0.35)      (0.45)      (0.33)        (0.50)          (0.73)        (0.74)
                 Panel C: Conditional on the first-born children being multiple birth
firstborns are      3123       0.21%       0.21        0.70        0.89        0.40              2.35          0.78
all girls                                 (0.41)      (0.46)      (0.31)      (0.49)            (0.64)        (0.70)
firstborns are      3989         0.27%       0.20       0.39         0.55          0.63          0.28          2.24
all boys                                    (2.60)     (0.49)       (0.50)        (0.48)        (0.55)        (0.51)
firstborns           4576          0.31%     0.22       0.48         0.68          0.57          1.32          1.38
have mixed                                  (0.42)     (0.50)       (0.46)        (0.49)        (0.59)        (0.56)
gender
Notes: Unit of analysis is adult labor aged 17-60 as defined in the study sample. Of the 576352 adults that have children
but do not have clear-firstborn definition, 576101 (or 99.96%) is because they report at least one child over age 16 and
therefore we are not sure that the reported oldest child is the real oldest child. The gender of second or later-borns is
conditional on the families that have second birth.




                                                         35
Table 4 Test for the validity of instruments
                                                                       Dependent Variable
                                                                                                               Having at
                                              migrate or not                    # of kids    Family size
                                                                                                             least one boy
                                    (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)           (5)               (6)
 having a girl firstborn        0.00392***     0.00331***         0.0132***     0.248***      0.256***        -0.318***
                                (0.000824)     (0.000823)        (0.000994)     (0.00388)     (0.00399)        (0.00164)
 female* girl firstborn                                          -0.0201***
                                                                 (0.000940)
 1 if firstborn info missing     0.0437***     0.0371***          0.0373***     -1.444***     -0.771***       -0.680***
                                 (0.00142)      (0.00136)         (0.00136)     (0.00450)     (0.00729)        (0.00153)
 female                                        -0.0325***        -0.0281***     -0.133***     -0.785***       -0.0367***
                                               (0.000947)        (0.000929)     (0.00596)      (0.0100)        (0.00197)
 age                                           -0.0212***        -0.0213***     0.247***      0.390***        0.0832***
                                               (0.000349)        (0.000349)     (0.00174)     (0.00233)       (0.000485)
 age square                                   0.000159***        0.000160***   -0.00310***   -0.00430***     -0.00106***
                                               (3.53e-06)         (3.53e-06)    (2.06e-05)    (2.81e-05)      (5.67e-06)
 distance to nearest station                   0.00879***        0.00877***    -0.00256***    0.0338***       0.00191***
                                               (0.000273)        (0.000273)     (0.000693)    (0.00107)       (0.000180)
 years of schooling                             9.70e-05          9.81e-05      0.000858*     0.00145**       0.000160**
                                               (0.000225)        (0.000225)     (0.000442)   (0.000619)       (7.74e-05)
 County dummy                     control        control           control        control      control          control
 Numbers of Observations         3,327,996     3,327,996          3,327,996     1,153,804     1,153,804        1,153,804
 Level of Observations           individual    individual         individual    household     household       household
 R square                         0.0879         0.2016            0.2017        0.5298        0.1986           0.4667
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. The error terms are clustered
by village.




                                                            36
Table 5: Key coefficients of OLS and 2SLS regressions on Specification 1, study sample

                                                      Panel A: First stage
                                                                     Dependent Variables: peer migration ( y i ,v )
                                                          (1) OLS            (2) 2SLS           (3) 2SLS           (4) 2SLS
% of same-village adults having multiples in the
first birth                                                                  0.545**                               0.487**
                                                                             (0.154)                               (0.154)
% of same-village male labors residing in
households with a girl firstborn                                                                0.715***           0.683***
                                                                                                 (0.129)            (0.129)
% of same-village females residing in households
with a girl firstborn                                                                          -0.691***           -0.662***
                                                                                                 (0.122)             (0.122)
Number of observations                                                       3327996            3327996             3327996
R square                                                                      0.340               0.343               0.345
First stage F-statistics                                                      12.47               16.33               13.86
                                                     Panel B: Second Stage
                                                                    Dependent Variable: self migration ( yi ,v )
% of same-village adults migrating                       0.930***           0.631***            0.768***           0.727***
                                                         (0.00326)            (0.106)            (0.0407)           (0.0438)
                   Conditional LR test for weak IV                        [0.571, 0.672]      [0.721,0.787]      [0.685,0.743]

                                     (other coefficients are reported in Appendix Table A2)

 Observations                                             3327996            3327996            3327996            3327996
 R-squared                                                 0.276              0.267              0.273              0.272
                                                     Panel C: Reduced form
                                                                    Dependent Variable: self migration ( yi ,v )
% of same-village adults having multiples in the
first birth                                                                  0.346**                               0.300**
                                                                             (0.152)                               (0.152)
% of same-village male labors residing in
households with a girl firstborn                                                                0.600***           0.582***
                                                                                                 (0.125)            (0.125)
% of same-village females residing in households
with a girl firstborn                                                                          -0.518***           -0.502***
                                                                                                 (0.118)             (0.118)
Number of observations                                                     3327996              3327996             3327996
R square                                                                     0.196                0.196               0.197
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions control for county fixed effects,
registered township population, presence of highway exit, and # of township-village-enterprises in township. Errors are
clustered by village.




                                                         37
Table 6: Robust checks on Specification 1

                                                                              Dependent variables: migration
                                                                                                                                              Family    Exclude
                                                                           Main Sample                                                       with only minority
                                                                                                                                            two adults gathering
Sample                                                                                                                                                  villages
                                                       Exclude                                                      include
                                                          own                  IV           IV                    migration    include
                                                      household            conditional conditional                 of other migration
                                   Redefine     Use     fertility   IV       on girl    on same-                   adults in   of other
                           Results migration township outcomes conditional firstborns     village                  different  adults in
                            from     as 6+      FE     from the on all-boy with adult households                 villages but the same
                           Table 6 months instead of right hand multiples age at or with different                   same    household
                          Column 4 away county FE         side     only     below 35    surnames                  township
Specification               2SLS     2SLS      2SLS      2SLS     2SLS        2SLS         2SLS                      2SLS       2SLS         2SLS         2SLS
                            （1）     （2）         (3)        (4)      (5)       （6）         （7）                         (8)         (9)        （10）         （11）
% of same-village adults
that migrate (exclude
own household)           0.727*** 0.674*** 0.789*** 0.741***            0.681***      0.622***      0.810***       0.782***     0.482***     0.604***     0.710***
                         (0.0438) (0.116) (0.0757) (0.0407)              (0.148)      (0.0825)      (0.0458)        (0.104)     (0.0396)     (0.0186)     (0.0217)
% of same-township
adults that migrate
(exclude own village)                                                                                               0.0108
                                                                                                                    (0.103)
% of same-household
adults that migrate
(exclude self)                                                                                                                  0.144***
                                                                                                                                 (0.002)
Control Other Variables      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes                       Yes          Yes
Numbers of Observations 3,327,996 3,327,996 3,327,996 3,327,996 3,327,996 3,327,996                 3,327,996     3,327,996 3,327,996 2,138,948 2,330,227
R-squared                     0.272       0.268       0.275       0.260   0.270       0.267           0.259          0.274        0.333         0.226       0.273
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions control for county fixed effects (except for column 3) and
all the other variables used in Table 6. Errors are clustered by village.




                                                                                 38
Table 7 2SLS regression by destination, study sample

                                                                  Dependent Variable: Migration to
                                                  Within
                                                 province             A             B              C              D
                                                    (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)
% of same village adults migrating to
same province                                     0.996***        -0.00512       -0.00255      -0.00197       0.00125
                                                  (0.0170)         (0.0283)      (0.0279)     (0.00826)      (0.00419)
% of same village adults migrating to A           0.0501**        1.103***       0.109***     0.0341***       0.00942*
                                                  (0.0207)         (0.0364)      (0.0369)      (0.0107)      (0.00506)
% of same village adults migrating to B            -0.0597          0.0130       1.009***      0.000879      -0.0240**
                                                  (0.0384)         (0.0632)      (0.0626)      (0.0185)      (0.00992)
% of same village adults migrating to C            -0.0327           -0.138       -0.132       0.964***       0.000261
                                                  (0.0548)         (0.0981)      (0.0984)      (0.0282)       (0.0135)
% of same village adults migrating to D            -0.0928          -0.153*       -0.125      -0.0648**       0.967***
                                                  (0.0568)         (0.0848)      (0.0790)      (0.0274)       (0.0160)
Observations                                      3327996          3327996       3327996       3327996        3327996
R-squared                                           0.102             0.106        0.097         0.068          0.043
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include
county fixed effects, all the control variables used in Table 6, and percent of same village adults migrating to other
destinations. Errors are clustered by village. Shaded cells refer to influence from peers migrating to the same
destination.


Table 8 2SLS regression by industrial sector, study sample

                                                     Dependent Variable: Migration for
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)
                                            manufacturing   service    construction other jobs

 % of same-village adults migrating
 for manufacturing jobs                        0.927***          -0.00439        -0.0120          -0.0258
                                               (0.0743)          (0.0164)       (0.0133)         (0.0373)
 % of same-village adults migrating
 for service jobs                               -0.454*          0.896***        -0.0405         -0.205*
                                                (0.243)          (0.0540)       (0.0430)         (0.122)
 % of same-village adults migrating
 for construction jobs                          0.0414            0.0115        0.937***          -0.0197
                                                (0.163)          (0.0361)       (0.0304)         (0.0822)
 % of same-village adults migrating
 for other jobs                                -0.236***       -0.0531***        -0.0276*        0.879***
                                                (0.0759)         (0.0167)        (0.0142)        (0.0386)
 Observations                                   3327996          3327996         3327996         3327996
 R-squared                                        0.190           0.065            0.071           0.132
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include
county fixed effects, and all the control variables used in Table 6. Errors are clustered by village. Shaded cells refer
to influence from peers migrating for the same industrial sector.




                                                            39
Table 10: Heterogeneous effects of peer migration, study sample
                                                         Dependent Variable: Self migration, 2SLS
                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)                (5)

% of same-village adults that migrate             0.796***       0.776***       0.825***     0.538***     0.781***
                                                  (0.0346)        (0.039)       (0.0397)      (0.101)     (0.0397)

% of same-village adults that migrate *
distance to the nearest bus station
                                                   -0.00085
                                                  (0.00776)
% of same-village adults that migrate *
distance to county center                                         0.00016
                                                                 (0.00014)
% of same-village adults that migrate *
distance to the center of the studied area                                      0.00054*
                                                                               (0.000282)
% of same-village adults that migrate *
                                                                                             0.00131**
distance to the provincial capital
                                                                                            (0.000357)
% of same-village adults that migrate * have
TV access                                                                                                   0.0182
                                                                                                           (0.0274)
Numbers of Observations (household)                  3,327,996       3,327,996     3,327,996 3,327,996    3,327,996
R-squared                                              0.274           0.274         0.275        0.274     0.274
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include
county fixed effects and all the control variables used in Table 6. IVs are the same as in Column (4) of Table 6.
Errors are clustered by village.




                                                        40
Appendix A: China’s migration pattern and hukou restrictions

         The land-population pressure is more acute in China than in other countries. According to the
World Bank, China’s rural population per square kilometer of arable land was 592 in 2000. Although this
number has declined to 542 in 2005 (probably due to migration and fertility control), it is still higher than
that of US (33), Mexico (98), and India (489). The high population density implies that rural China
potentially have a large amount of agricultural labor that could be more productive in other activities.
         The transfer from agricultural labor to non-agricultural activities takes two forms in China. One is
working for local Township-Village-Enterprises. These enterprises often locate in the same village or
same town, allowing workers to commute between home and work every day. The other form is migrating
to a far-away city, working there, and coming home occasionally for holidays, family visits, or agricultural
seasons. As shown in Appendix Figure A1, the percent of rural population engaging in local non-
agriculture work has increased from roughly 16% in 1985 to over 25% in 2005. In comparison, the percent
of people migrating for city work grows much faster, from 2.2% in 1985 to nearly 20% in 2005.
         A large fraction of the rural-to-urban migration moves across province. Based on the 2000 China
Population Census, rural-to-urban migration accounts for 52% of intra-province moves but 78% of inter-
province moves (Cai and Wang 2003). Within inter-province migration, 75% of migrants move from the
West and Mid-west to the East (Wang, Wu and Cai 2003). 34 Rural migrants are concentrated in
manufacturing (32%), construction (22%), services (12%) and retail (5%) (Sheng 2008).
         Most rural migrants cannot obtain a permanent residential permit in their working cities. Before
1984, most individual activities, including employment, schooling and social benefits, were closely tied to
an individual’s residence permit (Hukou). The enforcement of the Hukou system was relaxed over time,
partly because more and more enterprises are not province-owned and do not require local Hukou for
employment, partly because Chinese government has adopted a series of policies that allow people to live
in cities without local Hukou (Chen 2006). For example, if a rural-to-urban migrant wants to work in a city
for more than one month, the city will issue a temporary residential permit (TRP) condition on the
migrant’s employment status. Alternatively, the migrant can apply for a TRP by staying in the house of a
local resident (or a hotel) but that resident (or hotel owner) must show a valid residential permit of the city
to the local police. If a migrant is caught without Hukou and TRP, s/he is subject to fine and could be sent
back home. Like Hukou, TRP constitutes a barrier to entry into urban areas and is quite controversial.
Some cities tried to eliminate TRP, but many of them end up reactivating it because local residents prefer
to have it due to safety reasons.35 By the time of our sample period (2006), most destinations observed in
our sample still issue and enforce TRP.


34
   Lin, Wang and Zhao (2006) show that, in the year of 2000, the urban per capita income is 142% higher than that of
rural areas. Per capita income of 12 coastal provinces on the East is 65% higher than that of inland areas.
35
   As documented in Wan, Wang and Li (2004), temporary residential permit has reduced urban crime because (1) it
facilitates the management of rural-to-urban migrants, (2) it helps the police to target crimes committed by or towards
migrants, and (3) the police can educate migrants in laws and law enforcement.
                                                         41
        In short, although the relaxed Hukou system and the introduction of TRP have fostered rural-to-
urban migration, they do not facilitate once-for-all migration to the city. Without urban Hukou, rural
migrants have to keep their families at home, work alone in the city, and tolerate discrimination in
schooling, housing, health insurance, work protection, and retirement benefits. Knight, Song and Jia
(1999) document that migrants on average spend 6.8 months away from home in 1993. Using newer data,
Du (2000) finds that the away time is on average 8 months per year for migrants from Sichuan (a western
province) and 7 months for migrants from Anhui (a middle province).
        Despite the inconvenience of long-distance travel, most migrants work away from home for years
and do not return permanently to their rural origin. Using data from six provinces, Zhao (2002) estimates
that 8.3% of those that migrated in 1998 returned to the origin area and remained there from the end of
1998 to August 1999. Based on more recent data, Sheng (2008) finds that among all the rural people who
migrated in 2003, only 7.1% returned home and did not migrate again during 2004. The return percentage
is the lowest for those in the 16-25 age group (6.2%) and the highest for age 45 and above (16.7%).


Appendix B: China’s one child policy
        China started the one-child policy in late 1970s. Due to strong boy preference, the policy is
difficult to implement in rural areas, especially if the firstborn is a girl. The aggressive implementation of
the one-child policy in early 1980s and the subsequent conflicts in rural areas motivated the central
government to relax the one-child policy in 1984. The most important change in the 1984 policy is
allowing a rural family to have a second child if the firstborn is female. With an intention to reduce
infanticide of firstborn girls, the percentage of rural households receiving a second child permit has
increased from 5% in 1982 to 50% in 1986 (White 1992).
        The province of our data stipulates that a household with both parents having rural hukous is
eligible to apply for the permit of a second child if (1) the first born is a girl, or (2) at least one of the
parents belongs to a minority ethnicity, or (3) the mother of the child is a single child herself and the father
of the child lives with the parents of the child’s mother. However, the government won’t issue the permit
if the mother was less than 30 year old at the time of the first birth and the birth space between the two
births is less than four years. If a rural household has a second birth without the permit, the household is
subject to fines.




                                                         42
Appendix Figure A1: Transfer of rural labor to non-agriculture activities, 1985-2004, all China




       Data source：China Rural Statistical Yearbook 2006



Appendix Figure A2: Distribution of migrants by # of months away from home in 2006, study
sample




                                                 43
Figure A3: Age distribution in villages where 0-10% adults migrate               Figure A4: Age distribution in villages where 10-20% adults
                                                                                 migrate
        80,000
        70,000
        60,000
head    50,000                                                                   head
count
        40,000                                                                   count
        30,000
        20,000
        10,000
            0
                 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 112


                                   non-migrants   migrants




Figure A5: Age distribution in villages where 20-30% adults migrate              Figure A6: Age distribution in villages where 30+% adults migrate




                                                                                 head
head                                                                             count
count




                                                                                 44
Appendix Table A1: Summary statistics by migration status, study sample
                                                               All Adults age 17-60      Non-Migrants              Migrants
                                                                        (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                                                mean          std dev   mean          std dev   mean          std dev
Panel A: Individual Attributes
age                                                             35.63         (11.66)   37.34         (11.61)   27.36         (7.70)
years of schooling                                               6.44         (2.87)    6.15          (2.93)    7.84          (2.04)
female                                                           0.47         (0.50)    0.48          (0.50)    0.38          (0.48)
being household head                                             0.35         (0.48)    0.38          (0.49)    0.17          (0.38)
                                        1
whether my first single birth is girl                            0.49         (0.50)    0.49          (0.50)    0.49          (0.50)
                                      2
whether my first birth is multiples                              0.01         (0.09)    0.01          (0.08)    0.01          (0.11)
                                                   3
minimum age of my own children under age 16                      7.58         (4.74)    7.61          (4.71)    7.39          (4.90)
                                               3
maximal age of my own children under age 16                     10.29         (4.74)    10.40         (4.69)    9.65          (4.94)
Panel B: Household attributes
household head age                                              45.39         (11.16)   44.70         (10.95)   48.73         (11.56)
household head being female                                      0.05         (0.22)    0.05          (0.22)    0.07          (0.26)
household head yr of schooling                                   6.26         (2.83)    6.27          (2.82)    6.24          (2.88)
# of HH members age 0-6                                          0.40         (0.71)    0.41          (0.71)    0.38          (0.69)
# of HH members age 7-16                                         0.87         (1.11)    0.91          (1.12)    0.66          (1.00)
# of HH members age 17-23                                        0.83         (1.02)    0.78          (0.99)    1.08          (1.11)
# of HH members age 24-44                                        1.59         (0.90)    1.56          (0.88)    1.72          (0.99)
# of HH members age 45-59                                        0.75         (0.88)    0.73          (0.88)    0.85          (0.89)
# of HH members age 60+                                          0.23         (0.54)    0.21          (0.51)    0.35          (0.65)
# of girls in the HH age 0-16                                    0.58         (0.81)    0.61          (0.82)    0.48          (0.76)
# of boys in the HH age 0-16                                     0.68         (0.81)    0.71          (0.82)    0.55          (0.77)
Has any boy in the HH? (age 0-16)                                0.49         (0.50)    0.51          (0.50)    0.41          (0.49)
estimated house value (10,000 yuan)                              2.36         (2.80)    2.37          (2.87)    2.28          (2.43)
have any outstanding loans                                       0.14         (0.34)    0.13          (0.34)    0.15          (0.36)
                     5
contract land (mu)                                               3.45         (2.54)    3.44          (2.55)    3.48          (2.45)
                 5
land in use (mu)                                                 4.13         (3.04)    4.15          (3.04)    3.99          (3.06)
Prevalence of HH head's surname in the village                   0.10         (0.12)    0.10          (0.12)    0.10          (0.11)
HH head's surname is the largest surname in the village          0.21         (0.41)    0.21          (0.41)    0.21          (0.41)
HH head's surname is the second largest in the village           0.13         (0.34)    0.13          (0.34)    0.13          (0.33)
HH head's surname is the third largest in the village            0.10         (0.29)    0.10          (0.29)    0.10          (0.29)
HH head's surname is below the third largest in the village      0.56         (0.50)    0.56          (0.50)    0.57          (0.50)
                                                                                                                (to be continued)




                                                          45
Appendix Table A1 (continued)
                                                                  All Adults age 17-60         Non-Migrants                 Migrants
                                                                            (1)                        (2)                        (3)
                                                                   mean           std dev     mean           std dev     mean           std dev
Panel C: Village attributes
distance to the nearest bus station (kilometer)                     6.02           (8.23)     6.16            (8.37)     5.35            (7.45)
whether the village is a minority gathering                         0.30           (0.46)     0.31            (0.46)     0.26            (0.44)
the village has a national poverty status                           0.51           (0.50)     0.51            (0.50)     0.49            (0.50)
# of adults 17-60 in the village                                  1083.00         (545.67)   1083.73         (543.30)   1079.43         (556.97)
                              4
average land per adult (mu)                                         1.63           (0.70)     1.64            (0.71)     1.59            (0.64)
whether regular water use is guaranteed                             0.37           (0.48)     0.36            (0.48)     0.43            (0.49)
have organized production and sale of agriculture products          0.09           (0.28)     0.08            (0.28)     0.10            (0.29)
% of natural gathering groups that have access to electricity       0.96           (0.16)     0.96            (0.16)     0.97            (0.13)
% of natural gathering groups that have access to telephone         0.78           (0.34)     0.77            (0.35)     0.83            (0.30)
% of natural gathering groups that have access to TV signal         0.91           (0.26)     0.90            (0.27)     0.92            (0.24)
% of natural gathering groups that have access to drivable
road                                                                0.66           (0.31)     0.66            (0.32)     0.68            (0.30)
Panel D: attributes of adults in the same village
% of adults in the village that are migrants (exclude all
adults in self HH)                                                  0.17           (0.14)     0.15            (0.13)     0.29            (0.12)
% of first-born children being girl (exclude self, single birth
only)                                                               0.49           (0.06)     0.49            (0.06)     0.49            (0.05)
% of first-born children being multiples (exclude self)             0.01           (0.01)     0.01            (0.01)     0.01            (0.01)
Observations                                                           3327996                   2759453                     568543

Notes: An individual is defined as migrant if s/he has been away from the village for the reason of work for more than 15 days in
2006. Because we code first birth missing if a household reports no child or the oldest child above age 16 (see more details in
Section 2), we have (1) "whether own first child is girl" has 1834855 missing observations (55.1%), (2) "whether own first birth is
multiples" has 1823197 missing observations (54.78%), (3) minimum and maximum child age has 1257900 missing observations
each (37.8%). (4) One Chinese mu is equal to 666.7 square meters or 0.1647 acres.




                                                            46
Appendix Table A2: Full results of the 2SLS regression on Specification 1, study sample

                                                                      Dependent Variable: self migration ( yi ,v )
% of same-village adults migrating                      0.930***              0.631***            0.768***           0.727***
                                                        (0.00326)              (0.106)            (0.0407)           (0.0438)
                     Conditional LR test for weak IV                      [0.571, 0.672]      [0.721,0.787]      [0.685,0.743]
female                                                  -0.0485***          -0.0484***          -0.0484***         -0.0484***
                                                         (0.00117)           (0.00119)           (0.00118)          (0.00118)
age                                                     -0.0116***          -0.0117***          -0.0117***         -0.0117***
                                                        (0.000269)          (0.000278)          (0.000272)         (0.000272)
age square                                             2.74e-05***         3.02e-05***         2.89e-05***        2.93e-05***
                                                         (2.94e-06)          (3.10e-06)          (2.97e-06)         (2.97e-06)
years of schooling                                     0.00852***           0.00871***          0.00862***        0.00865***
                                                        (0.000233)          (0.000242)          (0.000232)         (0.000232)
# of HH members aged 0-6                               0.00642***           0.00764***          0.00708***        0.00725***
                                                        (0.000944)           (0.00103)          (0.000957)         (0.000957)
# of HH members aged 7-16                              0.00743***           0.00857***          0.00805***        0.00821***
                                                        (0.000610)          (0.000697)          (0.000618)         (0.000614)
# of HH members aged 17-23                             0.00374***           0.00565***          0.00478***        0.00504***
                                                        (0.000397)          (0.000756)          (0.000466)         (0.000469)
# of HH members aged 24-44                              0.0256***            0.0282***           0.0270***          0.0274***
                                                        (0.000610)           (0.00101)          (0.000705)         (0.000688)
# of HH members aged 45-59                              0.0325***            0.0347***           0.0337***          0.0340***
                                                        (0.000670)          (0.000997)          (0.000739)         (0.000737)
# of HH members aged 60+                                0.0170***            0.0206***           0.0189***          0.0194***
                                                        (0.000716)           (0.00141)          (0.000878)         (0.000880)
having at least one boy in HH                          -0.00598***         -0.00575***         -0.00585***        -0.00582***
                                                        (0.000868)          (0.000896)          (0.000877)         (0.000881)
minimum age of own child                               0.00309***           0.00310***          0.00309***        0.00310***
                                                        (0.000128)          (0.000131)          (0.000129)         (0.000129)
having a girl firstborn                                0.00218***           0.00191***          0.00203***        0.00200***
                                                        (0.000710)          (0.000726)          (0.000716)         (0.000717)
first birth is multiples                                  0.00510            0.0124***          -0.0316***         -0.0305***
                                                             ()              (0.00467)           (0.00475)          (0.00457)
second birth is multiples                               -0.0128***          -0.0110***          -0.0118***         -0.0116***
                                                         (0.00351)           (0.00363)           (0.00355)          (0.00357)
Is household head                                       -0.0353***          -0.0353***          -0.0353***         -0.0353***
                                                         (0.00121)           (0.00121)           (0.00121)          (0.00121)
age of household head                                  0.00341***           0.00360***          0.00351***        0.00354***
                                                         (6.85e-05)          (9.31e-05)          (7.38e-05)         (7.34e-05)
household head is female                                0.0226***            0.0244***           0.0236***          0.0238***
                                                         (0.00145)           (0.00166)           (0.00151)          (0.00152)
years of schooling for household head                  -0.00253***         -0.00191***         -0.00220***        -0.00211***
                                                        (0.000189)          (0.000304)          (0.000217)         (0.000222)
estimated house value                                  -0.00281***         -0.00355***         -0.00321***        -0.00331***
                                                        (0.000159)          (0.000329)          (0.000196)         (0.000207)
contract land (mu)                                     -0.00150***         -0.00262***         -0.00211***        -0.00226***

                                                        47
                                                       (0.000182)        (0.000436)          (0.000244)         (0.000251)
Prevalence of HH head's surname in village               -0.00102           0.00148            0.000340           0.000681
                                                        (0.00290)         (0.00440)           (0.00343)          (0.00366)
distance to nearest bus station                       -7.96e-05**          -1.95e-05           -4.70e-05          -3.88e-05
                                                        (3.18e-05)        (8.12e-05)          (5.19e-05)         (5.95e-05)
village is a minority gathering                          0.00122*          -0.00414            -0.00169          -0.00242*
                                                       (0.000639)         (0.00255)           (0.00127)          (0.00145)
village has national poverty status                    -0.00157**          -0.00200           -0.00180*           -0.00186
                                                       (0.000633)         (0.00157)           (0.00103)          (0.00118)
# of adults in the village                            -0.00722***        -0.0124***          -0.0100***         -0.0107***
                                                        (0.00104)         (0.00310)           (0.00186)          (0.00209)
arable land in the village (mu)                       0.00322***         0.00677***          0.00515***         0.00564***
                                                       (0.000794)         (0.00218)           (0.00133)          (0.00149)
regular water use is guaranteed                        -0.00131**        -0.00356**          -0.00253**         -0.00284**
                                                       (0.000607)         (0.00179)           (0.00104)          (0.00120)
village has organized production and sale of           0.00241**            0.00308            0.00278*            0.00287
   agricultural products
                                                       (0.000985)          (0.00250)           (0.00165)           (0.00189)
% of natural gathering groups within the village        -0.00311*            0.00314           0.000281             0.00113
  having access to electricity                          (0.00176)          (0.00458)           (0.00287)           (0.00323)
% of natural gathering groups within the village         0.000538         0.0122***          0.00685***          0.00843***
  having access to telephone                           (0.000908)          (0.00455)           (0.00208)           (0.00228)
% of natural gathering groups within the village         0.00247*           -0.00206            1.03e-05           -0.000608
  having access to TV signals                           (0.00130)          (0.00324)           (0.00196)           (0.00222)
% of natural gathering groups within the village       0.00373***          0.00383*           0.00378**           0.00380**
  having access to drivable roads                      (0.000932)          (0.00225)           (0.00148)           (0.00170)
Observations                                              3327996            3327996            3327996             3327996
R-squared                                                  0.276              0.267               0.273               0.272
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions control for county fixed effects,
registered township population, presence of highway exit, and # of township-village-enterprises in township. Errors are
clustered by village.




                                                       48
Appendix Table A3: 2SLS regression by age cohort

                                                                          Dependent Variable: Migration
 sample                                           17-20         21-25         26-30         31-35               36-40         41-45
                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)                 (5)           (6)
 % of same-village adults aged 17-20
 that migrate                                  1.142***       0.697***       0.577***         0.287**         0.0989*         0.0366
                                               (0.0563)        (0.145)        (0.175)         (0.117)         (0.0532)       (0.0271)
 % of same-village adults aged 21-25
 that migrate                                 -0.224***       0.339**         -0.0586         0.0810           0.0422         0.0288
                                               (0.0513)       (0.143)         (0.170)         (0.113)         (0.0503)       (0.0258)
 % of same-village adults aged 26-30
 that migrate                                   -0.0572       -0.320**        -0.0311        -0.497***       -0.222***       -0.122***
                                               (0.0573)        (0.163)        (0.206)         (0.144)         (0.0626)        (0.0328)
 % of same-village adults aged 31-35
 that migrate                                   0.108            0.153         -0.245         0.423**          -0.141         0.0133
                                               (0.0832)         (0.229)       (0.274)         (0.207)         (0.0938)       (0.0442)
 % of same-village adults aged 36-40
 that migrate                                   0.238            0.417        0.993**         0.753**         1.305***       0.170**
                                               (0.148)          (0.389)       (0.481)         (0.339)          (0.150)       (0.0723)
 % of same-village adults aged 41-45
 that migrate                                     -0.213        -0.339         0.0118          0.168           -0.112        0.742***
                                                 (0.187)       (0.496)        (0.556)         (0.382)         (0.179)        (0.0947)
 Observations                                    341307        442035         472301          498009          506443          339076
 R-squared                                         0.275         0.299          0.290          0.226           0.149           0.096
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include
county fixed effects, all the control variables used in Table 6, and the percentages of same village adults aged 46-50,
51-55, 56-60 that migrate. Errors are clustered by village. Shaded cells refer to influence from peers of the same age
group.

Appendix Table A4: 2SLS regression by gender

                                                                           Dependent variable: migration
Sample                                                                    male                           female
                                                                           (1)                              (2)
% of same-village male adults that migrate                              0.766***                        0.237***
                                                                         (13.34)                          (3.52)
% of same-village female adults that migrate                              0.097                         0.437***
                                                                        （1.91）                            (7.36)
Numbers of Observations                                               1,780,353                       1,547,643
R-Squared                                                                0.29                            0.27
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include
county fixed effects and all the control variables used in Table 6. Errors are clustered by village. Shaded cells refer to
influence from peers of the same gender.




                                                           49
Appendix Table A5: 2SLS regression by surname groups

                                                                  Dependent Variable: migration
                                                (1)                     (2)              (3)               (4)
                                                                     Adults with    Adults with
                                          Adults with              second most       third most       Adults with
  sample                                 most dominant               dominant         dominant           other
                                           surname                   surname          surname          surnames
% of migrants among adults that
have the most dominant surname in
the village                                 0.976***                  0.0948           0.154            0.231*
                                             (0.150)                  (0.213)         (0.230)           (0.122)
% of migrants among adults that
have the second most dominant
surname in the village                       0.259**                 1.239***         0.378*            0.300**
                                             (0.101)                  (0.172)         (0.213)           (0.145)
% of migrants among adults that
have the third most dominant
surname in the village                        -0.118                  -0.321*         0.435*           -0.00815
                                             (0.111)                  (0.179)         (0.225)           (0.147)
% of migrants among adults that
have other surnames in the village             -0.258               -0.231             -0.208             0.302*
                                              (0.210)              (0.310)             (0.301)            (0.175)
Observations                                  754602               457514              337638            1973942
R-squared                                      0.279                 0.263              0.274              0.268
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions
include county fixed effects and all the control variables used in Table 6. Errors are clustered by village. Shaded
cells refer to influence from peers of the same surname group.

Appendix Table A6: 2SLS regression by education group

                                                                Dependent Variable: migration
Sample                                                 Edu: 0-5    Edu: 6-9    Edu: 10-12     Edu>12
                                                         (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)
% of migrants among adults whose years of
schooling is less than 7                               0.917***         0.661***     0.858***          0.706
                                                         (7.90)           (2.66)       (3.22)         (1.03)
% of migrants among adults whose years of                                                             -0.178
schooling is between 7 and 9                              -0.11           0.304       -0.076
                                                         (-1.51)         (-1.85)      (-0.41)        (-0.35)
% of migrants among adults whose years of             0.112**         0.339***     0.753***           0.361
schooling is between 10 and 13
                                                         (2.55)          (2.97)       (7.12)           (1.1)
% of migrants among adults whose years of
schooling is above 12                                   -0.009        0.007            -0.042        0.527***
                                                        (-0.59)      (0.14）          （-0.83）            (3.39)
Observations                                          1358,858       834404            49331             5579
R-squared                                                0.2           0.26             0.23             0.26
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust t-statistics in parentheses. All regressions
include county fixed effects and all the control variables used in Table 6. Errors are clustered by village.
Shaded cells refer to influence from peers of the same education group.




                                                             50
Appendix Table A7: Impact of peer migration on the land in use by non-migrating households
                                                                              Dependent Variable: land
Sample                                                                        Exclude migration family
                                                                         OLS                            2SLS
                                                                          (1)                             (2)
% of same-village adults that migrate                                  1.393***                         -0.131
                                                                        (0.089)                        (0.794)
Numbers of Observations (household)                                     984,110                        984,110
R-squared                                                                0.737                           0.733
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include
county fixed effects, own contract land, and all the control variables used in Table 6. Errors are clustered by village.




Appendix Table A8: Empirical tests for organized migration or organized recruiting
                                                         Dependent Variable: Migration , all 2SLS
                                                                                   Redefine IVs based on children age
                                        Include village cadre demographics                     0-12 only
                                                      (1) 2SLS                                 (2) 2SLS
% of same-village adults migrating                     0.735***                                  0.672***
                                                       (0.0417)                                  (0.0477)
Numbers of Observations                               3,327,996                                  3,327,996
R-Squared                                                 0.272                                   0.269
Notes: Significance at 10% (*), 5% (**), 1% (***). Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include
county fixed effects, all the control variables used in Table 6, and village cadre demographics (gender, education and
veteran status for village head and communist party leader.). Errors are clustered by village.




                                                           51
