NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPLICATIONS FOR ENERGY INNOVATION FROM THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY
Ashish Arora
Alfonso Gambardella
Working Paper 15676
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15676

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2010

We are grateful to Linda Cohen, Rebecca Henderson, Richard Newell and other participants at the
NBER meeting, April 2009, Boston for helpful comments, and to Bonnie Nevel and Susan Schaffer
for assistance in the preparation of this manuscript. We remain responsible for all remaining errors
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ashish Arora and Alfonso Gambardella. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Implications for Energy Innovation from the chemical industry
Ashish Arora and Alfonso Gambardella
NBER Working Paper No. 15676
January 2010
JEL No. N7,O3,O31,O33,O34,O38
ABSTRACT
The history of innovation in the chemical industry offers many insights for accelerating energy innovation.
In this chapter, we begin by laying out the early history of the chemical industry for an overview of
the role innovation has played in its development. We then explore three noteworthy historical experiences.
We describe the switch in feedstocks from coal to oil, and briefly analyze two government programs
that have attempted to promote innovation: synthetic rubber and synfuels. We take a close look at
the role that specialized engineering firms have played in the diffusion of important innovations, and
we detail the effect that government policies have had on fostering innovation. In particular, we highlight
the role of anti-trust policies, and of policies for protecting intellectual property rights.

Ashish Arora
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
ashish.arora@duke.edu
Alfonso Gambardella
Department of Management and KITeS
Bocconi University
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milan
Italy
alfonso.gambardella@unibocconi.it

Once a leader in industrial innovation, the chemical industry has changed countless aspects of
modern life. From the plastic in the toothbrush we use in the morning, to the tires we drive to work on and
the fuel that powers them, to the clothes that keep us warm, chemical innovations are so infused in our
daily lives that we generally take them for granted. It is hard to imagine life without the myriad chemical
breakthroughs that shape today’s world.
It is difficult to speak of the chemical industry, one that David Landes (1969: 269) has called the
most “miscellaneous of industries” and which encompasses synthetic fibers, plastics, agricultural
pesticides and fertilizers, food additives, health and beauty aids, and many other products and production
components.. For this chapter, we will focus on industrial synthetic fibers and plastics and the inputs from
which they are made. Their history offers useful lessons for how energy innovation and diffusion might
be accelerated.
Chemical innovation has been marked by the search for new feedstocks, and the concomitant
process innovations that allow the feedstocks to be produced and used. A prominent example of such a
change in feedstocks is the shift from coal to oil (and gas) for producing synthetic fibers and plastics, a
change that began before World War II in the United States. This shift was accompanied by a flood of
innovations, including advances in petroleum refining and new processes for the production of important
synthetic fibers and plastics. Energy innovation too is likely to involve to some extent the development
and large scale deployment of new processes and new materials designed by chemists and chemical
engineers.
Innovation in the chemical industry requires scaling-up laboratory discoveries into commercially
viable products. This sort of chemical engineering has its roots in oil refining. The gigantic refineries that
produce gasoline, kerosene, diesel, and a host of valuable inputs used in a wide range of commonly used
materials, embody numerous innovations in chemistry and chemical engineering. The bio-refineries of the
future will no doubt be different from the oil refineries of the present, but much of the expertise they
require will come from chemists and chemical engineers.
There are more subtle connections as well. The successful commercial introduction of new
materials has required careful attention to questions such as how downstream users would use them,
whether existing processing machinery would have to be modified, and how the final product in which
the new material was embodied, would differ. All these considerations have potential effects that ripple
through the value chain.1 For example, the introduction of a new automobile fuel may also require
changes in how it is distributed and used, and a new form of rubber with different temperature-related
properties may require new learning about best applications for its use. Chemical innovation, which has
often consisted of new types of materials that are used to produce existing products, have long featured
this type of adjustment.
Despite this complexity, for the most part, the chemical industry has relied upon markets to
coordinate the required changes. This coordination is far from perfect. Many chemical processes have
produced harmful by-products. However, the history of chemical innovation also reflects the search to
mitigate or eliminate waste. For instance, chlorine produced as a byproduct in producing caustic soda in
the mid 19th century was used to produce bleaching powder. Changes in the market place, especially
growth in demand, have occasionally made what was hitherto waste more valuable and therefore worth
capturing. Thus, in the 19th century in the United States, kerosene was the principal product produced
from crude oil. Natural gas was routinely flared in oil pumps, and heavier components in crude oil, such
as waxes, were simply tossed aside. Over time, in response to rising demand, techniques were developed
to use these hitherto waste products. The implications for energy innovation, which centrally involves the
problem of dealing with harmful by-products such as carbon dioxide, are obvious.
Major innovations in the recent history of the chemical industry have been the result of privately
funded research carried out in the laboratories of large chemical and oil firms. In the 1870s, when the
chemical industry revolved around synthetic dyes, firms believed that hiring chemists would help them
1

A “value chain” is a series of activities for which each step of the activity increases the value of the target product.

2

discover new dyes, the way to commercial success. During the 1920s and years of the Great Depression,
the spread of the automobile created demand for gasoline (and hence for new refining technologies), for
lacquers (as car paint), plastics, and materials for car tires. Later, World War II greatly boosted the
demand for plastics, synthetic fibers such as nylon and polyester, high octane gasoline, and synthetic
rubber. In each case, the payoffs for developing new materials, improving them, and developing
techniques to reduce production costs and increase production volumes, were significant and predictable.
The post World War II boom in the 1950s and 1960s further increased demand for synthetic fibers such as
polyester, and for new plastics such as polystyrene.
This commitment to investing in research, not simply in production, became ingrained in the
industry. Hounshell and Smith (1988) argue that the commercial success of nylon, commercialized just as
World War II started, may have been salient in shaping the thinking of the management of DuPont, and
by extension, of other chemical firms as well. Hounshell and Smith describe in detail the largely fruitless
attempts of DuPont management to search for blockbuster products that would be as successful as nylon.
In the process, the company built substantial in-house capability for R&D, and for some time even
operated an in-house “Polymer Institute.” By contrast, most other technology intensive sectors developed
after World War II, by which time, government support for research was more forthcoming, and in some
cases, decisive in starting the industry.
Early in the history of the industry, when synthetic dyestuffs were based on advances in organic
chemistry by German chemists, universities made formative contributions, and in the 20th century, they
have contributed indirectly (but importantly) by institutionalizing the learning being created by firms and
by training students—creating the disciplines, as it were, of petroleum engineering, chemical engineering,
polymer chemistry, polymer engineering and so on. The Federal government’s role in supporting
innovation in the industry has not, however, been limited to supporting universities and programs such as
synfuels and the synthetic rubber program. It has also played a key role in facilitating the development of
a “market for technology” in the industry, through both anti trust and intellectual property policy. But it
has been in private research labs, and indeed through the research programs of a wide range of private
firms including smaller players and “specialized engineering firms” or “SEFs”, that most recent
discoveries have taken place.
The development of new processes and materials alone does not make a significant contribution
to economic growth; the new processes and materials have to be widely diffused. The rapid diffusion of
synthetic fibers and plastics, such as nylon, polyester and polystyrene, was fostered by an extensive
market for technology in which chemical technologies were widely licensed. Specialized engineering
firms, which have supplied technology and know-how, played a key role in this process. The emergence
of these markets for technology appears to have been importantly due to anti-trust policies, principally in
the United States, and the enforcement of intellectual property rights.
In this chapter, we begin by laying out the early history of the chemical industry for an overview
of the role innovation has played in its development. We then explore three noteworthy historical
experiences. We describe the switch in feedstocks from coal to oil, and briefly analyze two government
programs that have attempted to promote innovation: synthetic rubber and synfuels. We take a close look
at the role that specialized engineering firms have played in the diffusion of important innovations, and
we detail the effect that government policies have had on fostering innovation.
[Header1] Early history
The modern chemical industry began with organic chemicals, and specifically, synthetic dyes.
Beginning with William Perkin’s accidental discovery of a mauve (purple) dye in 1856 while in Professor
August Hofmann’s lab, new synthetic dyes were rapidly and subsequently discovered in France and
Germany. By the 1870s, German firms dominated the synthetic dye market. Although the initial discoveries
were made in the labs of university professors—there were few chemical labs outside universities—private
firms quickly began investing in their own labs: by the 1880s, the leading German firms had created in-house

3

laboratories for discovering new synthetic dyes. Ten years later, the vast majority of synthetic dyes came
from the R&D labs of German chemical companies.
University research remained important for opening up fields of inquiry and of suggesting fruitful
areas of investigation. For instance, Friedrich August Kekulé’s discovery of the benzene ring structure in
1866 was crucial for the discovery of dyes based on aniline, by enabling researchers to predict what colors
different reagents might produce. By the 1880s, university research was aimed at clarifying the structure of
dyes discovered in corporate labs, and understanding their properties, rather than discovering new dyes as
such (Murmann 2003).
The United States was a follower in scientific chemical research and also a net technology importer
until World War I. During this time, American chemical firms focused on developing new ways of producing
chemicals on a large scale, especially commodity chemicals like sulfuric acid (Arora and Rosenberg 1998).
These innovations were based in experience, rather than scientific discovery—that is, the innovations arose
from trial and error in the lab, rather than relying on recent scientific advances. Products such as fertilizers
and gasoline also required large scale production to reduce costs. As petroleum refining grew in importance,
so did the demand for new refining processes.
The period from 1920 to 1960 probably marks the golden age of innovation in the chemical industry,
at least as far as the United States is concerned. The major polymers—plastics and synthetic fibers—
originated in corporate labs and were commercialized during this 40-year period (Table 1).2 These advances
in scientific innovation and understanding of polymers also increased understanding of the relationship
between the molecular structure and the physical properties of the material. This period also marks major
developments in chemical engineering, with the commercialization of a number of important chemical
processes. In many cases, fundamental scientific contributions came from researchers working for private
firms, such as Wallace Carothers (DuPont), Frank Mayo (US Rubber), and Giulio Natta (Montecatini). Paul
Flory, later to receive the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his contributions to the area of polymer chemistry,
worked for many years in the research departments of DuPont, Standard Oil, and other chemical firms, before
moving to academia.
Chemical engineering was a distinctly American achievement—more specifically, it was a testimony
to America’s very productive university-industry interface.3 The signal contribution of universities was to
train students and institutionalize the learning being created by firms—creating the disciplines of chemical
engineering, petroleum engineering, polymer chemistry, and polymer engineering. The general purpose
nature of chemical engineering enabled university research and training to play an important role in applying
engineering science to the practical problem of designing large-scale processes. Many of the basic
technological breakthroughs came from researchers trained in these new disciplines and moving on to
corporate labs. For example, the first significant chemical process innovation, the Haber-Bosch process, was
developed by BASF early in the 20th century. A number of the major advances in catalytic refining
techniques were developed by oil firms, notably Standard Oil of New Jersey (now ExxonMobil). University
researchers were sometimes involved in these innovations, but typically in partnership with researchers from
corporate labs. Notably, research partners Warren Lewis and Edwin Gilliland from MIT developed fluidized
bed catalytic cracking in close cooperation with the chemical engineers at Standard Oil (Spitz 1988).

2

The two exceptions are the first synthetic rubber (neoprene), which was based on work by Julius Nieuwland at
Notre Dame University, and the catalyst systems used to produce polypropylene and high density polyethylene,
developed by Karl Ziegler at what is now part of the Max Planck Institutes.
3
See Landau and Rosenberg (1992) for a discussion of the role of MIT in the development of chemical engineering
as a discipline. The large size of the market had introduced American firms to the problems involved in scaling up
production of basic products, such as chlorine, caustic soda, soda ash, and sulfuric acid as early as the beginning of
the 20th century. This focus on large-scale production had additional benefits when it turned out that the new
petrochemical technologies had strong plant-level economies of scale. Because scaling up output was not a simple
matter—it involved considerable learning—early experience with process technologies gained American firms a
head start when petrochemicals became the dominant feedstock after World War II..

4

Individuals and small engineering firms (which were typically entrepreneurial startup firms) were
another important source of chemical process innovation during the golden age. For instance, Scientific
Design, a small firm founded in 1946, developed new “fixed bed” catalytic processes for ethylene glycol,
maleic anhydride, and most importantly, for production of purified terephthalic acid, the basic building block
of polyester. Similarly, National Hydrocarbon Company (now Universal Oil Products [UOP]), provided
some of the fundamental advances in refining technology, including thermal catalytic cracking, reforming,
and sulfur extraction. UOP remains a leading source of refining technology to this day.

[Header1] Case studies in chemical innovation
New materials used by firms as inputs (rather than sold directly to consumers) typically take a
long time to diffuse broadly. Not only are industrial firms are inherently conservative in their adoption of
new materials, diffusion also takes time because new materials often require complementary changes in
the physical infrastructure. This issue is likely to arise in the case of energy. For example, the case of fuel
cells for automobiles are one such challenge. The concomitant changes needed in the physical
infrastructure (such as fuelling stations) are thought to involve large financial investments and
coordination problems, potentially greatly delaying the widespread adoption of fuel cells (see for
instance, Struben and Sterman, 2008).
Another significant cause of delay is what Bresnahan and Greenstein (1996) dub “co-invention”
by users—that is, the need for users of the new technology to become familiar with its use and in some
cases to design complementary adaptations to facilitate its use. Bresnahan and Greenstein found that coinvention can pose significant costs in time and money to a company, as demonstrated by the resistance
and delay in the switch from mainframes to client-servers in U.S. firms. David (1990) similarly argues
that the diffusion of electrical power was slowed as manufacturers, used to steam power, had to learn how
to exploit the full potential of electricity from this new energy source. In the case of the chemical
industry, Hounshell (1988) shows that as new industrial materials were introduced, users had to learn
about the properties of these new materials. For instance, when first introduced, rayon fiber was believed
to be weaker than cotton fiber, and because rayon fibers were further weakened when wet, the material
was assumed to be unsuitable for tire cord. However, it was discovered that hot rayon is 50 percent
stronger than cotton. Rayon tire cord, however, did not take off until World War II, when circumstances
forced the use of synthetic rubber for tires; synthetic rubber tires run hotter than natural rubber tires, and
therefore rayon was a better cord material under those hotter conditions. This also illustrates the systemic
interdependencies in chemical innovation.
However, in general, diffusion in the chemical industry has been surprisingly fast. The most
notable is the swift and thorough switch from coal to petroleum as a dominant chemical feedstock, after
World War II.
[Header2] Coal to Petroleum
At the end of World War I, coal-derived chemicals formed the basis of the chemical industry. For
instance, coal tar provided a source for synthetic dyes; coal coking furnaces provided the nitrogen for
fertilizers and explosives such as TNT, and coal provided the toluene for those explosives. Heating coal to
make coke—a raw material in the manufacture of high-carbon steel—also produces a number of
chemically useful gases and byproducts: coal tar, ammonia, and benzene. Indeed, firms such as Solvay,
Koppers, and Allied Chemicals, owned batteries of byproduct coke ovens to produce these valuable
chemicals. These joined a large complementary physical infrastructure of byproduct coke ovens across
the United States and around Europe, complementing a substantial accumulated learning about the use of
coal byproducts as chemical building blocks. As late as 1938, DuPont, the leading American chemical
company, announced that it would create a synthetic fiber “from coal, air, and water” , when starting its
first commercial nylon plant in Seaford, Delaware.
Everything changed with the meteoric postwar popularity of the automobile, which greatly
increased the demand for gasoline, leading refiners to improve oil-refining processes. Furthermore, the

5

oil-refining process for automobile fuel used only a portion of the petroleum refined, leaving ample
byproduct with no clear use. During the 1940s, petroleum byproducts from automobile oil refineries
increasingly went into the production of basic materials, such as plastics, synthetic rubber, and synthetic
fibers. Oil-based chemicals began to quickly outstrip the previously dominant coal-based chemicals.
The change had many dimensions. New extracting and refining technology for petroleum had to
be developed. Further, there was a concomitant change in the technology from acetylene-based chemistry
(triple bonds typical of coal byproducts) to the ethylene-based chemistry (double bonds) of oil
byproducts. But ultimately, the move from coal to oil to produce chemicals was driven by the superiority
of oil-based feedstocks, and by falling costs due to the progressive improvements in extraction and
refining technologies.
The switch from coal to oil also is remarkable because of its rapid worldwide diffusion. That
these processes were rapidly adopted in Europe is significant because Europe was abundantly supplied
with coal (but little oil) and because Europe had pioneered the use of coal in synthetics and plastics.
The switch to oil began in the United States, which had abundant domestic oil and natural gas
reserves.4 By 1950, half of the total U.S. production of organic chemicals was based on natural gas and
oil; by 1960, the proportion was 88 percent. The switch came later, but as rapidly, in Western Europe. In
the United Kingdom in 1949, for instance, 9 percent of total organic chemical production was based on
oil and natural gas, and the proportion rose to 63 percent by 1962. In Germany, the first petrochemical
plant was set up in the mid-1950s, and by 1973 German companies derived 90 percent of their chemical
feedstocks from oil. In light of Germany's substantial endowment of coal, and the fact that German firms
had made large, irretrievable investments in coal-related technologies, the changeover of the German
industry is especially remarkable (Stokes 1994). The swift diffusion of petrochemical technology in
Europe ironically was aided by the World War II destruction of the German and French industrial
capacity, which reduced switching costs. However, the ready availability of petrochemical technology
from American firms, especially by specialized suppliers of technology and engineering services, was
crucial. Equally important, if not more so, was the post-war availability of crude oil from the Middle East,
with the supplies guaranteed by Pax Americana.5 In other words, markets in both goods and technology
played a fundamental role in facilitating the switch from coal to petroleum in the United States and
Western Europe.
The enormity of this shift may not be easily appreciated today, until we begin to consider an
analogous energy innovation challenge, such as a possible increase in the use of biomass. At that point, a
range of issues analogous to the coal-to-oil switch arise. For instance, can processes be developed that can
handle variations in the composition of biomass sources? Can processes be developed to remove
impurities from biomass that might interfere with their processing (such as poisoning the catalyst)? Can
the likely undesirable byproducts be removed after processing in a cost effective and scalable manner?
Can existing equipment be used? Similar questions were confronted and solved through innovation and
diffusion during the coal-to-oil shift.
[Header2] The Synthetic Rubber Research Program6
The Synthetic Rubber Research Program offers an interesting instance of a government-funded
cooperative research program in the chemical industry. This wartime program took place from 1939 to 1945,
when the United States faced being cut off from nearly 90 percent of the world’s natural rubber supplies
4

The U.S. and European statistics detailed in this passage are from Chapman (1991).
The discovery of oil in the Middle East was significant not only because it meant that more oil was available, but
also because the additional reserves would be supplied through a global market, and therefore control over oil was
unlikely to be used as an economic or military weapon. The U.S. guarantee of unhindered oil supply to Western
Europe was also very important in this respect. We are grateful to David Mowery for bringing this to our attention.
6
This section draws upon Arora (2002). In addition, see Herbert and Bisio (1985) and Morris (1989) for detailed
accounts and assessments of the program.
5

6

located in Southeast Asia. As a response, the U.S. government formed a consortium of the leading rubber
firms, some of the leading chemical firms, and selected university researchers to expand and improve the
production of synthetic rubber. The program was later extended to 1956. Between 1942 and 1956, the U.S.
government invested $56 million for R&D in this consortium. The program mandated free exchange of
information among participants.7
The principal objectives of the program were three fold. The first was to expand greatly the scale of
synthetic rubber production. The second was to improve the quality of the synthetic rubber and produce
specialty rubbers, such as rubbers suitable for use at low temperatures. The third objective, less explicit and of
lower priority, was to develop greater knowledge and understanding of polymers.
The first objective of the program was successfully met. By 1945, the United States produced nearly
850,000 tons of synthetic rubber (up from less than 10,000 tons in 1941), more than seven times the peak
German production achieved in 1943. Virtually all of the ramped-up production went to the war effort; the
U.S. government purchased all production from the program, and companies producing synthetic rubber did
not have to worry about being able to sell it. Having a guaranteed market in the U.S. government was
important because it released the companies from concerns that there would be insufficient market for their
efforts.
The tremendous increase in the production of synthetic rubber did not require radical technological
advance. Although a variety of alternative monomers (building blocks) were tried out, it turned out that
butadiene and styrene, used in the Buna-S rubber patented in Germany in 1921, were the most suitable.8
Neither was the basic process fundamentally new. Even so, a variety of logistical and technological problems
had to be solved, such as expanding the supply of butadiene, for which advances in chemical engineering and
petroleum refining were critical. Butadiene could be produced from the byproducts of oil refining or natural
gas. It could also be produced from other sources, such as industrial alcohol (ethanol). Many different sources
of ethanol were considered, included alcohol from grain or molasses. In Europe, Chemische Werke Huls (a
German specialty chemicals company) nearly built a tire plant with French red wine as an ethylene source;
the United States actually imported beet ethanol for butadiene for the synthetic rubber program shortly after
WWII. During the tenure of the synthetic rubber program, Congress passed laws mandating use of grain
ethanol for butadiene production. Plus ca change, plus c'est la meme chose! The vast bulk of butadiene,
however, was ultimately produced from oil-refining byproducts.
Styrene, the other key input, could also be obtained from coal byproducts, but oil-based sources were
more promising, particularly after new processes were developed that could produce benzene ring type
molecules. Government coordination played an important role in styrene production as well. The Dow
Chemical Company was asked to take charge of styrene production for the program, and build large styrene
plants in Torrance (California), Velasco (Texas), and Sarnia (Ontario) using Dow technology and to
supervise construction of several other plants. Union Carbide Corporation was asked to build a large plant
based on its technology, and Monsanto Company was asked to build an ethylbenzene-styrene plant using
Dow and Monsanto technology, in partnership with Lummus Corporation. The Koppers Company was asked
to build a plant using vapor phase alkylation process using technical contributions from UOP, Phillips
Petroleum Company, and Koppers. U.S. production rose from less than 2 million pounds per month in 1941
to 20 million pounds per month by the end of 1943. By the end of 1944, production was 40 million pounds
per month (Spitz 1988).
The program’s second objective of improving the quality of synthetic rubber was complementary to
the first objective. Though not fundamental in terms of the science involved, a number of improvements to
the polymerization process were critical in producing synthetic rubber of a higher and more consistent
quality. These changes were especially important for “cold rubber,” a new type of synthetic rubber also made
from butadiene and styrene but of higher quality in some ways. Among other uses, cold rubber was better
7

Eventually, 36 firms joined the consortium. In some cases firms took special precautions to ensure that related
internal projects were kept separate.
8
Buna S rubber was called GR-S rubber in the United States.

7

suited for automobile tires. By 1954, two thirds of all synthetic rubber produced in the United States was
“cold.” Especially noteworthy improvements involved better control over gel formation, improved modifiers
and emulsifiers, and, in the case of cold rubber, a new catalyst as well.
After World War II, the synthetic rubber program was no longer the only or even the principal source
of innovation in synthetic rubber. For example, oil-extended rubber—cold rubber with added mineral oils,
which was both cheaper and easier to process than cold rubber—was developed by Goodyear Tire & Rubber
Company, and independently, by General Tire, which was not part of the research program.9 New modifiers
and carbon black (an important rubber additive) came from Phillips Petroleum, not a member of the program
until after those discoveries. Similarly, the next generation of synthetic rubbers, (the so called nitrile rubber)
were privately developed by two firms, Goodrich and Goodyear, outside the synthetic rubber program.
Although the government’s research program succeeded in its two main objectives, the program had
significant design flaws that ultimately narrowed its effectiveness in encouraging more widespread
innovation. Perhaps its greatest flaw was its inflexible insistence on a common “recipe” to be followed by all
participating companies; this may have delayed the adoption of a number of improvements (Morris 1989).
The justification for the common recipe requirement was that it would facilitate cooperation among members
and simplify processing. However, according to Morris (1989), the effect was to complicate testing and largescale introduction of new recipes. The common recipe requirement also pushed many consortium members to
spin off or partition some of their internal research projects, thus protecting themselves from the restrictions
of the government program.
The information-sharing mandate was both a benefit and a curse for the program. On the one hand,
the mandate allowed a number of firms to enter the industry, particularly after the end of World War II. This
greatly increased competition and contributed to the rapid growth of the industry. On the other hand, the
mandate diluted the incentives of firms to develop innovations because they would have to share the
information with their rivals, lowering their private returns. Consequently, some participating firms had
research groups working in rubber and polymer technologies that were carefully kept apart from the research
groups participating in the synthetic rubber program. Many of the major advances in technology came from
outside the research sponsored by the program during that time period.
The greatest failure of the government research program in promoting fundamental technical
advance (as opposed to increasing the production of synthetic rubber for the war effort), in Morris’s opinion,
was in the case of synthetic natural rubber (i.e., a synthetic route to the production of natural rubber, as
opposed to a synthetic material with properties like those of natural rubber). Although GR-S (formerly Buna
S) rubber worked well for automobile tire track, natural rubber was much better for truck and airplane tires,
where loads and temperatures are markedly higher. Many program participants, from both industry and
academia, tried to develop a suitable synthetic rubber for trucks and planes. The solution turned out to be a
process of synthesizing natural rubber itself by polymerizing isoprene. The pioneering research of the
German chemist Karl Ziegler (not the U.S. government research program), in catalytic polymerization of
polyethylene in 1950 and related materials, was instrumental in this solution. Morris (1989) suggests that the
information sharing requirements imposed by the government program may have delayed the application of
Ziegler’s discoveries until 1955.
Thus neither the basic process for producing synthetic rubber, namely, the butadiene-styrene process,
nor some of the important post-war improvements in the process for synthetic rubber, can be credited to the
government-funded program. The government research program succeeded in its immediate war-time aims,
but not in its longer-term peace time ones. However, the government funds at stake were small. Between
1943 and 1955 only $55 million were invested in R&D, a fraction of the nearly $700 million capital
investment in synthetic rubber production in 1945 alone, and less than 2 percent of the total value of the
synthetic rubber produced over this period.

9

There were benefits, nonetheless, from Goodyear’s discovery, because Goodyear, as a member of the cooperative
research program, made its discovery available to all other members.

8

The government’s synthetic rubber research program succeeded in increasing production because it
quickly settled on a viable technology, standardized the inputs (for the most part), and coordinated the
production. As well, it coordinated with the users of synthetic rubber, and provided capital to construct the
various production facilities. The program worked best where the technology required incremental
improvements advancements, which nonetheless cumulatively had a large impact. The program was able to
coordinate private parties on a given standard (e.g., the GR-S rubber standard), which was desirable because
the standard itself was a good one. Getting to a good standard was more likely because the technology was
relatively mature and progress required was incremental.
Conversely, the synthetic rubber program did not facilitate development of radical breakthroughs nor
fundamental discoveries in polymer science (although it contributed to both). This undoubtedly had much to
do with the priorities of the program, which imposed certain inflexibilities that hindered radical innovation. In
some cases, the information-sharing mandate diluted the incentives of firms to develop innovations because
they would have to share the information with their rivals. Further, the strong applied orientation of the
program implied a reduced priority for the training of graduate students, resulting in a much smaller
contribution to the growth of polymer science than might otherwise have been.
The program’s history also highlights the diversity of the potential sources of innovation. In the
rubber research program, important innovations came from unexpected sources outside the program.
General Tire invented “cold rubber” and Philips Petroleum, a smaller oil company from Oklahoma, albeit
one with a strong tradition of chemical research, made significant contributions to the development of
carbon black and other modifiers. Therefore, an innovation environment that has left ample room for new
players has also made greater room for success, rather than one placing large early bets on a handful of
players.
A third lesson from the history of the synthetic rubber program is that of the role of demand, or
procurement. During the war, all production from the program was purchased by the government at
guaranteed prices, and companies were therefore not concerned about being able to sell their product.
After the war, the renewed availability of natural rubber raised doubts about the viability of synthetic
rubber, but the greater versatility of different types of synthetic rubber eventually prevailed.

9

[Header2] The Synfuel Program10
As early as the 1920s, the U.S. government had experimented with liquefaction of coal and other
substances for fuels, but it did not result in a significant program until the end of World War II. The 1944
Synthetic Liquid Fuels Act led to a $30 million 5-year Department of the Interior research program that
attempted to alleviate shortfalls in the supply of oil during after immediately after the war. The basic
technologies, coal liquefaction and coal gasification, already existed but neither was commercially viable
at prevailing prices. The objective of the program was to promote new processes, catalysts and input
sources that would lead to commercial viability. Through the program, a demonstration coal
hydrogenation plant was constructed in 1949 that produced synthetic diesel and inspired great optimism
for the prospect of synthetic fuel to replace fuel from crude oil, supplies of which at the time were limited
and expensive. With a view of avoiding an “energy crisis” and dependence on “foreign oil” (a newly
coined phrase at that point), Congress extended the program twice for an additional 11 years and
increased funding to $87.6 million. However, the next plants built could not produce fuel at such low
costs and high volume that had earlier excited so much optimism in the industry.
In the 1950s, a combination of lowered expectations for the synthetic fuels industry, the opening
of Middle Eastern oil fields, new private forays into coal hydrogenation, and a political shift in both the
executive and legislative branches of the U.S. government, led to Congress ending funding for synthetic
fuel programs in 1953. Low-level research continued in “backburner” mode by the interior department,
and later this research was transferred to the newly developed Department of Energy in the 1970s.
The increases in crude oil prices in the 1970s revived the synthetic fuel efforts, with a mixture of
motives consisting of reducing dependence on imported oil and promoting the use of coal, especially coal
mined in the eastern part of the United States. The Energy Security Act of 1980 established the Synthetic
Fuel Corporation (SFC), which was set up to promote the commercialization of these technologies. The
corporation was a quasi-governmental entity comprising private industry partners and initially authorized
for a maximum of 12 years and a maximum of $88 billion. The interest in synfuels heated up throughout
the 1970s, and by the end of that decade synfuels research was a major component of the nation’s energy
program. Spurred by instability in the Middle East, the high price of crude oil and fears that oil supplies
were drying up, projected dramatic increases in future oil costs, and concern that “market failures” were
inhibiting private companies to invest in research, the synfuels program again regained popularity.
Under the program, some technical progress was made and large scale processes were developed.
Coal gasification appears to have been the most successful of the technological investments. One facility,
the Cool Water Coal Gasification plant, which was provided price guarantees worth $115 million,
succeeding in coming under budget and meeting the expected production and quality standards. However,
Cool Water was a rare success for the SFC. Ultimately, low crude oil prices reduced the economic and
strategic imperative to develop synthetic fuels from coal or other sources. The SFC was unable to lay the
foundations for a commercially viable industry, in part because the technology failed to support largescale production of affordable and reliable synthetic fuels. The broad consensus is that the government’s
synfuel programs failed, though there is less agreement on the causes of the failure.
At the risk of oversimplifying the contrast, the synthetic rubber program succeeded because there
was an enormous growth in demand for synthetic rubber, whereas the synthetic fuel program largely
operated in an era of abundant, though occasionally expensive, oil and gas. Although price signals and
signals about the future growth in demand are not the only ones that matter, they surely were very
important for the failure of the synfuels program.

10

This section relies upon Cohen and Noll’s discussion of the program, as well as
http://fossil.energy.gov/aboutus/history/index.html and http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL33359.pdf.

10

[Header1] Diffusion and the Critical role of Specialized Engineering Firms
In 1999, the world’s then largest greenfield refinery and associated chemical plants, embodying
the latest technology available, with an estimated cost of around $6 billion, was commissioned in
Jamnagar, India. The event passed by with little comment. In marked contrast, when an Indian company
announced the development of a new car nearly a decade later there was extensive publicity. And yet
refining technology was developed only in the 1920s, whereas the internal combustion engine is nearly a
century and a half old. One can infer that chemical technology has diffused so broadly that it is
considered unremarkable for the latest technology to be used in a poor country. Put differently, there is no
need for an Indian firm to try to design its own refineries and chemical plants, because the required
technology can be readily acquired at a reasonable price. The rapid diffusion of innovative techniques and
processes is one of the striking features of the chemical industry. This is particularly true of chemical
innovations since World War II, the diffusion of which were fostered by specialized engineering firms
(SEFs).11
In a pioneering study, Freeman (1968) noted that for the period 1960–1966, “ procured, and
constructed by specialist plant contractors.” Moreover, Freeman found that SEFs were an important
source of process technologies; during 1960–1966, they accounted as a group for about 30 percent of all
licenses of chemical processes. Freeman’s findings are confirmed by more recent data analyzed in Arora
and Gambardella (1998). These data show that for the period 1980–1990, almost three-fourths of all
chemical plants in the world were engineered by SEFs. Although the share of SEFs varies across different
types of chemical products, in practically all of them it is above 50 percent. Moreover, SEFs still account
for about 35 percent of all licenses. However, SEFs in the 1980s were perhaps more important than this
figure suggests because their very presence induced many downstream companies to license their
processes. In essence, SEFs helped create a market for technology, making process technology into a
commodity that could be bought and sold.
The first SEFs were formed in the early part of the 20th century, and their clients were typically oil
companies. However, SEFs also started operating in bulk chemicals such as sulfuric acid and ammonia.
Later, most SEFs would design large scale plants for refineries and petrochemical building blocks, such as
ethylene. Companies such as Kellogg Engineering, Badger Engineering, Stone and Webster, and UOP are
prominent examples of early SEFs.
In addition to diffusion, the SEFs also played a crucial role in the development of new and improved
processes. However, with a few notable exceptions, SEFs did not develop radically new processes. The
contributions of SEFs have been largely in two areas: catalytic processes and engineering design
improvements.12 For the most part, however, major process innovations came from the large oil and
chemical companies (Mansfield et al. 1977). The SEFs were most effective at moving new processes
down the learning curve. By acting as independent licensers, SEFs also induced chemical firms to license
their technology (Arora and Gambardella 1998). SEFs provide a vivid illustration of the economies of scale
operating at the industry level, rather than at the plant or individual firm. By specializing in process design
and engineering, and by working for a number of clients, SEFs could learn and accumulate skills and
expertise that no single chemical company could match.13

11

This rapid diffusion greatly accelerated the maturation of the chemical industry and the consequent wide-ranging
restructuring that the industry underwent in the United States in the 1980s, followed shortly by a similar
restructuring in Europe (Arora and Gambardella 1998).
12
A number of other SEFs have contributed to advances in engineering design. For instance, Kellogg made significant
contributions to developing high-pressure processes for ammonia in the 1930s, while Badger is associated with fluidized
bed catalytic processes (in collaboration with Sohio). Similarly, the Danish SEF, Halder Topsoe, is the leading source of
technology for ammonia plants. Lurgi, a German firm, licenses a number of technologies, including coal gasification.
13
As independent developers of technology, SEFs are similar in some respects to today's biotech companies, allying with
a number of chemical firms in developing new technologies.

11

Adam Smith noted more than 200 years ago that specialization and division of labor are more
extensive in larger markets. As Bresnahan and Gambardella (1998) demonstrate, a large market is important
for technology specialists, but this growth in market must be in the form of an increase in the breadth (more
buyers) rather than merely depth (each buyer becomes larger). Indeed, SEFs account for a greater share of
licenses to small firms and firms in developing countries, indicating the mutual dependence between
specialist technology suppliers and firms that are not technically sophisticated (Figure 4).
The challenge of innovation is more than the mere discovery and development of new
technologies and feedstocks. The technology and processes for using these alternatives will be effective
only if they are broadly used. Technology diffusion has been faster when firms like SEFs have played a
role in offering technology, sometimes bundled with engineering services. Rapid diffusion of innovation in
the chemical industry has resulted when when major innovations were not concentrated in the hands of a few
firms, no matter how innovative. Instead, multiple sources of innovations appear to have been desirable

[Header1] Innovation policies in the chemical industry
Two policy areas stand out with respect to their effect on innovation in the chemical sector. First,
intellectual property rights protection, particularly patenting, has stimulated innovation. Second, licensing
and antitrust regulations have fostered wider competition and sped up diffusion of technologies.
[Header2]Intellectual property rights
The chemical industry has seen extensive technology diffusion though it also enjoys strong patent
protection. Although this may sound like a contradiction in terms, it is not. In chemicals, although patents
are effective in deterring straight imitation, rivals were often able to develop competing variants of
patented chemical processes. These processes differed in terms of operating conditions, starting materials,
or in terms of yields, conversion rates, and properties of the final material. The ability to develop different
processes resulted in a vigorous competition in the market for technology and a rapid diffusion of new
technologies.
Despite the importance of technology specialists, the chemical industry has largely been spared
the problems that some non-manufacturing patent holders have created in several information technology
sectors. Patents largely work well in the chemical industry in that they encourage the invention of new
technologies and follow-on investment in commercializing those technologies (Cohen et al. 2000). They
also encourage the widespread use of new technologies. This appears to be because the object of discovery
can be described clearly in terms of formulae, reaction pathways, operating conditions, and the like (Levin et
al. 1987). But it is not merely that the object of discovery is more discrete in the sense of being a particular
compound. Rather, it is the ability to relate the "essential" structure of the compound to its function. This
allows a patent to include within its ambit inessential variations in structure, as in minor modifications in side
chains of a pesticide.14 In fact, chemical product patents frequently use Markush structures,15 which permit a
succinct and compact description of the claims and allow the inventor to protect the invention for sets of
related compounds without the expense (and tedium) of testing and listing the entire set. The ability to
explicate the underlying scientific basis of the innovation allows the scope of the patent to be delimited more
clearly. The obvious extensions can be foreseen more easily and described more compactly.
When innovations cannot be described in terms of universal and general categories, sensible patent
law can only provide narrow patent protection. Failure to do so results in costly patent disputes, sometimes
with devastating consequences for the economy, as an early epoch in the history of the chemical industry
itself shows. During the 1860s, for example, when synthetic dyes first appeared, their structure was poorly
14

In some instances, seemingly minor variations in side chains can have significant biological effects. Therefore, what is
a "minor" variation is itself determined by the state of the current understanding of the relation between structure and
function.
15
A Markush structure is best understood as a language for specifying chemical structures of compounds, which allows
generic representation for an entire set of related compounds. See Maynard and Peters (1991) for details.

12

understood and so were the reaction pathways and processes. Broad patents led to litigation and, in some
cases, unwarranted and harmful monopolies. In France, an excessively broad patent on Fuchsine (aniline red)
was construed to include all processes for making the red aniline-based dye, even though it the structure of
aniline dyes was as yet unknown. There were also long and bitter disputes in England about the validity of
the Medlock patent for magenta (another aniline dye); the dispute turned on the appropriate definition of
“dry” arsenic acid (i.e., with or without water of crystallization). In the case of aniline blue, the dispute rested
on whether the substitution of an organic acid for an inorganic acid in the production process was enough to
avoid infringement (Travis 1993). The British courts interpreted patents narrowly, with the result that
competition in the British organic dyestuffs industry remained vigorous, until the industry itself was
overwhelmed by its German rivals. By contrast, the Fuchsine monopoly in France devastated the local
industry. It should be recalled that France at first rivaled Germany in organic chemistry, but the French
synthetic dye industry greatly suffered from the Fuchsine dispute.
Until World War II, chemical producers did use patents to restrict entry and carve up markets.
However, after the war, patents were used more frequently to facilitate technology licensing, particularly
outside home markets. In a marked departure from their pre-World War II strategy of closely controlling their
technology, a number of chemical and oil companies began to use licensing as an important (although not the
only) means of profiting from innovation. Spitz (1988: 318) describes the licensing of the Hercules-Distillers
phenol/acetone process “to any and all comers”; the process “was commercialized in 1953 and forever
changed the way that phenol would be produced.” This remarkable change in behavior appears to have been
triggered in part by a newly vigorous anti trust policy in the United States, an issue that we discuss in some
depth below.
One reason why patent protection promoted diffusion of technology was the greater competition it
created in both product markets and in the market for technology. When multiple sources of technology exist,
then even when the technology sources are not exact substitutes, they can provide effective competition.
Arora and Fosfuri (2003) formally show that the presence of other technology holders, especially those that
do not participate in the product market, encourages licensing, facilitating entry downstream.
It is also noteworthy that SEF licensing activities appear not to have been hindered by patenting.
Indeed, in processes in which high rates of patenting occur, SEFs are more active than in processes with low
rates of patenting (Figure 1). Insofar as patenting rates are indicators of technological activity, this suggests
that SEFs are active in diffusing technologies not simply in mature sectors, but also in sectors with high rates
of technical advance.
An active technology market has also encouraged new entrants into the product market. Arora et
al. (2000) show that markets for technology encourage investment by chemical firms in developing
countries, implying that technology suppliers lower entry barriers. Lieberman (1989) finds that licensing
was less common in concentrated chemical products, and the limited licensing that did take place was by
outsiders (non-producers and foreign firms). Moreover, he finds that when licensing was restricted, there
was less entry. In a related study of 24 chemical product markets, Lieberman (1987) reports that patenting
by outsiders was associated with a faster decline of product price, once again suggesting that outside
patenting encouraged entry in the product market. This is borne out by Arora and Fosfuri (2000), who
show that the principle source of demand for technology licensed by SEFs are small firms in Western
markets (North America, Japan, Western Europe), and firms in developing countries (Figure 2).
[Header2] Licensing and Anti-trust regulations
As we noted above, post WWII, chemical firms have tended to license their technology, which
has greatly contributed to technology diffusion. Ralph Landau observed in 1966 that the “...the partial
breakdown of secrecy barriers in the chemical industry is increasing...the trend toward more licensing of
processes” (Landau 1966: 4). Chemical firms have licensed heavily because they have faced competition
in both the product and the technology markets. These two types of competition are inter-related. A
competitive product market will encourage the entry of technology specialists (Bresnahan and Gambardella
1988). When Standard Oil, with its dominant position in the oil market, tried to restrict access to refining
technology, the independent oil firms turned to specialized technology suppliers such as UOP. More

13

generally, at crucial stages in the industry’s history, anti-trust rulings have directly increased competition in
the product market and also reduced concentration of technology ownership, increasing competition in the
market for technology.
The two firms prominently featured in the context of anti-trust enforcement in the United States were
Standard Oil and DuPont. William Burton, a scientist at Standard Oil developed the first commercially
successful cracking process, a first major innovation in refining technology, in 1909-1910. However,
Standard Oil was reluctant to invest in the process. As a result of an anti-trust suit, the original Standard Oil
was broken up into several firms in 1911, among which was Standard Oil of Indiana, where Burton worked,
and which not only commercialized the process but also licensed it to a number of other oil refiners. The high
royalty charged by Standard of Indiana led others to develop alternative processes, among which was UOP,
which eventually developed into a leading supplier of technology to the petroleum refining industry.
The case of Du Pont provides another important example of the role of anti-trust policy. Founded as
a maker of explosives powder, Du Pont was split into three separate firms following a successful anti-trust
suit in 1913. The anti-trust suit convinced the management of Du Pont that the only path to future growth lay
in entering new markets through innovation rather than acquisition of existing producers. In 1926 Du Pont
signed a comprehensive technology sharing agreement with ICI, which also involved market-sharing.16 The
agreement entitled Du Pont to exclusive access in the United States to ICI technology, such as polyethylene.
However, the fear of anti-trust action pushed ICI to license polyethylene to other firms as well after World
War II. Similarly, Du Pont was nudged into licensing its nylon technology (and know-how) to a Monsanto
joint venture, Chemstrand, in 1951. More recently, anti-trust authorities in the United States and Europe
intervened when Dow Chemical acquired Union Carbide. The anti-trust ruling attempted to try to maintain
competition both in the polyethylene market as well as in the market for polyethylene technology.17
The more general point is that licensing flourished when firms faced competition from other
technologically capable firms (whether at home or abroad) and licensing itself facilitated entry into the
industry. The second tentative conclusion from the history of the chemical industry is that anti-trust
enforcement, including the occasional episodes of compulsory licensing, does not appear to have had a
chilling effect on innovation. Part of the reason that innovation flourished is that the in the US the
industry has had multiple sources of innovation. No single firm, not even Du Pont, has dominated the
chemical industry, in the way IG Farben and ICI dominated their respective national industries between
the two world-wars.

[Header1] Conclusions and caveats
Three noteworthy aspects of innovation characterize the chemical industry.18 First, chemical
innovations are deeply rooted in science. However, despite a worldwide tradition of government support for
scientific research, chemical R&D has been largely privately funded. In the United States, federal
government support for chemical research, already at a relatively low level, has steadily declined over time.
Second, other than early in the history of the industry when new dyes relied upon the scientific advances in
organic chemistry led by German chemists, innovations have largely come from firms rather than
universities. Universities, on the other hand, have played an important role in institutionalizing the learning,
creating new disciplines (which have been crucial for sustaining innovations), and developing human capital.
Third, the major phases of chemical innovation have been accompanied by large growth in demand.

16

The agreement would be dissolved in 1952.
Dow Chemical and BP-Amoco were competing against Univation Technologies, a joint venture of ExxonMobil
and Union Carbide. Dow and Exxon held the basic catalyst patents, and BP and Union Carbide supplied process
technology for polyethylene. As a condition of the acquisition, Dow made its catalyst technology available to BPAmoco.
18
The beginning of this section draws upon Arora (2002).
17

14

These three aspects are closely related. The chemical industry rose to prominence when
government support for research was uncommon, chemical innovations could capture large markets by
substituting for a variety of materials used as industrial inputs, and the scientific understanding linking the
structure of their materials to their properties could increase the productivity of attempts to discover new
and useful materials. Thus it made commercial sense for firms to invest not simply in applied research,
but also in basic research—an area typically the domain of universities and government programs.
Therefore, chemical innovation has relied more heavily than some other innovation based industries, upon
private investments in research, development, and commercialization. Correspondingly, government
supported research, and university discoveries, have been less important.
However, although they feature centrally, established firms have not been the only actors in
chemical innovations. Rather, they share the stage with a variety of other firms, including startups. If
nylon and polyethylene were discovered in corporate labs (of Du Pont and ICI respectively), polyester,
the most successful synthetic material used in everything from clothes to plastic bottles, was discovered
by chemists working for the Calico Printers Association, a group mostly concerned with textile printing.
The fundamental advances in catalysts for producing polyethylene and polypropylene came from the
work of Karl Ziegler, a German chemist funded by the local coal industry association, and from a small
oil company in Oklahoma, Phillips. If the first major refining technology, thermal cracking, originated
from Standard Oil, the next one, catalytic cracking, was invented in 1936 by Eugene Houdry, a French
engineer who moved to the United States to commercialize his invention. The technology was
significantly improved by a group of firms led by Standard Oil of New Jersey. The implication is that
innovation in the chemical industry has drawn upon a diverse range of sources, including corporate R&D
labs and government programs, but also a variety of small firms and startups.
Large government initiatives have had mixed success. They have been successful in coordinating
private decisions when innovation required complementary improvements in inputs and users, as well as
large investments in complementary infrastructure. They have been successful in coaxing incremental
technical advances, which have cumulatively contributed significantly to productivity growth. The record
of such initiatives in producing significant new technical advances in the chemical industry is poor, but in
part because these initiatives have had conflicting goals, such as increasing the efficiency of existing
technology along with the development of new technologies.
The history of the chemical industry shows that technology has diffused effectively through
markets for technology. Markets for technology have also offered a prominent role for startups and other
types of technology specialists such as SEFs, which have been the engine of diffusion for chemical
innovation, as well as a frequent contributor. The chemical industry’s history shows that indirect
government policies that promote competition in the product market as well as in the market for can
promote technical advance and productivity growth.
Competition in the technology market does not imply weakening intellectual property protection;
rather, strong patent protection can facilitate competition by encouraging innovation by firms outside the
industry, including startups. However, broad patent protection is effective when the underlying
knowledge base is strong. For new bodies of knowledge, narrowly crafted patent protection works better
at encouraging innovation and preventing logjams. In addition, from time to time, anti-trust policy has
prevented chemical technology ownership from being concentrated in a few hands, enhancing
competition among technology holders.
History rarely repeats itself, and its lessons cannot be applied mechanically. The chemical
industry is an instance where targeted government programs succeeded in coordinating private efforts to
meet urgent public needs. Chemical innovation, however, has relied largely upon private investments in
research and commercialization. Competition and patent policies have helped keep the product markets
and the market for technology competitive and ensured the rapid diffusion of chemical innovations.

15

[Header1] References
Arora, Ashish. 2002. The government’s role in chemical technology innovation, then and now. in
Vicki Norberg-Bohm, ed. The Role Of Government In Energy Technology Innovation: Insights For
Government Policy In The Energy Sector, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard, MA
Arora, Ashish, and Nathan Rosenberg. 1998. "The U.S. success story: The growth of the United States
chemical industry", in Chemicals and Long Term Economic Growth, Ashish Arora, Ralph Landau, and Nathan
Rosenberg (eds.), John Wiley and Sons. New York.
Arora, Ashish, and Alfonso Gambardella. 1998. "Evolution of industry structure in the chemical industry"
(with Alfonso Gambardella), in Chemicals and Long Term Economic Growth, Ashish Arora, Ralph Landau, and
Nathan Rosenberg (eds.), John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Arora, Ashish, and Andrea Fosfuri. 2000. The market for technology in the chemical industry: Causes
and consequences. Revue d'Economie Industrielle. 92, 317-334.
Arora A., Fosfuri A. 2003. Licensing the Market for Technology. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 52, 272-95.Arora, Ashish, Alfonso Gambardella and Andrea Fosfuri. 2000. Specialized
technology suppliers, international spillovers and investment: evidence from the chemical industry. Journal of
Development Economics. 65(1): 31-54.
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Alfonso Gambardella. 1998. The division of inventive labor and the extent of
the market. in Elhanan Helpman (ed.) General-Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. MIT Press,
Cambridge MA. pp 253-267
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Shane Greenstein. 1996. Technical progress and co-invention in computing
and in the uses of computers. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, Vol. 1996, pp. 1-83.
Chapman, K. 1991. The international petrochemical industry: Evolution and location. Basil Blackwell,
Oxford.
Chemical Age Project File. 1991. Database available from Reed Telepublishing Ltd, Reed Elsevier
Plc. http://library.dialog.com/bluesheets/html/bl0318.html
Cohen, Linda, and Roger Noll. 1991. Synthetic fuels from coal. In, Linda Cohen and Roger Noll (eds).
The Technology Pork Barrel. Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Cohen, Wesley M, Richard R. Nelson and John P. Walsh. 2000. Protecting their intellectual assets:
appropriability conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent (or not). working paper 7552. National
Bureau of Economics Research. Cambridge MA.
David, Paul A. 1990. The dynamo and the computer: an historical perspective on the modern
productivity paradox. The American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 355-361.
Freeman, Christofer, 1968, "Chemical Process Plant: Innovation and the World Market", National
Institute Economic Review, No.45 (August), 29-51.
Herbert, Vernon and Attilio Bisio. 1985. Synthetic Rubber : A Project That Had To Succeed.
Greenwood Press. Westport, Conn.
Hounshell, David. and John Kenley Smith. 1988. Science and Corporate Strategy: DuPont R&D 19021980. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge UK.
Hounshell, David. 1988. The making of the synthetic fiber industry in the United States. unpublished
manuscript, Harvard Business School.
Landau, Ralph. 1966. The Chemical Plant: From Process Selection to Commercial Operation. Rinhold
Publishing Co., New York.
Landau, Ralph and Nathan Rosenberg. 1992, "Successful commercialization in the chemical process
industries", in Rosenberg et al (eds.) Technology and the Wealth of Nations, Stanford University Press,
Stanford, CA.
Landes, David S. The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in
Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969. ix + 566 pp. [Levin
et al. 1987 goes here]

16

Lieberman, Marvin. 1987. Patents, learning by doing, and market structure in the chemical processing
industries. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 5, 257-276.
Lieberman, Marvin. 1989. The learning curve, technological barriers to entry, and competitive survival
in the chemical processing industries. Strategic Management Journal, 10, 431-447.
Mansfield, E. et al., 1977, The Production and Application of New Industrial Technology, Norton &
Company, New York.
Maynard, John, and Howard M. Peters. 1991. Understanding Chemical Patents: A Guide for the
Inventor. American Chemical Society. Washington, DC.
Morris, Peter J.T., 1989, The American Synthetic Rubber Research Program, University of
Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
Murmann, J. Peter. 2003. Knowledge and competitive advantage. Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge UK.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1998. Technological change in chemicals: the role of university-industry relations.
In Ashish Arora, Ralph Landau, and Nathan Rosenberg (eds.) Chemicals and Long-Term Economic Growth.
John Wiley & Sons. New York.
Spitz, Peter H. 1988. Petrochemicals: The Rise of an Industry, John Wiley, New York.
Struben, Jeroen and Sterman, John,Transition Challenges for Alternative Fuel Vehicle and
Transportation Systems(May 1, 2007). Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, Vol. 35, No. 6, pp.
1070-1097,
2008;
MIT
Sloan
Research
Paper
No.
4587-06.
Available
at
SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=881800
Stokes, R., 1988, Divide and Prosper: The Heirs of IG Farben under Allied Authority 1945-51,
University of California Press, Berkeley and London.
Travis, Anthony S. 1993. The Rainbow Makers: The Origins of the Synthetic Dyestuffs Industry in
Western Europe. Associated University Presses. London.

17

Figure 1. Average number of Specialized Engineering Firms by patent intensity in process, 139 process technologies (1980–1990)

Note: The top 25% processes are in the top quartile in terms of the number of patents , and the bottom 25% of the processes are in the last
quartile in terms of the number of patents filed.
Source: Our calculations, based on CAPF (1991) data.

19

Figure 2: Share of SEFs in technology licensing by type of buyer.

Source: Arora and Fosfuri 2000
Notes:
TW = Third World. Includes all countries except those in Western Europe, Japan, North America, Australia and Eastern Europe (ex. Soviet Bloc).
FW = First World. Comprises of Western Europe, Japan, North America and Australia.
Large FW = First World firms with turnover greater than $1 Billion in 1988.
Small FW = All other First World firms.

Table 1: Major polymer innovations
Inventors and Commercializers

Polymer

Inventor

Organization of inventor

Commercializing firm

Year of
Commercialization

Synthetic Fibers
Nylon

Carothers

DuPont

DuPont

Polyester

Whinfield-Dickson

Calico Printers

ICI

Acrylics

Various

1934
1939

Bayer; DuPont

1920–30s

General Bakelite

1910

Union Carbide; BF Goodrich
and GE

1930s

IG Farben

1930

Plastics
Phenolic resins

Baekland; Edison and others

PVC

Fritz Klatte

Polystyrene

various

Low Density
Polyethylene

Swallow, Perrin, Fawcett, Gibson

ICI

ICI

1939

Polypropylene

Ziegler-Natta;

Max-Planck Inst.

Various

1960s

Hogan & Banks

Montecatini;
DuPont

1936

Griesham Electron

Phillips Petroleum
Neoprene

Nieuwland,

Notre Dame Univ, DuPont

Collins
Source: Arora (2002).

20

