                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EDUCATIONAL EXPECTATIONS AND ATTAINMENT

                                           Brian A. Jacob
                                           Tamara Wilder

                                        Working Paper 15683
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15683


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




We would like to thank Nate Reid, Edie Ostapik and Sam Hwang for valuable research assistance.
We would like to thank the Spencer and Russell Sage Foundations for their financial support. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2010 by Brian A. Jacob and Tamara Wilder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Educational Expectations and Attainment
Brian A. Jacob and Tamara Wilder
NBER Working Paper No. 15683
January 2010
JEL No. I20,J01,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the role of educational expectations in the educational attainment process. We
utilize data from a variety of datasets to document and analyze the trends in educational expectations
between the mid-1970s and the early 2000s. We focus on differences across racial/ethnic and socioeconomic
groups and examine how young people update their expectations during high school and beyond.
The results indicate that expectations rose for all students with the greatest increases among young
women. Expectations have become somewhat less predictive of attainment over the past several decades
but expectations remain strong predictors of attainment above and beyond other standard determinants
of schooling. Interestingly, the data demonstrate that the majority (about 60 percent) of students update
their expectations at least once between eighth grade and eight years post-high school. Updating appears
to be based, in part, on the acquisition of new information about academic ability.


Brian A. Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu

Tamara Wilder
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 S. State #5307
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
wildert@umich.edu
I. Introduction

       Education has become an increasingly important determinant of labor market success in

the United States over the past several decades. The economic returns to a college degree have

jumped dramatically. For example, the weekly earnings of workers with exactly a bachelor’s

degree increased by roughly 22 percent from 1980 to 2005 relative to workers with a high school

diploma alone (Goldin and Katz 2007). At the same time, rates of college completion have

increased across all racial/ethnic and socio-economic groups during this period. Yet,

economically disadvantaged groups still lag behind their more advantaged peers in terms of

educational attainment. According to the U.S. Census, 37 percent of white, non-Hispanic twenty-

five to twenty-nine year olds had at least a Bachelor’s degree in 2008 compared with only 21 and

12 percent of African-American and Hispanics respectively (U.S. Census, 2008).

       Researchers, educators and policymakers have frequently looked to the educational

expectations of young people – that is, their beliefs about their likely educational attainment - to

gauge their future success. During the 1960s, William H. Sewell and Otis D. Duncan and their

colleagues produced seminal research demonstrating a strong positive correlation between

expectations and educational and occupational attainment. This research spurred almost fifty

years of inquiry into the effects of expectations on attainment. While there is no convincing

evidence that expectations influence attainment in a causal sense, many still believe that

inspiring students to attend college will result in a more highly educated population.

       In this paper, we examine the role of educational expectations in the educational

attainment process. Specifically, we investigate how the family experience, school functioning,

and knowledge of the labor market pathways affect educational outcomes by means of

expectations. We begin by documenting the trends in educational expectations between 1980 and
the early 2000s, highlighting how these trends have changed differentially across racial/ethnic

and socioeconomic groups. While there is a considerable literature on expectations in the 1980s

and 1990s, 1 there is very little evidence on how expectations have evolved over the past fifteen

years, arguably a period during which educational attainment has become even more important

for disadvantaged youth.

        To document these trends, we combine data from three longitudinal NCES datasets: High

School and Beyond Survey (HSB), the National Education Longitudinal Survey of 1988 (NELS),

and the Education Longitudinal Survey of 2002 (ELS). In addition, we use data from

Monitoring the Future (MTF), a rich source of information on a nationally representative set of

high school students beginning in the mid-1970s that has never (to the best of our knowledge)

been used for this purpose. Our trend analysis pays particular attention to the gap between

expectations and actual attainment.

        Next, we examine how expectations are related to attainment. Earlier research

documents that conditional on a number of family, neighborhood, individual and school

characteristics higher expectations are associated with higher attainment. However, the growing

gap between expectations and actual attainment suggests that this relationship has weakened over

time. Our analysis focuses on how the relationship between expectations and attainment has

changed over time for various groups.

        We will examine how, if at all, students update their expectations in response to

additional information about costs and benefits of college for themselves. Prior work has

documented this updating among college students (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2009), but

there is no evidence on whether or not high school students or young adults in the labor force

1
 For research on expectations in 1980s using HSB see Astone and McLanahan, 1991, Hanson, 1994 Teachman and
Paasch, 1998. For research on expectations in the 1990s, see Kao and Tienda, 1998; Hu, 2003; McCarron and
Inkelas, 2006.


                                                     2
update their educational expectations. Understanding the process by which students form

expectations and how they update these expectations is critical to understanding variation in

educational attainment. We use data on a nationally representative set of eighth grade students in

1988 from the NELS to explore how young people update their expectations during high school

and to determine if schools and college costs affect students’ development and maintenance of

expectations.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we lay out the conceptual

framework for how expectations affect attainment. In Section III, we describe the data used in

our analysis. In Section IV, we document the trends in educational expectations and actual

attainment from the late 1970s through the early 2000s, highlighting differences across

racial/ethnic and socioeconomic groups. In Section V, we analyze the relationship between

expectations and attainment. In Section VI, we develop a measure of the alignment between

expectations and predicted attainment and investigate the determinants of misalignment in high

school. Delving into the black box of expectations in Section VII, we document if and when

students update their expectations and analyze how schools and state higher education policy can

influence students’ expectations. Section VIII discusses the implications of our findings and

concludes.

II. Conceptual Framework

       Since the 1970s much research has focused on the link between educational expectations

and educational attainment, with a focus on determining what factors influence the development

of educational expectations. Much of the early literature in this area uses the terms expectations

and aspirations interchangeably. In practice, however, these two concepts are quite distinct.

Expectations refer to what individuals think will happen while aspirations refer to what they hope




                                                 3
will happen. In this paper, we focus on expectations for several reasons. First, historically

aspirations are higher than expectations, perhaps because they are more heavily influenced by

societal norms, but given today’s mantra of college for all, aspirations and expectations are

indistinguishable. According to Monitoring the Future data, for example, 85.1 percent of the

Class of 2007 aspired to attain a BA or more and 84.8 percent of the Class of 2007 expected at

least a BA. Second, and related, expectations should be more amenable to rational updating

based upon the acquisition of new information than aspirations. In this sense, expectations are

the more appropriate target of social policies designed to increase educational attainment among

young people.

       The vast majority of this research was conducted by sociologists and psychologists, who

view expectations formation as a social process whereby individuals draw on the experiences

and expectations of those around them. Figure 1 displays the potentially complex relationship

between expectations and attainment.

       The squares and rectangles on the left side of the figure contain the determinants of

educational expectations. Solid lines indicate relationships we hypothesize are unidirectional

whereas dashed lines indicate potentially bi-directional relationship. Some of the determinants

such as family factors and college costs are exogenous to the individual. Other factors such as an

individual’s academic achievement and the attitudes/behaviors of one’s peers can vary with time,

and are likely both influence and are influenced by one’s own expectations. For example, family

SES affects a student’s expectations, but the student’s expectations are not likely to influence her

family’s SES. However, the high school program a student is placed in affects her expectations,

but her expectations may also affect the program in which the guidance counselor/administrator

places the student.




                                                 4
       Many of the factors that affect expectations are also determinants of attainment, seen by

the curved arrows. Because expectations and attainment share many determinants, it is difficult

to untangle the effect of expectations on attainment. It may be that any relationship between

expectations and attainment is merely correlational, and the expectations merely mediate the

relationship between various individual, family, neighborhood, schools and cost factors and

attainment.

       Yet, a substantial body of literature leads one to believe that arrow between expectations

and attainment does exist. There are a variety of mechanisms through which expectations might

influence attainment. For example, a student who expects to attend college may make a point of

signing up for college entrance exams and/or researching financial aid options. Similarly, upon

entering high school a student with college expectations may be placed in the college-prep high

school program as opposed to the general program. These mechanisms are shown as dotted

arrows in Figure 1. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the relationships outlined in

Figure 1 to better understand the how expectations might influence educational attainment.

III. Data

       The analysis in this paper draws on several different data sets. To provide a consistent

picture of educational expectations over a long-time period, we utilize data from the Monitoring

the Future Survey (MTF). Funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse and conducted at the

University of Michigan’s Survey Research Center, MTF collects data on student attitudes,

behaviors, and beliefs. Beginning in 1976, MTF has collected data annually on a national

representative sample of twelfth graders, which has consistently asked twelfth grade students

about their educational expectations. MTF began surveying eighth and tenth graders in 1991,

asking them similar questions.




                                                 5
        In order to more carefully investigate the determinants of educational expectations, we

utilize data from a series of three longitudinal surveys conducted by the National Center for

Education Statistics: High School and Beyond, 1980 (HSB); the National Educational

Longitudinal Survey, 1988 (NELS); and the Education Longitudinal Survey, 2002 (ELS). These

surveys are longitudinal, following the high school sophomore classes of 1980, 1990, and 2002

into adulthood, thus documenting changes in expectations over time.

        Each NCES survey follows students from the beginning of high school through entry into

their young adult lives. Included in each survey are data gathered from students and their parents,

teachers and schools, and administrative data such as high school transcripts. Because the goal

of each survey is similar—to monitor students’ academic experiences and educational and

occupational expectations to better understand the transition from high school to young adult

life—the questions pertaining to educational expectations are consistently asked throughout each

survey. Although previous research has utilized both HSB and the NELS to investigate

educational expectations, no research to date links these two surveys to the most current data

from the ELS. This is our contribution to the literature.

        In addition to information on individual, family and school characteristics, these datasets

include demographic and local labor market data from the U.S. Census that is matched to the

respondent’s county of residence in the corresponding censual year. 2 Finally, in order to

measure the cost of postsecondary education for each respondent, we created county-level

measures of tuition and room and board costs at all degree-granting Title IV institutions using




2
  In HSB, Census data was matched by NCES to the county in which the student’s tenth grade high school is located,
in the NELS the Census data was matched to student’s twelfth grade high school, and in the ELS the Census data is
matched to the county in which the student’s tenth grade high school is located. HSB incorporates data from the
1980 Census, NELS incorporates 1990 Census data and ELS incorporates 2000 Census data.


                                                        6
HEGIS/IPEDS data. In our analysis, we utilize the average in-state tuition and room and board

data in $2007. 3

        In order to compare trends across all three files, in one of our analysis files we focus

solely on the set of students from tenth grade through two years following expected high school

graduation. In all three datasets, this entails tracking a nationally representative set of tenth

graders for 4 years, even if they leave school. To facilitate our analysis, we exclude students

who were missing data on tenth grade expectations or several key demographic variables such as

race, gender, socio-economic status and test scores. This results in dropping 15 percent of

students in HSB, 18 percent of students in NELS and 13 percent of students in ELS.

        Table 1 presents the summary statistics from this three-cohort analysis sample. Several

facts are worth noting. First, there is a sharp increase in the expectations for at least some

college between 1980 and 1990, but little change from 1990 to 2002. In contrast, expectations

regarding BA completion jumped considerably in all periods. Second, parental education of

students increased over this period, particularly from 1980 to 1990. Last, the percent of students

enrolling in 4-year post-secondary institutions increased by nearly 50 percent between 1980 and

2002.

        In addition to the three-cohort panel, we also utilize the full NELS panel to more

carefully examine how students update their expectations. This panel tracks a nationally

representative set of eighth graders in 1988 for twelve years, with the final survey administered

in 2000, when this cohort was eight years beyond their expected high school graduation date.

Table 2 presents summary statistics for this sample. It is worth noting that the sample size varies

across waves and outcomes as not all respondents have data for each variable in each wave.




                                                   7
IV. Trends in Educational Expectations

       To begin, we present data on how educational expectations have evolved over the past

several decades. As noted above, most prior research has utilized survey data from high school

students in the early 1980s (HSB) and early 1990s (NELS). In Figure 2, we present similar data

on educational expectations from the Monitoring the Future (MTF) survey, which has regularly

surveyed nationally representative cohorts of students since 1976. This data not only allows us

to extend our analysis beyond the scope of HSB and NELS, but also provides a useful cross-

check on the reliability expectations data. To minimize the impact of sampling variability, we

present three-year moving averages.

       In the top panel, we see that in 1976, roughly 77 percent of high school seniors expected

to complete at least some college. This fraction rose dramatically until the late 1990s, at which

point about 93 percent of seniors expected to complete at least some college. Comparing the

trends for eighth and tenth graders with those for twelfth graders, we see that on average,

students’ expectations with respect to some college did not change during high school.

       In the bottom panel, we see a similar pattern for the fraction of high school seniors

expecting to complete at least a BA degree. Expectations increased rapidly from the 1970s

through the mid-1990s, and somewhat less rapidly (but nonetheless steadily) from the mid-1990s

through the present. At the same time, we see that on average students lower their expectations

between eighth and twelfth grade. Among the class of 2006, for example, roughly 90 percent of

students believed as eighth graders that they would complete a BA. But by the time that this

cohort had reached twelfth grade, only a little more than 80 percent expected to attain a BA.

       Comparing these trends to the statistics shown in Table 1, there appears to be a relatively

good correspondence between the various data sets. Roughly 80 percent of the HSB cohort




                                                 8
believed that they would attain at least some college compared with about 85 percent in MTF,

but only 40 percent believed that they would attain a BA (compared with 58 percent in MTF).

Among the ELS cohort, who were seniors in 2004, 94 percent expected at least some college and

75 percent expected a BA (compared with about 95 percent and 80 percent in the MTF data).

       Figures 3 and 4 show comparable trends for several different subgroups, focusing on

twelfth graders. Figures 3a and 3b show trends by race and gender. Black females had

noticeably higher expectations than all other groups at the beginning of the sample period (the

late 1970s and early 1980s), with over 85 percent black female students reporting that they

expected to attain at least some postsecondary education compared with roughly 78 percent

among the other groups. Expectations among all groups increased sharply during the 1980s and

1990s, though both white and black females reported higher expectations than white and black

males. For example, in 2006 over 95 percent of young women in twelfth grade expected to

attain at least some postsecondary education compared with only slightly more than 90 percent

of young men. Similar trends are apparent for expectations regarding BA completion shown in

Figure 3b.

       Figure 4 shows similar trends for males and females who come from more versus less

advantaged backgrounds. In the mid-1970s, students whose parents had a BA degree had

substantially higher educational expectations than their peers. About 75 percent of males and

females with college educated parents expected a BA, while only 41 percent of females and 45

percent of males whose parents had less than a BA expected to do so. Interestingly, there was

little difference in expectations of at least some college across gender within the parental

education groups shown in this figure. However, by the mid-2000s with parental education

groups, fewer males expected to attain a BA than did females. During the past thirty years,




                                                 9
expectations for all groups have risen steadily, but it is striking that the expectations of young

women (from both more and less advantaged backgrounds) have risen more rapidly than the

expectations of young men. In fact, the percent of females whose parents had less than a high

school degree expecting a BA doubled between the mid- 1970s and mid-2000s, increasing from

41 percent to 82 percent.

V. The Relationship between Educational Expectations and Actual Enrollment

         Researchers in the 1970s identified educational expectations as an important predictor of

educational and occupational attainment (Duncan, Featherman and Duncan, 1972; Sewell, Haller,

and Ohlendorf, 1970; Sewell, Haller, and Portes, 1969; Sewell and Hauser, 1972). 4 Even after

conditioning on an extensive set of family background characteristics, educational expectations

are strongly correlated with educational attainment (Duncan, Featherman, & Duncan, 1972;

Sewell & Hauser, 1980; Sewell, Hauser, & Wolf, 1980; Sewell & Shah, 1967). 5

         Of course, this correlation does not necessarily imply that expectations have a causal

impact on attainment. The positive correlation may simply reflect the fact that individuals have

better information about their future path than can be captured with the measures commonly

available in the data used by researchers. For example, an individual may have access to money

for college from a relative that does not show up in the family income measures available in

standard datasets. Alternatively, some students with mediocre grades and test scores

undoubtedly have greater academic potential than others with similar high school performance.

If those with greater “unobserved potential” indicate higher educational expectations, one would



4
  Although our analysis explicitly investigates expectations and outcomes, much of the prior research in this area
blurs the distinction concepts of expectations and aspirations. Because of ambiguity in the literature, unless the
author’s explicitly define aspirations as hopes for educational attainment, we use the term expectations opposed to
aspirations even in cases where the original researcher used aspirations.
5
  The unconditional correlation between educational expectations and educational attainment tends to be on the
order of .6 to .7 (Sewell, Hauser, and Wolf, 1980; Teachman, 1987).


                                                         10
find a positive correlation due to the presence of this unobserved factor and not because of the

independent causal power of expectations themselves. In the analyses that follows, we not only

document the relationship between expectations and attainment, but take considerable pains to

assess, as best as possible, whether the documented relationship is causal or not.

       To examine the relationship between expectations and enrollment, in Table 3 we present

results from regressions of postsecondary enrollment on tenth grade expectations and other

background variables. The top panel presents OLS estimates where the dependent variable is

enrolled in any postsecondary institution whereas the bottom panel presents estimates where the

dependent variable is enrolled in a four-year institution. Columns 1-3 show estimates in which

the only predictors are tenth grade expectations. Columns 4-6 present estimates from a model

that includes as predictors all family background variables, student demographics, and school

and county characteristics.

       In columns 1-3, we see that tenth grade expectations are indeed strong predictors of

enrollment. For example, in the 2002 cohort of tenth graders, students who expected to attain at

least some college were 23 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in postsecondary

education than their peers who expected to attain at most a high school degree. Interestingly,

however, nearly 27 percent of students who, as tenth graders, did not expect to attain any college

were enrolled in college within two years of their expected high school graduation. Similarly,

students in this cohort who expected to attain a BA degree were roughly 41 percentage points

more likely to be enrolled in a four-year college. Again, it is interesting to note that roughly 7

percent of students with no expectations of college report being enrolled in a four-year college in

the second follow-up survey.




                                                 11
       Even after we control for a host of individual, family and school characteristics, tenth

grade expectations are strongly predictive of eventual enrollment (columns 4-6). For example,

among the 2002 cohort of tenth graders, students who expected to attain at least some college

were about 14 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in postsecondary education than their

peers who expected to attain at most a high school degree. Similarly, students in this cohort who

expected to attain a BA degree were roughly 16 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in a

four-year college.

       While these results indicate that expectations remain strong predictors of attainment

above and beyond other standard determinants of schooling, the data also reveal that

expectations have become somewhat less predictive of attainment over the past several decades.

In the 1980 cohort, tenth grade expectations explained roughly 25 percent of the variation

postsecondary enrollment. This figure decreased to roughly 20 percent for the 1990 cohort and

to roughly 15 percent in the 2002 cohort. The pattern is similar for BA attainment. One reason

for the decreasing explanatory power of expectations is that variance of expectations decreased

by about one-third between 1980 and 2002.

       However, determining the causality in this association is difficult. Omitted variables

such as family wealth, personal connections or talent (athletic, musical, artistic) may be driving

the apparent relationship between expectations and attainment. Additionally, the potential for

reverse causality between expectations and the predictors is strong. For example, student grades

directly affect both expectations and attainment but expectations may also affect grades such that

as expectations increase students earn higher grades. The causal loop between expectations and

grades makes it difficult to determine the primary mechanism (that is, grades or expectations)

through which these two variables affect attainment.




                                                12
       To further examine the relationship between expectations and enrollment and attainment,

we estimate increasingly comprehensive specifications for attainment using data from the

sophomore class of 1990. These results, shown in Table 4, come from OLS regressions. Panels

A and B document the effects of expectations on enrollment and panels C and D show how

expectations affect attainment. The coefficients on the expectations variables in the enrollment

panels (A and B) are larger than those in attainment panels (C and D), but expectations remain

strong predictors of attainment. Within each panel, each successive column includes additional

predictors to demonstrate the robustness of the expectations effect. We see that the inclusion of

family background and individual demographics in column 2 in each panel reduces the effect of

expectations on both enrollment and attainment only slightly. The inclusion of high school

achievement measures in column 3, however, dramatically reduces the coefficients on the

expectations variables in each of the panels. Interestingly, the inclusion of a variety of non-

achievement measures (column 4) including personality characteristics such as self-esteem and

locus of control as well as behavioral measures (for example, TV watching, homework

completion, suspensions, etc) have very little, if any, effect on the relationship between

expectations and enrollment and attainment. Similarly, the coefficients on expectations decrease

only slightly when measures of school characteristics (column 6) or school fixed effects (column

5) are added. The inclusion of county-level demographics and college cost variables (column 7)

also do not influence the relationship between expectations and attainment. The fact that the

inclusion of an increasingly rich set of observable characteristics does not change the

relationships between expectations and enrollment and expectations and attainment lends

credence to the view that expectations themselves may directly influence attainment.




                                                 13
           In a further attempt to dissect the relationship between expectations and attainment, Table

5 shows results from OLS regressions of various tenth grade behaviors on eighth grade

expectations. If expectations had a causal impact on attainment, one would expect them to also

predict a host of mediating mechanisms such as time spent on homework, and high school GPA.

Of course, the existence of a relationship between early expectations and subsequent behaviors

associated with schooling success does not by any means prove that expectations influence

attainment. But the absence of such relationships would be troubling. The results in Table 5

show that college expectations are positively associated with academic outcomes such as GPA,

hours of homework per week and type of high school program, but are not related to self-

reported absenteeism, self-reported TV watching, parent-reported behavior problems, or

personality measures such as self-esteem and locus of control. While the results are somewhat

mixed overall, the GPA and homework results are consistent with expectations having a causal

impact on achievement and attainment.

           It is important to recognize, however, that the results presented in Tables 3, 4, 5 are

merely suggestive of a causal relationship between expectations and college enrollment and

completion. Without a randomized assignment experiment in which all potential confounding

factors are controlled for, we cannot be fully confident that increasing expectations will lead to

college enrollment and completion.

VI. Understanding the Gap between Expectations and Attainment

           Prior literature has documented a substantial gap between the expectations and actual

attainment of young people. Figures 5 and 6 document the trends, by race and gender, in both

expectations and BA attainment. 6 Although expectations of a bachelor’s degree steadily

increased from about 60 percent in the early 1970s to over 80 percent by 2000, attainment of
6
    Attainment data were collected from the U.S. Census Bureau.


                                                         14
such a degree did not rise accordingly for Blacks or whites. In fact, the percent of Blacks and

males completing a BA has remained fairly constant over this time period. A greater proportion

of females and whites have completed a BA today than in the early 1970s but the rising trend has

not kept pace with increases in expectations.

       Understanding why students’ educational expectations are much higher than actual

attainment is important if it is desirable to change individuals’ expectations in an effort to attain

more optimal outcomes. The first step in doing this is to understand how young people form

educational expectations. Expectation formation is a complex process: individuals do not have

access to the same information and likely weight various factors differently in determining

expectations (Manski, 1993).

Determinants of Educational Expectations

       Prior research documents a variety of factors that are associated with educational

expectations, including children’s own abilities and school experiences (Duncan, Featherman,

and Duncan, 1972; Hoelter, 1982; Sewell, Haller, and Portes, 1969; Teachman and Paasch, 1998)

family characteristics such as parental educational attainment and income (Duncan, Featherman

and Duncan, 1972; Kao and Tienda, 1998; Sewell, Haller, and Ohlendorf, 1970; Sewell, Haller,

and Portes, 1969; Teachman and Paasch, 1998) and neighborhood characteristics (Teachman and

Paasch, 1998). One means by which parental income likely influences children’s educational

expectations is by the ability to pay for post-secondary education (Astone and McLanahan, 1991;

McLanahan and Bumpass 1988). Parental involvement, as evidenced by activities such as

monitoring their child’s homework, offering encouragement about school related activities and

providing academic enrichment materials at home, is positively related to expectations (Astone

and McLanahan, 1991; Kao and Tienda, 1998; Schneider and Stevenson, 1999). Additionally,




                                                  15
parents’ educational expectations for their children affect the children’s educational expectations

(Davies and Kandel, 1981; Schneider and Stevenson, 1999). 7 A child’s community is important

for the development of expectations because it determines the types of interactions the child has

with peers and other adults (Teachman and Paasch, 1998).

        Much of the literature focuses on the influence of teacher encouragement and

expectations and peer expectations, finding significant positive effects of both on expectations

(Davies and Kandel, 1981; Duncan, Featherman and Duncan, 1972; Hoelter, 1982; Kiuru,

Aunola, Vuori and Nurmi, 2006; Schneider and Stevenson, 1999; Sewell, Haller, and Ohlendorf,

1970; Sewell, Haller, and Portes, 1969). Similarly, when neighborhoods are socially,

economically, and racially segregated, expectations may be depressed. Children growing up in

neighborhoods of concentrated disadvantage likely do not have exposure individuals similar to

themselves and their families with high levels of educational attainment. Consequently, children

lack information about educational and occupational opportunities and may be unaware of the

economic benefits to educational attainment. (Ogbu, 1991; Stewart, Stewart, and Simmons, 2007;

Streufert, 1991; Wilson, 1987).

        While the prior literature has documented strong correlations between the individual,

family and neighborhood characteristics and children’s educational expectations, it is not at all

clear that one should interpret these relationships as causal. For many of the reasons discussed

above, it may be that factors omitted from the statistical models explain the observed relationship.

For example, the value parents place on higher education influences the neighborhood in which a

child lives and the schools he or she attends, and may explain a child’s expectations. But it may

be hard to observe parents’ value of education, which is likely manifest in numerous ways,

7
 However, the effect of parental expectations on children’s expectations can easily be overstated when parental
expectations are measured via the child’s perception, not the parent’s reported expectations (Davies and Kandel,
1981). Perceived parental expectations in part represent the expectations they are supposed to predict.


                                                        16
making it seem as though other correlated observables such as neighborhood explain a child’s

expectations.

        Table 6 presents the determinants of tenth grade expectations for the NELS sophomore

cohort. The results generally confirm the findings of the prior literature. SES and academic

ability are the strongest predictors of expectations. Both SES and academic ability are positively

related to expectations such that higher SES students have higher expectations than lower SES

students and students with higher test scores and higher GPAs have higher expectations than

students with lower academic ability. The only school level variable that affects expectations is

enrollment in a private school, and this particularly true when looking at expectations of a BA or

more.

Determinants of Misalignment

        With a general understanding of what determines expectations, we can begin to

investigate potential explanations for the gap between expectations and attainment. Researchers

have posed multiple explanations of the gap between expectations and attainment. In general,

the gap exists because students’ expectations are too high. Expectations are a student’s best

guess of their eventual attainment given their ability, family background, school quality, and

neighborhood—all factors that determine attainment. Hence, the expectations-attainment gap

implies inappropriate or “irrational” expectations given a student’s fixed characteristics and

experiences.

        Researchers often describe the gap as a problem in course-taking or preparation. While it

is true that these factors influence attainment, they do not (technically) explain the gap given our

definition of expectations: a student's best estimate of attainment using available information. If

the question is how to help students attain their expectations, then these are reasonable paths to




                                                 17
pursue, but they do not offer insight into the causes of the expectations-attainment gap. There

are two potential causes of the gap: one, misinformation about costs and/or requirements of

college (that is, students expect they will be able to pay for college and easily complete the

coursework) or two, an unexpected shock occurs after students form their expectations, which

prevents them from attending. Shocks such as changes in family income or illness can be

positive as well as negative which would drive the gap in different directions and this is not the

pattern found in the data making random shocks an unlikely cause of the gap. The fact that most

students attain less education than they expect (the expectations-attainment gap is negative)

suggests that misinformation is the cause of the gap. Students have misinformation about the

cost of college, the preparation they will need and the difficulty of completing college. Even

conditional on adequate preparation and available funding students may simply realize that

college is not a good match for them (Orfield and Paul, 1994; Schneider and Stevenson, 1999).

       When a student has expectations that are misinformed or the student is unprepared to

meet her expectations, sociologists say the student’s expectations are “misaligned.” Aligned

expectations are those that fit with other life goals and with ability and those that are stable

throughout high school (Schneider and Stevenson, 1999). Economists use slightly different

terminology, typically speaking of “rational” expectations or expectations that would result in

the largest economic gain for the individual given his/her affinity for schooling (Manski, 1993).

       Previous research suggests that some groups are more likely to have misaligned

expectations than others. For example, a study of middle school students in two Massachusetts

schools showed that urban students had less alignment between their educational expectations

and their educational preparation (for example, college track v. vocational track) and their other

life plans (for example, age of marriage and age of pregnancy/children) (Malcolmson, 2007).




                                                  18
       In Table 7 we develop a measure of alignment and attempt to discern which students are

more or less likely to have aligned expectations. We measure alignment in twelfth grade as the

predicted probability of reaching one’s twelfth grade expectations based upon observable twelfth

grade characteristics. Specifically, we regressed a binary indicator for a given level of

attainment (for example, BA degree, at least some college, high school) in 2000 (eight years after

expected high school graduation) on a host of student, family, school and neighborhood factors

measured as of twelfth grade. Using the coefficients from this regression, we predicted the

probability that each student would attain the level of education they expected in twelfth grade.

This prediction becomes the alignment measure for the student. For example, if a student

expected to attain a BA degree, but the predicted likelihood of this is only .36, the student’s

expectations are not particularly well aligned. If a student only expected to complete some

college, then we use the predicted probability that she or he will attain at least some college as

the measure of alignment. (Note that in this way we consider misalignment in a positive

direction – predicted to attain more education than expected – the same as alignment.) Students

assigned a higher value on our alignment measure are more likely to reach their expectations and

low alignment values correspond to a low probability of reaching one’s expectations and a

greater degree of misalignment.

       Table 7 displays the results of a series of multilevel models estimating what affects

expectation alignment in twelfth grade. With the full set of predictors (Column 5) the results

show that lower SES students are less likely to reach their expectations and high achieving

students are more likely to reach their expectations. Not surprisingly, students in larger schools

and those with greater proportions of student eligible for free- and reduced-priced lunch are less

likely to reach their expectations, and as the average test score in a school rises so too does the




                                                 19
likelihood that a student a within that school will reach her expectations. Positively, students

with more “aligned” expectations—higher predicted probabilities of reaching their

expectations—in eighth grade are more likely to reach to their twelfth grade expectations. This

finding highlights the importance of developing realistic and informed expectations early in a

student’s academic career.

       Perhaps, schools can play a role solidifying the link between expectations and attainment.

The bottom of Column 1 shows that about thirty percent of the variance in the predicted

probability of reaching twelfth grade expectations schools can be explained by schools. Yet,

once student characteristics such as demographics, family background variables, and academic

ability are added to the model, schools only explain only seven percent of the variance in

misalignment. Observable school characteristics such as the percent of free- and reduced-price

lunch students, school size, and the number of students per guidance counselor account for about

3 percent of school level explained variance, leaving about 4 percent of the total variance in

misalignment unexplained at the school level. Schools appear to be only minimally capable of

helping students develop aligned expectations. Students’ own characteristics explain

misalignment much more than which high school they attended.

VII. Informed Educational Expectations

       Much of the expectations literature questions students’ abilities to develop informed

expectations, arguing that individuals often do not have the information needed to form aligned

expectations or to accurately calculate the returns to schooling (Manski, 2004; Orfield and Paul,

1994; Schneider and Stevenson, 1999). However, recent research suggests that college students

may indeed update their expectations based on knowledge about their academic ability gained

during school (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2009; Zafar, 2009). Stinebrickner and




                                                 20
Stinebrickner (2009) follow Berea College students from entrance through each semester of

persistence, tracking their expected and actual performance. They find that students update their

expectations based on their actual grade performance, with students whose performance is

significantly lower than expected being more likely to drop-out than students whose performance

is as expected or better than expected. Zafar (2009) studied the expectations of college students

at Northwestern University and found evidence of updating consistent with Stinebrickner and

Stinebrickner (2009). Specifically, Zafar (2009) found that students revise their expectations of

future GPAs based on their prior GPAs. Perhaps more interestingly, Zafar (2009) found that

individuals are more likely to make revisions to expectations with higher degrees of uncertainty

such as workplace outcomes than to revise expectations that are initially held with certainty such

as parental approval and college completion.

        To date, the literature has not investigated how high school students update their

expectations. The data presented in Figures 2a and 2b showing that students lower expectations

of BA completion from eighth to twelfth grade provides some evidence that students do change

their expectations as they move through the educational process, acquiring new information. If

high school students do update their expectations based new information, policy interventions

designed to help high school students develop rational/realistic expectations may be successful.

In this section, we analyze NELS data to determine if, when, and why high school students

update their expectations. 8

        Table 8 provides descriptive statistics on updating. Each row presents statistics on a

different time period, with the fraction of students shown in the cells and the number of

observations in square brackets. In row 1, we see that roughly 61 percent of students changed

8
 Because the NELS is the most longitudinally comprehensive of the NCES surveys, spanning from eighth grade to
eight years after expected high school graduation, we rely exclusively on the NELS to analyze updating behavior
among students.


                                                      21
expectations at least once between 1988 and 2000, with 24 percent changing exactly twice and

14 percent changing three or more times. (Note that students were surveyed in five years – 1988,

1990, 1992, 1994 and 2000 – so that a maximum of four changes that can be captured in this data.

To the extent that students update more frequently, we may be understating the extent of

instability in expectations.) Perhaps not surprisingly, considerably more students lowered their

expectations between 1988 and 2000 (29 percent) than raised their expectations (13 percent). 9

         Row 2 shows that virtually all students who changed over the entire period did so at least

once in the first six years from 1988 to 1994. This makes sense insofar as one might expect that

students learn a great deal about their potential success in college during and immediately

following high school. Interestingly, if one compares expectations in eighth grade with

expectations six years later, we see that slightly more students increased their expectations (19

percent) than decreased (15 percent). However, between 1994 and 2000, 28 percent of young

people lowered their expectations compared with 6 percent who increased them and roughly 66

percent who did not change their expectations (row 3).

         Looking within the high school years, we see that 35 percent of students changed their

expectations between eighth and tenth grades. Interestingly, 13 percent increased their

expectations during this period while 22 percent lowered their expectations. Between tenth and

twelfth grades, roughly 15 percent of students raised their expectations while 10 percent lowered

their expectations (and 75 percent did not change their expectations).

         Given that students frequently change their expectations during high school and that

updating is not a random process, as students are more likely to update downward, we examine

9
  Note that the sample used to calculate the statistics in columns 7 and 8 differs somewhat from the sample used to
calculate the statistics in columns 1-6. This is because in order to have data in columns 7-8, respondents must have
had non-missing expectations data in both 1988 and 2000, whereas in order to have data in columns 1-6,
respondents only had to have non-missing expectations data in two (or more) of the five survey waves from 1988 to
2000.


                                                         22
the nature of updating. We first explore whether students with in certain schools are more likely

to update than others. Table 9 presents results from OLS regressions of updating on various

individual characteristics. We include high school fixed effects, so that we identify the

relationships off of variation within each of the 1,016 schools included in the NELS eighth grade

survey. 10

        SES and academic achievement are the strongest predictors of updating. Eighth graders

in the lower SES quintiles update more than students in the highest SES quintile and males

update more often than females. In fact, students in the lowest SES quintile are about 50 percent

more likely to have updated their expectations than students in the highest SES quintile. Lower

achieving students are also predicted to update more often than higher achieving students. More

disadvantaged youth (in terms of family income and academic achievement) update their

expectations more often than peers. These socio-economically and academically disadvantaged

students start out with extremely high expectations and, in general, lower them during high

school. Interestingly, students with lower scores on indices of self-concept and locus of control

and those that complete fewer hours of homework of per week are also more likely to update at

least once between eighth and twelfth grade than students with high scores on the indices and

those completing more hours of homework. Interestingly, the F-test for joint significance of the

school fixed effects shows that schools seem to matter only in terms of updating expectations at

least once between eighth and twelfth grade, but not for updating twice. This result suggests that

serial updaters—those updating twice between eighth and twelfth grade—are influenced more by

individual student and family characteristics rather than schools.



10
  On average there are eighteen students per school. The minimum number of students at a school is one and the
maximum number of students is fifty-eight. The schools at the twenty-fifth percentile have fourteen students and
schools at the seventy-fifth percentile have twenty-two students.


                                                        23
        Next, we investigate whether or not students update in a systematic way based on the

acquisition of new information. To do so, we estimate the determinants of updating with panel

data models and student fixed effects. These models essentially examine whether within-student

changes in factors such as academic performance are systematically associated with within-

student changes in educational expectations. The results in Table 10 demonstrate that changes in

GPA are positively associated with changes in expectations, but that changes in test scores and

SES are not associated with changes in expectations. When looking only at expectations for a

BA, changes in test scores become positively associated with expectations in the models

spanning from eighth grade (1988) to twelfth grade and beyond (1992 and 1994). Having a child

is a strong predictor of decreasing expectations.

        Table 11 presents results separately for a variety of subgroups. Interestingly, students in

the two lowest SES quintiles do not seem to update expectations based upon changes in GPA.

Yet, GPA has the strongest association with updating for minority students and those in the

fourth and fifth SES quintiles. For minorities, a one standard deviation increase in GPA is

associated with over one-tenth of point increase in expectations, or about a 5 percent increase.

The same increase in GPA is predicted to increase the expectations of students in the fourth and

fifth SES quintiles by almost one-tenth of a point (about a 3.5 percent increase). Although

negatively associated with the expectations of all groups, having a child is particularly

detrimental to the overall expectations of minorities and those in the middle SES quintile and the

highest test score quartile; having a child is associated with almost a 9 percent decrease in

expectations for minorities (.223 points), a 7 percent decrease in the highest SES quintile (.183

points), and a 10 percent decrease for students with the highest test scores (.292 points). 11


11
  To check the panel analysis assumptions we ran the 1988-1990 full model with the cross-sectional data, and found
even stronger statistically significant relationships between expectations and GPA and expectations and test scores.


                                                        24
       The bottom of Table 11 displays the results of changing academic and family

characteristics on the expectation of a BA by subgroups. The results are generally similar to

those reported in the top panel, but a few differences are noteworthy. Changes in test scores are

positively associated with expectations of a BA for males, whites, and those in the second test

score quartile. The magnitudes of these relationships are small, but statistically significant. In

general, almost all groups seem to update in the predicted directions based on changes in GPA

and changes in parent status, but some groups are more affected by these changes than others.

Interestingly, students in the middle of the SES distribution (that is, in the third and fourth

quintiles) and students in the tails of the test score distribution seem to be the most influenced by

changes in academic achievement. These results lend support to the conclusion that students

develop informed expectations, relying mostly upon their own academic achievement to

determine their college expectations. Yet, many students still do not reach their expectations,

suggesting that the updating that takes place during high school based upon academic

achievement is not sufficient to link expectations to attainment.

       Misunderstandings with regard to the costs of college may contribute to the observed

expectations-attainment gap. Although, economic circumstances have not played a large role in

the models thus far, the costs of college are the focus of many studies investigating barriers to

college entry and completion, and states have control over the costs of their public higher

education institutions. Beginning in the early 1990s states began adopting broad based merit aid

programs that award tuition and fees to student residents that meet a fairly low threshold of

academic achievement, such as a high school GPA of 3.0 (Dynarski, 2004). The adoption of

statewide merit aid programs was a dramatic shift from prior aid programs that at the federal

level consisted mostly of need based aid (that is, Pell Grants and Stafford Loans) and at the state




                                                  25
level occurred mainly as subsidies to public universities to keep tuition and fees low (Dynarksi,

2004). 12 Research suggests that broad based statewide merit aid programs have the potential to

increase college enrollment. The literature concludes that a $1,000 decrease in college tuition is

associated with about a 3.5 percent increase in enrollment (Dynarksi, 2003; Kane, 1995; Leslie

and Brinkman, 1987).

         Expectations may be a mediating factor between state merit aid programs and college

enrollment. For this reason, Table 12 demonstrates the effects of state-run broad based merit

scholarship programs on the expectations of two cohorts, the sophomore classes of 1990 and

2002. Controlling for state fixed effects, changes in the cost of college based upon the

implementation of a statewide merit aid program do not appear to influence student expectations

for college. Because almost all sophomores in 1990 and 2002 expected to attend at least some

college, the adoption of a statewide merit aid program may have provided the impetus for more

of these students to act upon their high expectations and enroll in college, instead of raising the

expectations of the10 percent of students who did not expect to attend any post-secondary

education.

VIII. Conclusion

         Expectations increased substantially since the early 1980s, but seem to have leveled off

with almost everyone expecting at least some college. Individual, family background and school

characteristics have become less predictive of student expectations over time. Expectations have

become somewhat less predictive of attainment but remain strong predictors of attainment above

and beyond other standard determinants of schooling. Determined largely by factors outside of

the school walls, expectations do appear to have an important influence on college enrollment


12
  Merit aid programs did exist at both the federal and state levels prior to the early 1990s but these programs were
very small and targeted at the very highest performing students such as the National Merit Scholarship.


                                                         26
and persistence. Over 60 percent of students update their expectations at least once between

eighth grade and eight years post-high school. Updating seems to be somewhat based on

acquisition of new information, particularly ability, especially for marginal students in terms of

college entry. Early alignment of expectations is predictive of greater likelihood of reaching

later expectations. Demographic characteristics of students and schools explain away a

substantial portion of the between school variation in the likelihood of students reaching their

expectations. State policies decreasing the costs of college do not seem to influence student

expectations.

   These results suggest that to generate a cohort of students with expectations likely to lead to

enrollment and persistence in post-secondary education, policies should be directed at helping

middle school students attain their maximum academic potential. Students rely on knowledge of

their academic ability to develop and maintain their expectations, lowering their expectations

when presented with indicators of lower academic ability and raising their expectations when

given signals of higher academic ability.




                                                27
                                          References

Astone, Nan M. and Sara S. McLanahan. 1991. “Family Structure, Parental Practices, and High
       School Completion.” American Sociological Review 56(3): 309-320.

Blau, Peter M. and Otis D. Duncan. 1967. The American occupational structure. New York:
       John Wiley & Sons.

Davies, Mark and Denise B. Kandel. 1981. “Parental and Peer Influences on Adolescents’
       Educational Plans: Some Further Evidence.” American Journal of Sociology. 87(2): 363-
       387.

Duncan, Otis D., David L. Featherman, and Beverly Duncan. 1972. Socioeconomic background
      and achievement. New York: Seminar Press.

Dynarski, Susan M. 2003. “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College
      Attendance and Completion.” The American Economic Review. 93 (1): 279-288.

Dynarski, Susan M. 2004. “The New Merit Aid.” In College Choices: The Economics of Where
      to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay for It, edited by Caroline M. Hoxby. Chicago: The
      University of Chicago Press.

Goldin, Claudia D. and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Long-Run Changes in the Wage Structure:
       Narrowing, Widening and Polarizing.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 135-
       165.

Hanson, Sandra L. 1994. “Unrealized Educational Aspirations and Expectations Among U.S.
      Youths.” Sociology of Education 67(3): 159-183.

Hu, Shouping. 2003. “Educational Aspirations and Postsecondary Access and Choice: Students
      in Urban, Suburban, and Rural Schools Compared.” Education Policy Analysis Archives,
      11(14).

Hoelter, Jon W. 1982. “Segregation and Rationality in Black Status Aspiration Processes.”
       Sociology of Education 55(1): 31-39.

Kane, Thomas J. (1995, July). “Rising Public College Tuition and College Entry: How Well Do
       Public Subsidies Promote Access to College?” NBER Working Paper Series. Working
       Paper No. 5164.

Kao, Grace and Marta Tienda. 1998. “Educational Expectations of Minority Youth.” American
      Journal of Education. 106(3): 249-384.

Kiuru, Noona, Kaisa Aunola, Jukka Vuori, and Jari-Erik Nurmi. 2007. “The Role of Peer Groups
       in Adolescents’ Educational Expectations and Adjustment.” Journal of Youth and
       Adolescence. 36(8): 995-1009.



                                              28
Leslie, Larry L. and Paul T. Brinkman. 1987. “Student Price Response in Higher Education: The
        Student Demand Studies.” The Journal of Higher Education 58 (2): 181-204.

Malcolmson, Carole N. 2007. Neighborhood, parents, no one: Home networks inform young
      adolescents’ status attainment goals. Dissertation. Harvard University.

Manski, Charles F. 1993. “Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to
      Schools?” In Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education edited by Charles
      Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

______. 2004. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica 72(5): 1329-1376.

McCarron, Graziella P. and Karen K. Inkelas. 2006. “The Gap Between Educational Aspirations
      and Attainment for First Generation College Students and the Role of Parental
      Involvement.” Journal of College Student Development 47(5): 534-549.

McLanahan, Sara S. and Larry Bumpass. 1988. “Intergenerational Consequences of Family
     Disruption.” American Journal of Sociology 94(1):130-52.

Ogbu, John U. 1991. “Low School Performance as an Adaptation: The Case of Blacks in
       Stockton, California.” In Minority status and schooling: A comparative study of
       immigrants and in voluntary minorities edited by Margaret A. Gibson & John U. Ogbu.
       New York: Garland.

Orfield, Gary and Faith G. Paul. 1994. High Hopes, Long Odds: A Major Report on Hoosier
       Teens and the American Dream. Indianapolis, IN: Indiana Youth Institute.

Schneider, Barbara and David Stevenson. 1999. The Ambitious Generation: America’s
       Teenagers Motivated but Directionless. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Sewell, William H., Archibald O. Haller, and George W. Ohlendorf. 1970. “The Educational and
       Early Occupational Status Attainment Process: Replication and Revision.” American
       Sociological Review 35(6): 1014-27.

Sewell, William H., Archibald O. Haller, and Alejandro Portes. 1969. “The Educational and
       Early Occupational Attainment Process.” American Sociological Review 34(1): 82-92.

Sewell, William H. and Robert M. Hauser. 1972. “Causes and Consequences of Higher
       Education: Models of the Status Attainment Process.” American Journal of Agricultural
       Economics 54(5): 851-861.

Sewell, William H. and Vimal P. Shah. 1967. “Socioeconomic Status, Intelligence, and the
       Attainment of Higher Education.” Sociology of Education 40(1): 1-23.




                                             29
Sewell, William. H., Robert M. Hauser, and Wendy C. Wolf, W. 1980. “Sex, Schooling and
       Occupational Status.” American Journal of Sociology 86(3): 551-583.

Stewart, Endya B., Eric A. Stewart, and Ronald L. Simons. 2007. “The Effect of Neighborhood
       Context on the College Expectations of African American Adolescents.” American
       Educational Research Journal 44(4): 896-919.

Stinebrickner, Todd. and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2008. “Learning About Academic Ability and
       College Drop-Out Decision.” Working Paper, University of Western Ontario.

Streufert, Peter. 1991. “The Effect of Social Isolation on Schooling Choice.” Working Paper,
       Institute for Research on Poverty.

Teachman, Jay D. 1987. “Family Background, Educational Resources, and Educational
      Attainment.” American Sociological Review 52: 548-557.

Teachman, Jay D. and Kathleen Paasch. 1998. “The Family and Educational Expectations.”
      Journal of Marriage and the Family 60(3): 704-714.

U.S. Census. (2008). Educational Attainment in the United States: 2008. Detailed Tables.
       http://www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/education/cps2008.html

Wilson, William. J. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public
      Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

_____. 1996. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor. New York: Vintage
       Books.

Zafar, Basit. 2009. “How Do College Students Form Expectations?” Working Paper, Federal
        Reserve Bank of New York.




                                              30
 Figure 1: Relationship between Educational Expectations and Educational Attainment


    Individual
        Ability
      Achievement
       Attention
       Behavior
       Motivation                                            Take
                                                           SAT/ACT

      Family
                                                            Apply to
         SES                                                College
  Parental Education            Educational                                Educational
    Marital Status
Household Composition           Expectations                               Attainment
                                                             Apply for
                                                           Financial Aid
 Neighborhood
      Role Models                              Placement in College-
         Peers                                   Prep HS Program



     School
      Quality
      Program
       Peers
      Teachers



        Costs
     College Tuition
Returns to College Degree




                                        31
Figure 2: Expected Education by Grade and Year




            (a) At Least Some College




              (b) College Degree



                     32
Figure 3: Expected Education Among twelfth Graders by Race and Gender




                      (a)At Least Some College




                         (b) College Degree


                                 33
Figure 4: Expected Education Among twelfth graders by SES and Gender




                       (a) At Least Some College




                         (b) College Degree



                                34
Figure 5: Expectations and Attainment of BA




                (a) Blacks




                (b) Whites


                    35
Figure 5 con’t.




 (c) Females




  (d) Males


      36
Figure 6: Expectations and Attainment of At Least Some College




                          (a) Blacks




                         (b) Whites


                             37
Figure 6 cont’d.




  (c) Females




   (d) Males


      38
              Table 1 - Summary Statistics for Sophomore Cohorts in HSB, NELS and ELS
                                                        HSB             NELS            ELS
                                                   (Sophomores in (Sophomores in (Sophomores in
                                                        1980,          1990, n=       2002, n=
                                                     n=11,498)         11,857)        12,174)
                                              Expectations
Grade 10 Expectations
          Grade 10 Expect Less than HS                  0.019            0.005         0.011
              Grade 10 Expect HS                        0.254            0.087         0.075
       Grade 10 Expect at Least Some PSE                0.727            0.908         0.914
         Grade 10 Expect BA or Higher                   0.402            0.611         0.801
Grade 12 Expectations
          Grade 12 Expect Less than HS                  0.025            0.002         0.003
              Grade 12 Expect HS                        0.188            0.052         0.058
       Grade 12 Expect Some at Least PSE                0.787            0.946         0.938
         Grade 12 Expect BA or Higher                   0.401            0.697         0.745
2 Years Post-HS Expectations
      2 Years Post-HS Expect Less than HS               0.029            0.003         0.003
           2 Years Post-HS Expect HS                    0.202            0.073         0.072
   2 Years Post-HS Expect at Least Some PSE             0.769            0.924         0.925
      2 Years Post-HS Expect BA or Higher               0.392            0.722         0.727
                                          Student Demographics
Male                                                   0.493        0.491            0.493
Race
                     Hispanic                          0.068        0.096            0.148
                       Black                           0.120        0.117            0.142
                       White                           0.788        0.741            0.615
                       Other                           0.024        0.046            0.048
Parent's Highest Education
            Parent Complete HS or Less                 0.412        0.282            0.264
           Parent Completed Some PSE                   0.428        0.415            0.346
          Parent Completed a BA or More                0.160        0.302            0.390
SES Quintile
               Lowest SES Quintile                     0.177        0.193            0.199
               Second SES Quintile                     0.204        0.204            0.208
                Third SES Quintile                     0.208        0.214            0.211
                Fourth SES Quintile                    0.214        0.213            0.205

              Highest SES Quintile                     0.197        0.177            0.177
Number of Siblings
                   No Siblings                         0.039        0.064            0.057
                   One Sibling                         0.204        0.325            0.297
                  Two Siblings                         0.256        0.273            0.289
             Three or More Siblings                    0.501        0.338            0.357
                                          Student Achievement
HS Program
                  HS Academic Program                  0.336        0.386            0.531
                   HS General Program                  0.459        0.458            0.364
                  HS Vocational Program                0.206        0.157            0.105
See notes at end of table.




                                                  39
            Table 1 Cont'd - Summary Statistics for Sophomore Cohorts in HSB, NELS and ELS
                                      Student Achievement Cont'd
Quartile of Combined Math and Reading Scores,
Grade 10
                  Lowest Quartile                        0.234            0.235            0.250
                  Second Quartile                        0.249            0.257            0.248
                   Third Quartile                        0.256            0.265            0.245
                 Highest Quartile                        0.261            0.243            0.257
Academic GPA, Grade 12                                   2.325            2.296            2.585
                                           School Variables
Students per Guidance Counselor, Grade 10, in
Hundreds                                               3.662                                  4.051     3.472
Percent of Free- and Reduced- Price Lunch Eligible
Students                                               0.149                                  0.192     0.230
Percent of Previous Year's Graduates in 4-Yr
College                                                0.471                                  0.457     0.497
                                     PSE Matriculation Variables
Applied to PSE in Grade 12                            0.649                                   0.666     0.757
Enrolled in PSE within 2 Years Post-HS                0.585                                   0.702     0.716

Type of PSE Enrolled in within 2 Years Post-HS
           Less than 2 Year Institution                               0.087                   0.171     0.016
                2 Year Institution                                    0.172                   0.170     0.243
                4 Year Institution                                    0.317                   0.362     0.457
Highest Degree Attained
                  Less than HS                                        0.071                   0.030       -
                       HS                                             0.473                   0.460       -
                   Certificate                                        0.105                   0.082       -
                       AA                                             0.084                   0.076       -
                       BA                                             0.226                   0.313       -
                       MA                                             0.029                   0.035       -
                      PHD                                             0.011                   0.006       -
                                         Economic Variables
Percent of County Population Unemployed              0.074                                    0.064     0.060
County Per Capita Income, in Thousands, 2007
Dollars                                             23.247                                   $21.887   $24.254
                                         PSE Cost Variables
County Mean PSE Tuition, In-State, in Thousands,
2007 Dollars                                            -                                    $7.051    $10.753
County Mean PSE Tuition, Out-of-State, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                 -                                    $9.068    $13.008
County Mean PSE Room and Board Costs, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                 -                                    $5.583    $7.972
County Minimum Tuition, In-State, in Thousands,
2007 Dollars                                            -                                     $3.17    $3.831
County Minimum Tuition, Out-of-State, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                 -                                    $5.763    $6.899
County Minimum PSE Room and Board Costs, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                 -                                    $3.835    $5.579
Notes:
SES is a composite measure of parents' education, parents' occupations, and family income.
PSE means post-secondary education.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.




                                                               40
                       Table 2 - Descriptive Statistics for NELS 1988-2000 Panel, 8th Grade Cohort
                                                      1988 Wave 1990 Wave 1992 Wave 1994 Wave 2000 Wave

                                                      Expectations
                  Expect Less than HS                    0.015       0.025        0.007       0.007   0.024
                      Expect HS                          0.099       0.103        0.052       0.085   0.214
                   Expect Some PSE                       0.886       0.873        0.940       0.908   0.762
                  Expect BA or Higher                    0.666       0.578        0.688       0.695   0.562
                                         Time-Invariant Student Characteristics
Male                                                                    0.499
Race
                             Hispanic                                0.106
                              Black                                  0.119
                              White                                  0.726
                              Other                                  0.048
SES Quintile
               Lowest SES Quintile                       0.206
               Second SES Quintile                       0.200
                Third SES Quintile                       0.211
               Fourth SES Quintile                       0.209
               Highest SES Quintile                      0.175
Number of Siblings
                   No Siblings                           0.062                    0.061
                   One Sibling                           0.317                    0.319
                  Two Siblings                           0.270                    0.270
              Three of More Siblings                     0.351                    0.350
LEP Status                                               0.023          -           -            -      -
Gifted Status                                              -            -         0.088          -      -
HS Program
              HS Academic Program                                                 0.365
               HS General Program                                                 0.470
             HS Vocational Program                                                0.165
                                        Time-Varying Family Characteristics
                 Student had child                      -        0.041             0.044      0.146     -
        Hours of TV Watched During Week               3.515      3.181             2.734        -       -
        Hours of Homework During Week                 5.748      7.625            13.263        -       -
      Parent(s) Notified of Behavior at School        0.290      0.150             0.213        -       -
          Locus of Control (standardized)             0.013      0.021             0.028        -       -
            Self-Concept (standardized)               0.004      -0.002            0.000        -       -
               Parent(s) Unemployed                   0.111      0.111             0.085        -       -
                     Suspended                          -        0.089             0.083        -       -
                    Days Absent                         -        9.893            11.291        -       -
                Live with 2 Parents                   0.666         -              0.616        -       -
See notes at end of table.




                                                           41
               Table 2 Cont'd - Descriptive Statistics for NELS 1988-2000 Panel, 8th Grade Cohort
                          Time-Varying Measures of Student Academic Performance
Academic GPA (scale 0-4 )                               2.923        2.750    2.288          -                  -
School Size (in hundreds)                               6.482       11.526 11.941            -                  -

Quartile of Combined Math and Reading Scores
                Lowest Quartile                                  0.242           0.221       0.239      -       -
               Second Quartile                                   0.263           0.255       0.256      -       -
                 Third Quartile                                  0.259           0.269       0.259      -       -
               Highest Quartile                                  0.236           0.255       0.246      -       -
                                                       School Characteristics

Students per Guidance Counselor, in Hundreds                        -            4.100         -        -       -
Percent of Free- and Reduced- Price Lunch
Eligible Students                                                0.241           0.199         -        -       -
Percent of Previous Year's Graduates in 4-Yr
College                                                            -             0.453         -        -       -
Private School                                                   0.121           0.097       0.092
                                                     PSE Matriculation Variables
Applied to PSE                                                   -            -              0.697      -       -
Enrolled in PSE                                                                                       0.734
Type of PSE Enrolled In
           Less than 2 Year Institution                                                               0.170
                2 Year Institution                                                                    0.183
                4 Year Institution                                                                    0.381
Highest Degree Attained
                  Less than HS                                                                                0.068
                       HS                                                                                     0.472
                   Certificate                                                                                0.085
                       AA                                                                                     0.072
                       BA                                                                                     0.273
                       MA                                                                                     0.029
                      PHD                                                                                     0.005
                                            Economic Variables
Percent of County Population Unemployed                       0.064
County Per Capita Income, in Thousands, 2007
Dollars                                                     $21.892
                                          PSE Cost Variables
County Mean PSE Tuition, In-State, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                                                      $7.040
County Mean PSE Tuition, Out-of-State, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                                                      $9.051
County Mean PSE Room and Board Costs, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                                                      $5.598
County Minimum Tuition, In-State, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                                                      $3.102
County Minimum Tuition, Out-of-State, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                                                      $5.678
County Minimum PSE Room and Board Costs, in
Thousands, 2007 Dollars                                                                      $3.803
Notes: N= 10,677
SES is a composite measure of parents' education, parents' occupations, and family income.
PSE means post-secondary education.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.




                                                                   42
         Table 3 - OLS Estimates of the Relationship between Educational Expectations and Actual Enrollment, Sophomore Cohorts

                                                                Dependent Variable = Enrolled in any postsecondary institution within 2 years of
                                                                                      expected high school graduation
                                                            Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores
                                                              in 1980       in 1990        in 2002        in 1980         in 1990        in 2002
                                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
Expect Some College or More, Grade 10                         .309***      .294***         .231***        .193***         .201***        .142***
                                                               (.016)        (.019)         (.025)         (.016)          (.019)         (.023)
Expect BA or More, Grade 10                                   .297***      .325***         .326***        .144***         .157***        .144***
                                                               (.013)        (.014)         (.018)         (.014)          (.015)         (.018)
   Variance of Expect at Least Some College,
                                    Grade 10                     .183               .082               .067               .183               .082               .067
    Variance in linear measure of educational
                                 expectations                   2.907              2.138              1.969               2.907             2.138              1.969
Controls                                                          No                 No                 No                 Yes               Yes                Yes
N                                                               11498              11857              12174               11498             11857              12174
R2                                                               .247               .205               .155                .336              .311               .320
Mean of Dependent Variable                                       .632               .712                .76                .632              .712                .76
Mean of dependent variable for students with
expectations of less than college                                 .25               .241               .273                .25               .241               .273


                                                           Dependent Variable = Enrolled in a 4-year college within 2 years of expected high school
                                                                                                  graduation
                                                           Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores Sophomores
                                                             in 1980       in 1990         in 2002         in 1980       in 1990         in 2002
                                                                (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)
Expect Some College or More, Grade 10                        .139***       .098***        .066***          .032***         .019            -.19
                                                              (.010)        (.010)          (.015)          (.010)        (.010)          (.015)
Expect BA or More, Grade 10                                  .411***       .398***        .414***          .223***       .176***        .163***
                                                              (.013)        (.012)          (.014)          (.014)        (.012)          (.015)
    Variance of Expect BA or More, Grade 10                      .248              0.235               .142               .248              0.235               .142
     Variance in linear measure of educational
                                  expectations                  2.907              2.138              1.969               2.907             2.138              1.969
Controls                                                          No                No                  No                 Yes               Yes                Yes
N                                                               11498              11857              12174               11498             11857              12174
R2                                                               .264              0.186               .127                .381              .353               .374
Mean of Dependent Variable                                       .364              0.379               .513                .364             0.379               .513
Mean of dependent variable for students with
expectations of less than college                                .054              0.031               .072               .054              0.031               .072
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
Data on applying and enrolling in college are based on self-reports.
To be enrolled in a post-secondary institution students had to finish high school with either a regular diploma or GED.
Data on 10th Graders in 1980 are from High School and Beyond.
Data on 10th Graders in 1990 are from National Education Longitudinal Study.
Data on 10th Graders in 2002 are from Education Longitudinal Study.
Control variables include: ses, gender, race/ethnicity, siblings, 10th grade test score quartile, 10th grade GPA, students per guidance counselor, high school program,
percent of high school's previous graduating going onto college, percentage of free- and reduced-priced lunch at high school, county unemployment rate, county per
capita income, county minimum in-state tuition, county minimum room and board




                                                                                   43
                                               Table 4 - OLS Estimates of the Relationship between Educational Expectations, Enrollment and Attainment for 1990 Sophomore Cohort
                                                                                                                                     Enrollment
                                                   Panel A: Dependent Variable = Enrolled in any postsecondary institution within 2 years Panel B: Dependent Variable = Enrolled in a 4-year college within 2 years of expected
                                                                             of expected high school graduation                                                         high school graduation
                                                                                                         (5)                                                                                  (5)
                                                                                                    (10th Grade                                                                            (10th Grade
                                                                                                    School Fixed                                                                           School Fixed
                                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        Effects)          (6)      (7)          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        Effects)       (6)         (7)
               Expectations
Expect Some College or More, Grade 10               .233***     0.227***    0.183***    0.178***     0.157***       0.178***   0.169***    .068***     0.051***      0.006       0.003        0.010         0.007      0.005
                                                     (.018)      (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.014)        (0.018)    (0.017)     (.009)      (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.013)       (0.009)    (0.009)
Expect BA or More, Grade 10                         .244***     0.192***    0.104***    0.104***     0.084***       0.096***   0.096***    .310***     0.240***    0.125***    0.124***     0.122***      0.113***   0.113***
                                                     (.014)      (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.010)        (0.016)    (0.016)     (.011)      (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.009)       (0.011)    (0.011)
           Student Characteristics                                  X           X           X            X              X           X                      X           X           X            X             X           X
           Family Characteristics                                   X           X           X            X              X           X                      X           X           X            X             X           X
     Academic Achievement Characteristics                                       X           X            X              X           X                                  X           X            X             X           X
       Non-Achievement Characteristics                                                      X            X              X           X                                              X            X             X           X
           School Characteristics                                                                                       X           X                                                                         X           X
           County Characteristics                                                                                                   X                                                                                     X
 2
R                                                    0.108       0.136       0.169        .173         .373             .185      .193       0.127       .171       0.244       0.246         0.429         .265        .268
N                                                                                          15803                                                                                 15803
F-Statistic for FE                                                                                    3.112                                                                                   3.13
DF_a for FE                                                                                            1466                                                                                   1466
DF_r for FE                                                                                           14294                                                                                  14294

Probability for F-Statistic of Joint Significance                                                      0.000                                                                                  0.000
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                 0.539                                                                                  0.286
Mean of Dependent Variable for Students with
Expectations of Less than College                                                          0.215                                                                                  0.041
See notes at end of table.




                                                                                                                   44
                                                    Table 4 Cont'd - OLS Estimates of the Relationship between Educational Expectations, Enrollment and Attainment for 1990 Sophomore Cohort
                                                                                                                                            Attainment

                                                                               Panel C: Dependent Variable = Attained at least some college                                                    Panel D: Dependent Variable = Attained a BA degree or more
                                                                                                                       (5)                                                                                                             (5)
                                                                                                                              (10th Grade                                                                                                    (10th Grade
                                                                                                                              School Fixed                                                                                                   School Fixed
                                                                   (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)           Effects)             (6)            (7)             (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)       Effects)       (6)        (7)
               Expectations
Expect Some College or More, Grade 10                           0.114***       0.100***        0.057***       0.053***          0.045**          0.055***       0.051***        0.048***        0.030***         -0.008          -0.010        -0.014        -0.005     -0.006
                                                                 (0.015)        (0.015)         (0.016)        (0.016)          (0.014)           (0.015)        (0.015)         (0.007)         (0.006)        (0.007)         (0.008)       (0.012)        (0.008)    (0.008)
Expect BA or More, Grade 10                                     0.209***       0.147***        0.058***       0.055***         0.040***          0.048***       0.048***        0.281***        0.203***       0.103***        0.102***      0.096***       0.092***   0.092***
                                                                 (0.013)        (0.012)         (0.013)        (0.013)          (0.010)           (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.010)         (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)       (0.008)        (0.009)    (0.009)
           Student Characteristics                                                 X               X              X                X                 X              X                               X              X               X             X              X          X
           Family Characteristics                                                  X               X              X                X                 X              X                               X              X               X             X              X          X
     Academic Achievement Characteristics                                                          X              X                X                 X              X                                              X               X             X              X          X
       Non-Achievement Characteristics                                                                            X                X                 X              X                                                              X             X              X          X
           School Characteristics                                                                                                                    X              X                                                                                           X          X
           County Characteristics                                                                                                                                   X                                                                                                      X
R2                                                                0.065          0.106           0.143          0.146             0.341            0.155          0.159            0.115          0.180           0.240          0.242         0.416         0.252       0.254
N                                                                                                                15803                                                                                                            15803
F-Statistic for FE                                                                                                               2.875                                                                                                         2.903
DF_a for FE                                                                                                                       1466                                                                                                         1466
DF_r for FE                                                                                                                      14294                                                                                                         14294

Probability for F-Statistic of Joint Significance                                                                                 0.000                                                                                                        0.000
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                                        0.337                                                                                                              0.240
Mean of Dependent Variable for Students with
Expectations of Less than College                                                                                  0.113                                                                                                             0.027
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
Data on applying and enrolling in college are based on self-reports.
To be enrolled in a post-secondary institution students had to finish high school with either a regular diploma or GED.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.
Student characteristics: socio-economic status quartile in grade 8, gender, and race/ethnicity.
Family characteristics: siblings in grade 8, household composition in grade 8, and number of sibling dropout as of grade 10.
Academic achievement characteristics: combined grade 8 math and reading test score quartiles, high school program, and grade 10 gpa.
Non-achievement characteristics: locus of control in grade 10, school suspensions in grade 10, days absent in grade 10, hours of TV per week in grade 10, and hours of homework per week in grade 10.
School characteristics: private school in grade 10, school size in grade 10, percent of previous year's graduates attending college, percent free- and reduced-priced lunch students in grade 10, students per guidance counselor.
County characteristics: percent of population unemployed in grade 10, county per capita income, in grade 10, minimum PSE in-state tuition in grade 12, and minimum PSE room and board costs in grade 12.




                                                                                                                                             45
                                                     Table 5 - Expectations and Student Outcomes in Grade 10, NELS Sophomores Cohort
                                                     Hours of                                             Parent(s) Notified at
                                                                                                                                  Suspended from
                                                   Homework per     Hours Watching      Academic HS      Least Once of Behavior   School At Least
                                         GPA          Week           TV per Week          Program          Problems at School          Once         Days Absent   Self-Concept   Locus of Control
Expect Some College or More, Grade 8       0.049     0.439*              -0.077               0.026             -0.030                -0.035             0.122        -0.021          -0.005
                                         (0.037)     (0.209)            (0.077)             (0.014)            (0.018)               (0.019)           (0.376)       (0.023)         (0.023)
Expect BA or More, Grade 8              0.094***     0.389*               0.016            0.089***             -0.001                -0.003            -0.287         0.016         0.032*
                                         (0.022)     (0.172)            (0.049)             (0.011)            (0.011)               (0.011)           (0.213)       (0.017)         (0.016)
Low SES Quintile Female, Grade 8          -0.075       0.242             -0.107           -0.135***           -0.080***               -0.008         2.443***         -0.040         0.057*
                                         (0.040)     (0.337)            (0.087)             (0.022)            (0.017)               (0.015)           (0.422)       (0.031)         (0.028)
Second SES Quintile Female, Grade 8       -0.030     0.818*              -0.060           -0.090***           -0.065***               -0.003          1.530***        -0.055        0.072**
                                         (0.033)     (0.340)            (0.074)             (0.022)            (0.017)               (0.014)           (0.303)       (0.030)         (0.026)
Third SES Quintile Female, Grade 8        -0.037     0.781**             -0.049            -0.067**           -0.059***               -0.019          1.436***     -0.098***        0.086***
                                         (0.033)     (0.295)            (0.076)             (0.021)            (0.016)               (0.011)           (0.320)       (0.029)         (0.026)
Fourth SES Quintile Female, Grade 8       -0.012       0.548            -0.174*              -0.027           -0.069***                0.005          1.032***       -0.078*         0.071*
                                         (0.030)     (0.311)            (0.075)             (0.022)            (0.019)               (0.019)           (0.270)       (0.033)         (0.030)
Highest SES Quintile Female, Grade 8       0.040     0.770*            -0.199**              -0.001           -0.053***               -0.006          0.891**       -0.101**        0.074**
                                         (0.030)     (0.335)            (0.070)             (0.022)            (0.016)               (0.009)           (0.272)       (0.033)         (0.028)
Low SES Quintile Male, Grade 8         -0.163***      -0.258              0.020           -0.128***              0.031               0.058**          1.795***         0.018           0.027
                                         (0.048)     (0.307)            (0.090)             (0.023)            (0.019)               (0.020)           (0.444)       (0.032)         (0.029)
Second SES Quintile Male, Grade 8      -0.128***      -0.345              0.112           -0.084***              0.026               0.046**             0.236         0.023           0.031
                                         (0.033)     (0.285)            (0.082)             (0.021)            (0.019)               (0.015)           (0.291)       (0.028)         (0.028)
Third SES Quintile Male, Grade 8        -0.087**      -0.292              0.116            -0.069**              0.003                 0.012             0.546         0.005           0.002
                                         (0.034)     (0.287)            (0.078)             (0.021)            (0.018)               (0.013)           (0.283)       (0.029)         (0.026)
Fourth SES Quintile Male, Grade 8        -0.070*      -0.010              0.067              -0.033             0.044*                -0.008             0.241         0.037           0.016
                                         (0.032)     (0.276)            (0.065)             (0.020)            (0.019)               (0.013)           (0.268)       (0.027)         (0.027)
Hispanic, Grade 8                         -0.000       0.012              0.053             0.040*               0.013                -0.019            -0.387         0.034           0.022
                                         (0.036)     (0.253)            (0.070)             (0.018)            (0.017)               (0.017)           (0.349)       (0.027)         (0.024)
Black, Grade 8                            -0.061      -0.318           0.392***              -0.008              0.025                 0.003         -1.245***      0.212***          0.068*
                                         (0.041)     (0.268)            (0.089)             (0.020)            (0.019)               (0.023)           (0.355)       (0.031)         (0.030)
Other, Grade 8                             0.037       0.609             -0.035               0.019             -0.005                 0.009            -0.302         0.035           0.016
                                         (0.043)     (0.343)            (0.085)             (0.021)            (0.020)               (0.018)           (0.430)       (0.031)         (0.030)
One Sibling, Grade 8                       0.001      -0.047             -0.149              -0.004              0.010                 0.003             0.011        -0.042         -0.056*
                                         (0.030)     (0.245)            (0.077)             (0.019)            (0.015)               (0.015)           (0.347)       (0.028)         (0.026)
Two Siblings, Grade 8                     -0.009       0.194             -0.106              -0.009              0.021                 0.002             0.505        -0.025          -0.041
                                         (0.031)     (0.241)            (0.080)             (0.018)            (0.016)               (0.015)           (0.384)       (0.027)         (0.027)
Three of More Siblings, Grade 8           -0.012       0.100            -0.192*             -0.042*              0.021                 0.014             0.536        -0.028          -0.044
                                         (0.032)     (0.243)            (0.082)             (0.018)            (0.016)               (0.016)           (0.347)       (0.029)         (0.027)
Living with 2 Parents, Grade 8           0.049**       0.131             0.092*              -0.010             -0.006                -0.014           -0.351*        -0.004           0.003
                                         (0.018)     (0.143)            (0.040)             (0.010)            (0.009)               (0.010)           (0.162)       (0.015)         (0.014)
See notes at end of table.




                                                                                          46
                                                                       Table 5 Cont'd - Expectations and Student Outcomes in Grade 10, NELS Sophomores Cohort
                                                                         Hours of                                              Parent(s) Notified at
                                                                                                                                                       Suspended from
                                                                       Homework per       Hours Watching      Academic HS     Least Once of Behavior   School At Least
                                                             GPA          Week             TV per Week          Program         Problems at School          Once         Days Absent   Self-Concept   Locus of Control
Low Quartile Combined Math and Reading
Test Score, Grade 8                                        -0.525***      -2.281***            0.045           -0.228***            0.037*                  0.024          0.664*       -0.090***        -0.127***
                                                            (0.032)        (0.272)            (0.069)           (0.016)             (0.015)                (0.016)         (0.296)       (0.026)          (0.025)
Second Quartile Combined Math and
Reading Test Score, Grade 8                                -0.379***      -1.577***            0.104           -0.176***             0.013                  -0.005         -0.005        -0.058**        -0.060**
                                                            (0.023)        (0.236)            (0.053)           (0.014)             (0.012)                (0.010)         (0.215)        (0.022)         (0.021)
Third Quartile Combined Math and Reading
Test Score, Grade 8                                        -0.239***      -0.796***          0.116**           -0.086***              0.007                -0.007           0.041       -0.061**          -0.045*
                                                             (0.019)        (0.198)          (0.043)             (0.013)            (0.011)               (0.008)          (0.196)       (0.021)          (0.019)
Academic GPA, Grade 8 (0-4 scale)                           0.467***       0.859***           0.037             0.123***           -0.042***             -0.038***        -0.887***     0.053***         0.074***
                                                             (0.017)        (0.123)          (0.032)             (0.008)            (0.007)               (0.008)          (0.179)       (0.012)          (0.012)
LEP Status, Grade 8                                           -0.072          0.098           -0.217             -0.017              -0.035                -0.031            0.238        0.025            0.001
                                                             (0.077)        (0.688)          (0.167)             (0.028)            (0.027)               (0.035)          (0.850)       (0.049)          (0.051)
Locus of Control, Grade 8 (standardized)                    0.053**        0.523***           -0.028            0.035***             -0.011               -0.020*           -0.009      0.094***         0.287***
                                                             (0.017)        (0.132)          (0.037)             (0.008)            (0.008)               (0.009)          (0.153)       (0.013)          (0.014)
Self-Concept, Grade 8 (standardized)                           0.020         -0.172           -0.023             -0.003              -0.008                 0.010            0.212      0.404***         0.129***
                                                             (0.014)        (0.128)          (0.033)             (0.007)            (0.008)               (0.010)          (0.143)       (0.013)          (0.013)
Parent(s) Notified of Behavior at School,
Grade 8                                                    -0.085***        0.026              -0.074            -0.011            0.109***               0.086***          0.387        -0.008            -0.016
                                                            (0.018)        (0.144)            (0.047)            (0.010)            (0.011)                (0.012)         (0.199)       (0.017)          (0.015)
Hours of TV Watched During the Week,
Grade 8                                                      0.003          0.017            0.390***            -0.002               0.003                  0.001          0.000        -0.004           -0.010*
                                                            (0.006)        (0.041)            (0.013)            (0.003)            (0.002)                (0.003)         (0.051)       (0.004)          (0.005)
Hours of Homework per Week, Grade 8                         0.004*        0.218***             -0.000           0.003***             -0.001                 -0.001          0.007        -0.003            0.000
                                                            (0.002)        (0.016)            (0.004)            (0.001)            (0.001)                (0.001)         (0.014)       (0.002)          (0.001)
N                                                                                                                                   15803
R2                                                           0.548         0.348              0.354              0.475               0.291                  0.298          0.440         0.415             0.388
F-Statistic for FE                                           3.744         3.128              3.174              5.389               2.95                   3.331          7.139         2.591             2.757
DF_a for FE                                                1466.000       1466.000           1466.000           1466.000           1466.000               1466.000        1466.000      1466.000         1466.000
DF_r for FE                                                1466.000       1466.000           1466.000           1466.000           1466.000               1466.000        1466.000      1466.000         1466.000
Probability for F-Statistic of Joint
Significance                                                0.000           0.000              0.000             0.000               0.000                 0.000            0.000         0.000            0.000
Mean of Dependent Variable                                  2.686           7.612              3.066             0.373               0.126                 0.076            4.574         0.008            0.042
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Models include school fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.




                                                                                                              47
                                                  Table 6 - Determinants of Grade 10 Educational Expectations, NELS Sophomore Cohort
                                                                                Dependent Variable = Expect at Least Some College       Dependent Variable = Expect BA or More

                                                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)                (1)            (2)             (3)
                             Student Characteristics
Expectations, Grade 8                                                              0.102***         0.102***        0.100***           0.189***       0.186***        0.186***
                                                                                    (0.008)          (0.008)         (0.008)             (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)
Academic GPA, Grade 8 (0-4 scale)                                                  0.034***         0.034***        0.032***           0.107***        0.110***       0.109***
                                                                                    (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.006)             (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)
Living with 2 Parents, Grade 8                                                       -0.002           -0.001          -0.005              0.019          0.015           0.013
                                                                                    (0.008)          (0.008)         (0.009)             (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.012)
Locus of Control, Grade 8 (standardized)                                              0.008            0.008           0.007              0.006          0.008           0.008
                                                                                    (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.008)             (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.010)
Self-Concept, Grade 8 (standardized)                                                 -0.002           -0.002          -0.002              0.011          0.011           0.011
                                                                                    (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)             (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)
Low SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                   -0.108***        -0.110***       -0.105***          -0.241***      -0.213***       -0.212***
                                                                                    (0.024)          (0.023)         (0.022)             (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.025)
Second SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                 -0.030*          -0.030*         -0.029*           -0.200***      -0.177***       -0.178***
                                                                                    (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)             (0.022)        (0.022)         (0.022)
Third SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                   -0.011           -0.011          -0.010           -0.112***      -0.094***       -0.093***
                                                                                    (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)             (0.021)        (0.021)         (0.021)
Fourth SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                  -0.007           -0.006          -0.004           -0.086***      -0.071***       -0.070***
                                                                                    (0.011)          (0.011)         (0.010)             (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.019)
Highest SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                 0.000            0.001           0.002              -0.047*        -0.044*         -0.044*
                                                                                    (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)             (0.021)        (0.021)         (0.021)
Low SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                     -0.111***        -0.112***       -0.110***          -0.249***      -0.225***       -0.225***
                                                                                    (0.021)          (0.021)         (0.020)             (0.025)        (0.026)         (0.026)
Second SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                  -0.059***        -0.058***       -0.058***          -0.228***      -0.207***       -0.207***
                                                                                    (0.013)          (0.014)         (0.013)             (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.025)
Third SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                     -0.020           -0.021          -0.020           -0.202***      -0.184***       -0.183***
                                                                                    (0.013)          (0.013)         (0.013)             (0.024)        (0.024)         (0.024)
Fourth SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                     0.009           0.009            0.008           -0.126***      -0.113***       -0.114***
                                                                                    (0.010)          (0.010)         (0.009)             (0.022)        (0.022)         (0.022)
Hispanic, Grade 8                                                                    0.028*           0.027*          0.028*              0.035         0.045*          0.043*
                                                                                    (0.013)          (0.014)         (0.014)             (0.019)        (0.018)         (0.019)
Black, Grade 8                                                                      0.036**          0.033**         0.035**           0.122***       0.125***        0.126***
                                                                                    (0.013)          (0.013)         (0.013)             (0.021)        (0.021)         (0.021)
Other, Grade 8                                                                       0.014            0.015           0.015               0.033          0.032           0.031
                                                                                    (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.018)             (0.020)        (0.020)         (0.021)
One Sibling, Grade 8                                                                 -0.015           -0.016          -0.019             -0.044*        -0.040*         -0.042*
                                                                                    (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)             (0.017)        (0.017)         (0.017)
Two Siblings, Grade 8                                                                -0.002           -0.002          -0.005            -0.048**       -0.045**        -0.047**
                                                                                    (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)             (0.018)        (0.017)         (0.018)
Three of More Siblings, Grade 8                                                      -0.020           -0.020          -0.022           -0.083***      -0.079***       -0.079***
                                                                                    (0.013)          (0.013)         (0.013)             (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.019)
See notes at end of table.




                                                                                         48
                                                           Table 6 Cont'd - Determinants of Grade 10 Educational Expectations, NELS Sophomore Cohort

                                                                                            Dependent Variable = Expect at Least Some College          Dependent Variable = Expect BA or More

                                                                                                   (1)             (2)              (3)                 (1)             (2)             (3)
                       Student Characteristics Cont'd
Low Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                                      -0.044***       -0.045***        -0.042***         -0.144***         -0.135***       -0.135***
                                                                                                 (0.012)         (0.013)          (0.013)            (0.020)          (0.020)         (0.020)
Second Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                                     0.005           0.005            0.005           -0.094***         -0.089***       -0.090***
                                                                                                 (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.009)            (0.017)          (0.017)         (0.017)
Third Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                                      0.015*          0.015*           0.015*            -0.031*          -0.030*         -0.031*
                                                                                                 (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)            (0.014)          (0.014)         (0.014)
HS Academic Program                                                                             0.033***          0.025*           0.025*          0.131***          0.133***        0.131***
                                                                                                 (0.007)         (0.011)          (0.011)            (0.012)          (0.019)         (0.019)
HS Vocational Program                                                                             0.007           0.016            0.017            -0.042**           -0.022          -0.022
                                                                                                 (0.013)         (0.016)          (0.016)            (0.016)          (0.027)         (0.027)
                                       School Characteristics
Private School, Grade 12                                                                                          -0.001          0.044**                             0.058**         0.077**
                                                                                                                 (0.013)          (0.016)                             (0.022)         (0.027)
School Size, Grade 12                                                                                             -0.001           -0.001                              0.000           0.000
                                                                                                                 (0.001)          (0.001)                             (0.001)         (0.001)
Percent of Previous Year's Graduates in 4-Yr College, Grade 10                                                    0.019            0.021                              0.060*          0.057*
                                                                                                                 (0.024)          (0.024)                             (0.027)         (0.028)
Percent of Free- and Reduced- Price Lunch Eligible Students, Grade 10                                             0.020            0.027                               -0.028          -0.037
                                                                                                                 (0.027)          (0.029)                             (0.029)         (0.032)
Students per Guidance Counselor, Grade 10, in Hundreds                                                            0.001            0.002                              -0.008*          -0.008
                                                                                                                 (0.004)          (0.004)                             (0.004)         (0.004)
Students per Guidance Counselor*HS Academic Program                                                               0.002            0.002                               -0.001          -0.001
                                                                                                                 (0.003)          (0.003)                             (0.005)         (0.005)
Students per Guidance Counselor*HS Vocational Program                                                             -0.002           -0.002                              -0.004          -0.004
                                                                                                                 (0.004)          (0.004)                             (0.006)         (0.006)
                             County Characteristics
Percent of County Population Unemployed, Grade 10                                                                                  -0.275                                              0.446
                                                                                                                                  (0.189)                                             (0.248)
County Per Capita Income, in thousands, Grade 10                                                                                   -0.000                                              0.001
                                                                                                                                  (0.001)                                             (0.001)
County Minimum PSE Tuition, In-State in thousands, Grade 12                                                                        -0.001                                              0.002
                                                                                                                                  (0.001)                                             (0.002)
County Minimum PSE Room and Board Costs, in thousands, Grade 12                                                                    0.003                                               -0.001
                                                                                                                                  (0.002)                                             (0.004)
N                                                                                                                 15803                                                15803
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                        0.162           0.163            0.169               0.354           0.360           0.360
Variance of Dependent Variable                                                                    0.903           0.903            0.903               0.635           0.635           0.635
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.




                                                                                                     49
                                       Table 7 - Determinants of Aligned Educational Expectations in 12th Grade, NELS 8th Grade Cohort
                                                                                   Dependent Variable = Predicted probability of eventually attaining 12th grade self-reported
                                                                                                                    educational expectations
                                                                                                                                                             Student, School,
                                                                                                                     Student and Sch                          County, School
                                                                                       No       Student Predictors, Predictors, School Student, School,       Average GPA,
                                                                                   Predictors       School RE              RE          County, School RE        School RE
                                                                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                             Student Characteristics
Alignment of 8th grade educational expectationsa                                                      0.376***            0.366***            0.366***           0.363***
                                                                                                       (0.014)             (0.014)             (0.014)            (0.014)
Expect Less than HS, Grade 8                                                                           0.041*               0.044*              0.045*             0.046*
                                                                                                       (0.021)             (0.021)             (0.021)            (0.021)
Expect HS, Grade 8                                                                                   -0.083***           -0.078***           -0.077***          -0.075***
                                                                                                       (0.010)             (0.010)             (0.010)            (0.010)
Expect BA or More, Grade 8                                                                           -0.021***           -0.022***           -0.021***          -0.022***
                                                                                                       (0.004)             (0.004)             (0.004)            (0.004)
Academic GPA, Grade 8 (0-4 scale)                                                                     0.032***            0.035***            0.036***           0.036***
                                                                                                       (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.003)
Living with 2 Parents, Grade 8                                                                        0.024***            0.018***            0.019***           0.018***
                                                                                                       (0.004)             (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.003)
Locus of Control, Grade 8 (standardized)                                                               0.007*               0.006*              0.006*              0.006
                                                                                                       (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.003)
Self-Concept, Grade 8 (standardized)                                                                    -0.000              -0.001              -0.001             -0.000
                                                                                                       (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.003)
Low SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                                     -0.067***           -0.055***           -0.054***          -0.050***
                                                                                                       (0.009)             (0.009)             (0.009)            (0.009)
Second SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                                  -0.088***           -0.078***           -0.077***          -0.075***
                                                                                                       (0.008)             (0.008)             (0.008)            (0.008)
Third SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                                   -0.060***           -0.052***           -0.051***          -0.049***
                                                                                                       (0.007)             (0.007)             (0.007)            (0.007)
Fourth SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                                   -0.022**             -0.016*             -0.015*             -0.013
                                                                                                       (0.007)             (0.007)             (0.007)            (0.007)
Highest SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                                  0.067***            0.067***            0.067***           0.068***
                                                                                                       (0.007)             (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.006)
Low SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                                       -0.096***           -0.084***           -0.083***          -0.080***
                                                                                                       (0.009)             (0.009)             (0.009)            (0.009)
Second SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                                    -0.103***           -0.095***           -0.094***          -0.092***
                                                                                                       (0.008)             (0.008)             (0.008)            (0.008)
Third SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                                     -0.091***           -0.083***           -0.083***          -0.080***
                                                                                                       (0.008)             (0.008)             (0.008)            (0.008)
Fourth SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                                    -0.063***           -0.058***           -0.057***          -0.056***
                                                                                                       (0.007)             (0.007)             (0.007)            (0.007)
Hispanic, Grade 8                                                                                       -0.010               0.004              0.001               0.002
                                                                                                       (0.006)             (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.006)
Black, Grade 8                                                                                       -0.024***             -0.015*            -0.016**            -0.012*
                                                                                                       (0.006)             (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.006)
Other, Grade 8                                                                                         0.015*             0.023***            0.021***          0.021***
                                                                                                       (0.006)             (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.006)
See notes at end of table.




                                                                                      50
                                   Table 7 Cont'd - Determinants of Aligned Educational Expectations in 12th Grade, NELS 8th Grade Cohort
                                                                                   Dependent Variable = Predicted probability of eventually attaining 12th grade self-reported
                                                                                                                    educational expectations
                                                                                                                                                             Student, School,
                                                                                                                     Student and Sch                          County, School
                                                                                      No       Student Predictors, Predictors, School Student, School,        Average GPA,
                                                                                   Predictors      School RE               RE          County, School RE        School RE
                                                                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                           Student Characteristics Cont'd
One Sibling, Grade 8                                                                                  0.026***           0.028***            0.029***            0.029***
                                                                                                       (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.006)             (0.006)
Two Siblings, Grade 8                                                                                   -0.012              -0.010             -0.009              -0.009
                                                                                                       (0.007)             (0.007)            (0.007)             (0.006)
Three of More Siblings, Grade 8                                                                        -0.013*              -0.011             -0.011              -0.011
                                                                                                       (0.007)             (0.007)            (0.006)             (0.006)
Low Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                                           -0.101***           -0.097***          -0.097***           -0.092***
                                                                                                       (0.006)             (0.006)            (0.006)             (0.006)
Second Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                                        -0.112***           -0.109***          -0.109***           -0.105***
                                                                                                       (0.006)             (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.005)
Third Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                                         -0.075***           -0.073***          -0.073***           -0.071***
                                                                                                       (0.005)             (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.005)
HS Academic Program                                                                                   0.024***            0.020***           0.019**             0.019***
                                                                                                       (0.004)             (0.006)            (0.006)             (0.006)
HS Vocational Program                                                                                 -0.015**             -0.021*            -0.019*             -0.019*
                                                                                                       (0.005)             (0.009)            (0.009)             (0.009)
                              School Characteristics
Private School, Grade 12                                                                                                  0.072***              0.006              -0.001
                                                                                                                           (0.007)            (0.011)             (0.011)
School Size, Grade 12                                                                                                    -0.001***           -0.001***          -0.001***
                                                                                                                           (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Percent of Previous Year's Graduates in 4-Yr College, Grade 10                                                            0.048***            0.037**               0.018
                                                                                                                           (0.012)            (0.012)             (0.012)
Percent of Free- and Reduced- Price Lunch Eligible Students, Grade 10                                                    -0.094***           -0.087***          -0.074***
                                                                                                                           (0.012)            (0.013)             (0.013)
Students per Guidance Counselor, Grade 10, in Hundreds                                                                     -0.003              -0.002             -0.002
                                                                                                                           (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)
Students per Guidance Counselor*HS Academic Program                                                                         0.000               0.000               0.000
                                                                                                                           (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)
Students per Guidance Counselor*HS Vocational Program                                                                       0.002               0.002               0.002
                                                                                                                           (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.002)
School Average Combined Test Score, Grade 12                                                                                                                     0.035***
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.006)
                            County Characteristics
Percent of County Population Unemployed, Grade 10                                                                                            0.386**             0.411***
                                                                                                                                              (0.126)             (0.124)
County Per Capita Income, in thousands, Grade 10                                                                                             0.003***            0.002***
                                                                                                                                              (0.001)             (0.001)
County Minimum PSE Tuition, In-State in thousands, Grade 12                                                                                   0.002*              0.002*
                                                                                                                                              (0.001)             (0.001)
County Minimum PSE Room and Board Costs, in thousands, Grade 12                                                                                0.001               0.001
                                                                                                                                              (0.002)             (0.002)
Variance Explained by Schools                                                           0.020          0.005               0.003               0.003               0.002
Residual Variance                                                                       0.053          0.030               0.029               0.029               0.029
Proportion of Total Variance Explained at School Level                                  0.273          0.070               0.038               0.036               0.034
N                                                                                                                             14403
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                                                     .415
Variance of Dependent Variable                                                                                                 .075
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
a: Predicted probability of eventually attaining 8th grade self-reported educational expectations.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.
Multilevel models with random effects at school level.




                                                                                       51
                                                     Table 8 - Changes in Expectations over Time, NELS 1988-2000 Panel
                                                                                                                                                        Later          Later
                        Changed at            Changed                          Changed Three                                                        Expectations   Expectations
      Years                                                      Changed Twice               Ever Increased Ever Decreased
                        Least Once          Exactly Once                       or More Times                                                        Higher than     Lower than
                                                                                                                                                        Initial        Initial
                             (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)                   (6)            (7)            (8)
1988-2000                   0.605                0.228                 0.239                 0.139                  0.436                 0.507         0.131          0.294
                          (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)       (9864)         (9864)
1988-1994                   0.514                0.245                 0.225                 0.044                  0.398                 0.360         0.191          0.152
                          (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)              (10,677)      (10,472)       (10,472)
1994-2000                   0.344                   -                     -                     -                     -                     -           0.064          0.280
                           (9,696)                                                                                                                     (9,696)        (9,696)
1988-1990                   0.346                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -          0.130          0.216
                          (10,573)                                                                                                                    (10,573)       (10,573)
1990-1992                   0.251                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -          0.149          0.102
                           (8,924)                                                                                                                     (8,924)        (8,924)
1992-1994                   0.233                    -                     -                     -                     -                     -          0.153          0.080
                           (8,894)                                                                                                                     (8,894)        (8,894)
Notes:
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.
Sample size included in parentheses.
Changed variables indicate any change between the two years.
Ever increases and ever decreased variables indicate whether a respondent ever changed her expectations within the period indicated.
Later expectations higher/lower than initial indicates that the expectations in the earlier year were lower/higher than those in the latest year.




                                                                                                52
             Table 9 - Characteristics of Students that Update Expectations between 8th and 12th Grades, NELS 8th Grade Cohort
                                                                           Changed at Least Once, Grade     Changed Twice, Grade 8 to
                                                                                  8 to Grade 12                    Grade 12
Low SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                     0.223***                       0.058***
                                                                                       (0.021)                        (0.014)
Second SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                  0.179***                       0.058***
                                                                                       (0.019)                        (0.013)
Third SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                   0.126***                        0.028**
                                                                                       (0.017)                        (0.010)
Fourth SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                  0.083***                         0.024*
                                                                                       (0.017)                        (0.011)
Highest SES Quintile Female, Grade 8                                                   -0.002                          0.006
                                                                                       (0.013)                        (0.009)
Low SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                       0.210***                        0.042**
                                                                                       (0.021)                        (0.013)
Second SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                    0.216***                       0.061***
                                                                                       (0.020)                        (0.012)
Third SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                     0.175***                       0.050***
                                                                                       (0.018)                        (0.012)
Fourth SES Quintile Male, Grade 8                                                    0.110***                        0.044***
                                                                                       (0.018)                        (0.011)
Hispanic, Grade 8                                                                      -0.018                           0.010
                                                                                       (0.017)                        (0.011)
Black, Grade 8                                                                          -0.025                          0.026
                                                                                       (0.019)                        (0.013)
Other, Grade 8                                                                          -0.019                         -0.003
                                                                                       (0.020)                        (0.012)
One Sibling, Grade 8                                                                     0.010                          0.008
                                                                                       (0.017)                        (0.012)
Two Siblings, Grade 8                                                                    0.010                          0.002
                                                                                       (0.018)                        (0.011)
Three of More Siblings, Grade 8                                                          0.031                          0.007
                                                                                       (0.018)                        (0.012)
Living with 2 Parents, Grade 8                                                          -0.010                          0.012
                                                                                       (0.009)                        (0.006)
Academic GPA, Grade 8 (0-4 scale)                                                    -0.112***                      -0.019***
                                                                                       (0.007)                        (0.005)
Low Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                           0.143***                         0.026*
                                                                                       (0.016)                        (0.010)
Second Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                        0.146***                        0.040***
                                                                                       (0.013)                        (0.008)
Third Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 8                         0.064***                        0.030***
                                                                                       (0.011)                        (0.007)
LEP Status, Grade 8                                                                      0.003                         -0.011
                                                                                       (0.034)                        (0.023)
Locus of Control, Grade 8 (standardized)                                             -0.033***                         -0.006
                                                                                       (0.008)                        (0.006)
Self-Concept, Grade 8 (standardized)                                                  -0.027**                         -0.005
                                                                                       (0.008)                        (0.005)
Hours of TV Watched During the Week, Grade 8                                            -0.001                         -0.001
                                                                                       (0.003)                        (0.002)
Hours of Homework per Week, Grade 8                                                   -0.003**                         -0.001
                                                                                       (0.001)                        (0.001)
N                                                                                       18096                          18096
  2
R                                                                                      0.215                          0.073
F-Statistic for FE                                                                     1.129                          0.975
DF_a for FE                                                                            1015                            1015
DF_r for FE                                                                            17048                          17048
Probability for F-Statistic of Joint Significance                                      0.003                          0.705
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                             0.391                          0.097
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Models include school fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.




                                                                   53
                                                            Table 10 - Changing Expectations, NELS 1988-2000 Panel Analysis
                                                                                             Linear Expectations as Dependent Variable
                                                                      1988-1990                                          1990-1992                  1988-1992 1988-1994
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)          (4)       (5)
Standardized Academic GPA                           0.094**                              0.093**       0.041*                             0.041*      0.058*   0.066***
                                                    (0.030)                               (0.030)      (0.017)                            (0.017)     (0.025)   (0.018)
Standardized Combined Test Score                                  0.060                     0.051                    0.026                 0.023       0.039      0.015
                                                                 (0.059)                  (0.057)                   (0.031)               (0.031)     (0.025)   (0.013)
Standardized SES                                                              -0.709       -0.681                                3.609     4.575       -0.860    0.009
                                                                             (1.650)      (1.619)                               (5.414)   (5.313)     (1.265)   (0.011)
Have Children                                                                                                                                                  -0.155***
                                                                                                                                                                (0.036)
1990                                               -0.104***    -0.110**      -0.097     -0.090*                                                      -0.093*   -0.168*
                                                    (0.026)      (0.035)     (0.053)     (0.044)                                                      (0.042)   (0.082)
1992                                                                                                  0.046**      0.052**      0.132      0.140       -0.003    -0.059
                                                                                                      (0.017)      (0.016)     (0.112)    (0.109)     (0.020)   (0.074)
1994                                                                                                                                                              0.000
                                                                                                                                                                (0.000)
N                                                    21322       21322       21322        21322        19710       19710        19710     19710        30387     40932
 2
R                                                    0.771       0.766       0.765        0.771        0.860       0.860        0.860     0.860        0.715     0.662
Mean of Dependent Variable                           2.530       2.530       2.530        2.530        2.561       2.561        2.561     2.561        2.565     2.583

                                                                                           Expect 4 Year College as Dependent Variable
                                                                    1988-1990                                           1990-1992                   1988-1992 1988-1994
                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)            (4)          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (4)       (5)
Standardized Academic GPA                           0.048**                              0.047**      0.033**                             0.032**    0.034**   0.034***
                                                    (0.016)                              (0.016)      (0.011)                             (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.009)
Standardized Combined Test Score                                 0.051                     0.047                    0.034                  0.031      0.038**   0.022*
                                                                (0.034)                  (0.034)                   (0.022)                (0.023)     (0.015)   (0.010)
Standardized SES                                                              -0.636      -0.673                                1.423      2.066       -0.748    -0.005
                                                                             (1.046)     (1.018)                               (3.236)    (3.178)     (0.745)   (0.008)
Have Children                                                                                                                                                 -0.112***
                                                                                                                                                                (0.022)
1990                                               -0.085*** -0.087***      -0.075**     -0.072**                                                   -0.073***    -0.106
                                                    (0.012)   (0.012)        (0.023)      (0.022)                                                     (0.017)   (0.067)
1992                                                                                                 0.038***     0.038***      0.072      0.080     -0.027**    -0.050
                                                                                                      (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.068)    (0.067)     (0.011)   (0.067)
1994                                                                                                                                                             0.016
                                                                                                                                                                (0.067)
N                                                    21322       21322       21322        21322        19710       19710        19710     19710        30387     40932
 2
R                                                    0.751       0.749       0.748        0.752        0.820       0.820        0.819     0.821        0.689     0.633
Mean of Dependent Variable                           0.648       0.648       0.648        0.648        0.654       0.654        0.654     0.654        0.665     0.679
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Models include student fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.




                                                                                         54
                                                           Table 11 - Changing Expectations by Eighth Grade Subgroups, NELS 1988-2000 Panel
                                                                                                   Linear Expectations as Dependent Variable

                                                                                                                                                       Low Quartile Second Quartile Third Quartile        High Quartile
                                                                                                                                                     Combined Math Combined Math Combined Math Combined Math
                                                          White/Asian                   Low SES    Second SES   Third SES   Fourth SES   Highest SES and Reading Test and Reading Test and Reading Test and Reading Test
                                    Male      Female     Pacific Islander    Minority   Quintile     Quintile    Quintile    Quintile      Quintile       Score            Score            Score            Score
Standardized Academic GPA           0.074*    0.056***       0.046*          0.120***     0.017      0.017      0.069***    0.093***      0.096**       0.088***         0.073***           0.023          0.080***
                                   (0.032)     (0.013)      (0.023)           (0.029)   (0.061)     (0.061)      (0.020)     (0.020)      (0.034)        (0.021)          (0.019)          (0.064)          (0.020)
Standardized Combined Test Score     0.015      0.016         0.027           -0.021      0.004      0.004         0.022       0.013        0.011         -0.039           0.094*            0.048            0.008
                                   (0.023)     (0.017)      (0.015)           (0.033)   (0.036)     (0.036)      (0.021)     (0.023)      (0.018)        (0.042)          (0.037)          (0.062)          (0.021)
Standardized SES                     0.001      0.019         0.018           -0.020      0.100      0.100       -0.004       -0.055        0.049          0.020            0.022            0.001            0.021
                                   (0.020)     (0.013)      (0.012)           (0.037)   (0.080)     (0.080)      (0.112)     (0.095)      (0.051)        (0.021)          (0.022)          (0.025)          (0.012)
Have Children                      -0.146*   -0.162***     -0.119**         -0.223***   -0.114      -0.114      -0.183**      -0.146       -0.039       -0.183***        -0.262***           0.067          -0.292*
                                   (0.070)     (0.035)      (0.046)           (0.050)   (0.080)     (0.080)      (0.065)     (0.091)      (0.115)        (0.052)          (0.068)          (0.088)          (0.121)
1990                                -0.090    -0.289**      -0.207*           -0.096    -0.346      -0.346       -0.287        0.071       -0.054         -0.147           -0.245           -0.091           -0.245
                                   (0.116)     (0.100)      (0.087)           (0.141)   (0.225)     (0.225)      (0.156)     (0.135)      (0.070)        (0.189)          (0.132)          (0.084)          (0.198)
1992                                 0.013      -0.176       -0.126            0.101     -0.192      -0.192       -0.187       0.151        0.005          0.096           -0.131           -0.040           -0.208
                                   (0.103)     (0.103)      (0.087)           (0.123)   (0.197)     (0.197)      (0.158)     (0.135)      (0.077)        (0.165)          (0.135)          (0.085)          (0.197)
1994                                 0.000      -0.080        0.000            0.000     -0.190      -0.190      -0.028        0.224        0.147          0.170            0.000            0.000            0.000
                                   (0.000)     (0.126)      (0.000)           (0.000)   (0.180)     (0.180)      (0.189)     (0.151)      (0.188)        (0.172)          (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)
N                                   19011       21718        31739             11870      8102        8102         8507        8227         7641           8194            10089            10667            10443
R2                                 0.653      0.669          0.674           0.629       0.602       0.602       0.600        0.580        0.628           0.609           0.606            0.609            0.539
Mean of Dependent Variable         2.560      2.605          2.608           2.571       2.191       2.191       2.610        2.773        2.935           2.155           2.485            2.713            2.907
See notes at end of table.




                                                                                                    55
                                                                        Table 11 Cont'd - Changing Expectations by Eighth Grade Subgroups, NELS 1988-2000 Panel
                                                                                                                  Expect 4 Year College as Dependent Variable

                                                                                                                                                                    Low Quartile    Second Quartile Third Quartile     High Quartile
                                                                         White/Asian                                                                              Combined Math Combined Math Combined Math Combined Math
                                                                           Pacific                  Low SES     Second SES   Third SES   Fourth SES   Highest SES and Reading Test and Reading Test and Reading Test and Reading Test
                                                    Male     Female       Islander   Minority       Quintile      Quintile    Quintile    Quintile      Quintile       Score            Score            Score            Score
Standardized Academic GPA                         0.037**     0.030**      0.030**      0.048***       0.001       0.001     0.045***     0.061***     0.034**       0.042***           0.035*           0.028          0.040***
                                                  (0.014)     (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.014)     (0.031)     (0.031)      (0.013)      (0.014)     (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.015)         (0.030)          (0.011)
Standardized Combined Test Score                  0.029*        0.015       0.025*        0.006        0.009       0.009       0.024        0.017       0.022          -0.024          0.070**           0.032            0.031
                                                  (0.014)     (0.012)      (0.011)       (0.018)     (0.033)     (0.033)      (0.015)      (0.021)     (0.015)        (0.033)           (0.026)         (0.030)          (0.019)
Standardized SES                                   -0.012       0.004       -0.005        -0.009      -0.003      -0.003        0.008       -0.088       0.021         -0.007            0.001           -0.022           0.011
                                                  (0.013)     (0.010)      (0.009)       (0.016)     (0.050)     (0.050)      (0.086)      (0.083)     (0.021)        (0.018)           (0.019)         (0.020)          (0.013)
Have Children                                    -0.119**   -0.109***     -0.098***    -0.147***      -0.088      -0.088     -0.133***      -0.121       0.012       -0.119***         -0.146**          -0.054          -0.200*
                                                  (0.037)     (0.028)      (0.027)       (0.033)     (0.046)     (0.046)      (0.040)      (0.064)     (0.105)        (0.032)           (0.048)         (0.057)          (0.092)
1990                                               -0.043    -0.205**       -0.141        -0.048      -0.181      -0.181       -0.244        0.080      -0.079         -0.012            -0.182          -0.065           -0.220
                                                  (0.102)     (0.063)      (0.073)       (0.116)     (0.098)     (0.098)      (0.145)      (0.138)     (0.068)        (0.127)           (0.099)         (0.069)          (0.180)
1992                                                0.012     -0.150*       -0.099         0.052      -0.136      -0.136       -0.195        0.145      -0.037         0.095             -0.132          -0.021           -0.189
                                                  (0.100)     (0.063)      (0.073)       (0.117)     (0.103)     (0.103)      (0.142)      (0.139)     (0.068)        (0.128)           (0.098)         (0.068)          (0.178)
1994                                                0.000      -0.105        0.000         0.000       0.000       0.000       -0.090        0.190       0.011         0.000             -0.058          0.060            -0.145
                                                  (0.000)     (0.068)      (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.140)      (0.153)     (0.078)        (0.000)           (0.107)         (0.074)          (0.168)
N                                                  19011       21718        31739         11870        8102        8102         8507         8227        7641           8194             10089           10667            10443
R2                                                 0.638     0.629          0.652        0.583       0.567        0.567        0.587       0.563        0.556           0.559           0.560            0.597            0.541
Mean of Dependent Variable                         0.664     0.694          0.697        0.672       0.429        0.429        0.676       0.807        0.944           0.399           0.590            0.758            0.919
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Models include student fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered at the school level.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
Data are from the National Education Longitudinal Study.




                                                                                                                56
                                     Table 12 - State Policy Effects on 10th Grade Educational Expectations, NELS and ELS Sophomore Cohorts
                                                                                             Expect At Least Some College                   Expect 4 Year College
                                                                                         (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)
Merit Scholarships Available                                                           0.002      0.001                             0.003      -0.000
                                                                                      (0.001)    (0.002)                           (0.002)    (0.002)
Years Merit Scholarship Available                                                                              0.022      0.014                           0.021    0.002
                                                                                                              (0.012)   (0.016)                         (0.019)   (0.018)
1990                                                                                   -0.000     0.017        0.001      0.020   -0.171*** -0.195*** -0.171*** -0.194***
                                                                                      (0.005)    (0.020)      (0.005)   (0.019)    (0.010)    (0.025)   (0.011)   (0.024)
Low SES Quintile Female                                                                    -0.061***             -0.061***              -0.154***             -0.154***
                                                                                            (0.009)               (0.009)                 (0.012)               (0.012)
Second SES Quintile Female                                                                    -0.010               -0.010               -0.096***             -0.096***
                                                                                             (0.007)              (0.007)                 (0.012)               (0.012)
Third SES Quintile Female                                                                     -0.004               -0.004               -0.052***             -0.052***
                                                                                             (0.008)              (0.008)                 (0.014)               (0.014)
Fourth SES Quintile Female                                                                    0.005                0.005                   -0.020                -0.020
                                                                                             (0.007)              (0.007)                 (0.011)               (0.011)
Highest SES Quintile Female                                                                   -0.004               -0.004                  -0.011                -0.011
                                                                                             (0.005)              (0.005)                 (0.014)               (0.014)
Low SES Quintile Male                                                                      -0.105***             -0.105***              -0.204***             -0.204***
                                                                                            (0.013)               (0.013)                 (0.017)               (0.017)
Second SES Quintile Male                                                                   -0.058***             -0.058***              -0.160***             -0.160***
                                                                                            (0.011)               (0.011)                 (0.011)               (0.011)
Third SES Quintile Male                                                                     -0.022*               -0.022*               -0.100***             -0.100***
                                                                                             (0.009)              (0.009)                 (0.013)               (0.013)
Fourth SES Quintile Male                                                                      0.008                0.008                 -0.035**              -0.035**
                                                                                             (0.006)              (0.006)                 (0.011)               (0.011)
Hispanic                                                                                   0.033***              0.033***               0.076***              0.076***
                                                                                            (0.009)               (0.009)                 (0.013)               (0.013)
Black                                                                                      0.061***              0.061***               0.130***              0.130***
                                                                                            (0.008)               (0.008)                 (0.011)               (0.011)
White                                                                                       0.020**               0.020**               0.060***              0.060***
                                                                                            (0.007)               (0.007)                 (0.012)               (0.012)
One Sibling                                                                                   -0.018               -0.018                 -0.035*               -0.035*
                                                                                             (0.010)              (0.010)                 (0.014)               (0.014)
Two Siblings                                                                                  -0.017               -0.017                -0.037**              -0.037**
                                                                                             (0.011)              (0.011)                 (0.013)               (0.013)
Three of More Siblings                                                                        -0.021               -0.021                -0.042**              -0.042**
                                                                                             (0.011)              (0.011)                 (0.013)               (0.013)
Low Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 10                                -0.082***             -0.082***              -0.189***             -0.189***
                                                                                            (0.009)               (0.009)                 (0.011)               (0.011)
Second Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 10                                0.007                0.007                -0.069***             -0.069***
                                                                                             (0.006)              (0.006)                 (0.007)               (0.007)
Third Quartile Combined Math and Reading Test Score, Grade 10                              0.020***              0.020***                  -0.007                -0.007
                                                                                             (0.004)              (0.004)                 (0.007)               (0.007)
Academic GPA, Grade 10 (0-4 scale)                                                         0.050***              0.050***               0.112***              0.112***
                                                                                            (0.004)               (0.004)                 (0.005)               (0.005)
Living with 2 Parents, Grade 10                                                               -0.005               -0.005                -0.020**              -0.020**
                                                                                             (0.009)              (0.009)                 (0.007)               (0.007)
Sibling Dropout, Grade 10                                                                  -0.030***             -0.030***              -0.051***             -0.051***
                                                                                            (0.008)               (0.008)                 (0.010)               (0.010)
See notes at end of table.




                                                                                   57
                                        Table 12 Cont'd. - State Policy Effects on 10th Grade Educational Expectations, NELS and ELS Sophomore Cohorts
                                                                                                   Expect At Least Some College                     Expect 4 Year College
                                                                                               (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
HS Academic Program                                                                                 0.047***               0.047***                0.086***                 0.086***
                                                                                                     (0.008)                (0.008)                  (0.014)                  (0.014)
HS Vocational Program                                                                                 0.032*                 0.032*                 -0.049*                  -0.049*
                                                                                                     (0.013)                (0.013)                  (0.023)                 (0.023)
Private School, Grade 10                                                                               0.011                 0.011                 0.061***                 0.061***
                                                                                                      (0.008)               (0.008)                  (0.017)                  (0.017)
Parent Notified of Behavior Problem(s) at School, Grade 10                                          -0.039***              -0.039***               -0.050***                -0.050***
                                                                                                     (0.007)                (0.007)                  (0.012)                  (0.012)
Hours of TV per Week, Grade 10                                                                         -0.001                -0.001                   0.001                    0.001
                                                                                                      (0.001)               (0.001)                  (0.002)                  (0.002)
Hours of Homework per Week, Grade 10                                                                0.002***               0.002***                0.004***                 0.004***
                                                                                                     (0.000)                (0.000)                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
Percent of Previous Year's Graduates in 4-Yr College, Grade 10                                         0.019                 0.020                  0.046**                  0.046**
                                                                                                      (0.011)               (0.011)                  (0.013)                  (0.013)
School Size, Grade 10                                                                                  0.000                 0.000                   0.002*                   0.002*
                                                                                                      (0.001)               (0.001)                  (0.001)                  (0.001)
Percent of Free- and Reduced- Price Lunch Eligible Students, Grade 10                                  -0.000                -0.000                   -0.005                   -0.005
                                                                                                      (0.016)               (0.016)                  (0.020)                  (0.020)
Students per Guidance Counselor, Grade 10, in Hundreds                                                 -0.001                -0.001                -0.012***                -0.012***
                                                                                                      (0.002)               (0.002)                  (0.003)                  (0.003)
Students per Guidance Counselor*HS Academic Program                                                    0.003                 0.003                 0.012***                 0.012***
                                                                                                      (0.002)               (0.002)                  (0.003)                  (0.003)
Students per Guidance Counselor*HS Vocational Program                                                  -0.001                -0.001                   -0.002                   -0.002
                                                                                                      (0.004)               (0.004)                  (0.004)                  (0.004)
County Minimum PSE Room and Board Costs, in thousands, Grade 12                                      -0.001*                -0.001*                   -0.000                   -0.000
                                                                                                      (0.001)               (0.001)                  (0.001)                  (0.001)
County Minimum PSE Tuition, In-State, Grade 12 (in thousands, 2007 $)                                  0.000                 0.000                    0.002                    0.002
                                                                                                      (0.002)               (0.002)                  (0.002)                  (0.002)
Percent of State Adults with BA or Higher, Grade 10                                                    0.705                 0.752                    -0.242                   -0.225
                                                                                                      (0.468)               (0.453)                  (0.614)                  (0.611)
State Unemployment Rate, Grade 10                                                                      -1.300                -1.152                   -0.092                   -0.064
                                                                                                      (0.795)               (0.798)                  (1.213)                  (1.260)
State Median Household Income, Grade 10 ( 2007 Dollars)                                                -0.000                -0.000                   -0.000                   -0.000
                                                                                                      (0.000)               (0.000)                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
N                                                                                                           29057                                          29057
R2                                                                                          0.006     0.151       0.006      0.152        0.047      0.309       0.047       0.309
F-Statistic for FE                                                                           3.54      2.80       3.57        2.79         5.25       3.34       5.34         3.34
DF_a for FE                                                                                   50        50          50         50           50         50          50          50
DF_r for FE                                                                                 29004     28950      29004       28952        29004      28950      29004        28952
Probability for F-Statistic of Joint Significance                                           0.000     0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000      0.000       0.000       0.000
Mean of Dependent Variable                                                                                  0.916                                          0.725
Notes:
* p< .05, ** p< .01, *** p<.001
Models include state fixed effects.
Data are weighted to be nationally representative.
All covariates are measures in 10th grade.
Standard errors clustered at the state level.
Data are from National Education Longitudinal Study and the Education Longitudinal Study.




                                                                                            58
