                                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 A PATCHWORK SAFETY NET:
ETRIC STUDIES OF INCOME MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE T

                                                     Price V. Fishback
                                                       Samuel Allen
                                                       Jonathan Fox
                                                    Brendan Livingston

                                                   Working Paper 15696
                                           http://www.nber.org/papers/w15696


                                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                January 2010




           The authors would like to thank Shawn Kantor, Peter Lindert, Carolyn Moehling, Robert Margo, Paul
           Rhode, David Ribar, Adrian Stoian, and John Wallis for sharing data and their insights on the issues
           addressed in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
           reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

           NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
           reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
           NBER publications.

           © 2010 by Price V. Fishback, Samuel Allen, Jonathan Fox, and Brendan Livingston. All rights reserved.
           Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
           that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Patchwork Safety Net: A Survey of Cliometric Studies of Income Maintenance Programs
in the United States in the First Half of the Twentieth Century
Price V. Fishback, Samuel Allen, Jonathan Fox, and Brendan Livingston
NBER Working Paper No. 15696
January 2010
JEL No. H53,H75,N32,N42,R50

                                            ABSTRACT

Social welfare programs in the United States are designed to serve as safety nets for people in hard
times, in contrast with the universal approach found in many other developed western nations. In
a survey of Cliometric studies of social welfare programs in the U.S., we examine the variation in
the safety net in the U.S. across states in the 20th century, the determinants of the variation, and its
impact on socioeconomic outcomes. The U.S. has always displayed substantial variation in the extent
of the safety net because the features of most public social welfare programs are and were determined
by local and state governments, even after the federal government became involved. Differences across
states persist strongly for typically a decade, although the persistence weakens with time, and there
are some periods when federal intervention led to a re-ordering. The rankings of state benefits differs
from program to program, and economic and political factors have different weights in determining
benefit levels in panel data estimation of their effects. Variation in benefits across programs during
the early 1900s had significant impact on labor markets, economic activity, family formation, death
rates, and crime.


Price V. Fishback                                  Jonathan Fox
Department of Economics                            University of Arizona
University of Arizona                              jonathanffox@gmail.com
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER                                           Brendan Livingston
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu                        University of Arizona
                                                   bsl@email.arizona.edu
Samuel Allen
Virginia Military Institute
341 Scott Shipp Hall
Lexington, VA 24450
allensk@vmi.edu
                                                                                                                3



    A Patchwork of Programs: A Survey of Cliometric Studies of Income Maintenance

           Programs in the United States in the First Half of the Twentieth Century

                 Price Fishback, Sam Allen, Jonathan Fox, and Brendan Livingston

        The United States has always had a much larger safety net than most people realize. In

the current era the United States is considered a laggard among the world’s developed economies

in terms of social welfare expenditures. Part of this image is driven by the fact that many

developed nations have adopted a strategy of universal programs where all receive health care

and family support payments. Meanwhile, the U.S. follows a safety net strategy, in which

private purchases of insurance and private charities play a much larger role and people typically

do not receive payments until their income drops below specified levels. As a result, gross

government expenditures on social welfare in the U.S. circa 2000 are much smaller as a share of

GDP than in Sweden, Norway, Finland, and Denmark. Once adjustments for taxation of benefits

and purchases and unfunded mandates are taken into account, however, the gap narrows

considerably. In 1990 purchasing power dollars, net government expenditures by the U.S. in

2003 were $5,408 per capita, which is lower than Sweden’s per capita spending of $6,259 and

Norway’s $5901, about the same as Denmark’s 5,472, and higher than Finland’s $4,232. Once

private social welfare expenditures are included, the U.S. per capita net public and private social

welfare spending rises to $7,850, which is substantially higher than Sweden’s $6,715, Norway’s

$6,315, Denmark’s $5,818, and Finland’s $4,920. 1

        One reason that the extent of the U.S. social safety net is under-estimated is that it is

composed of a large patchwork system of programs. Anybody reading the House of


1
  Fishback (2009) put together these comparisons from OECD statistics. For comparisons of many countries over
long periods of time see Lindert (2004, vols 1 and 2).
                                                                                                      4



Representative’s Ways and Means Committee’s Green Book, a massive volume providing an

overview of social welfare programs, will by struck by the broad range of programs available for

the poor in the United States. Another reason that the volume is so large is that the benefits in a

number of programs often vary substantially across states. The responsibility for income

maintenance programs has been centered in local and state governments since colonial times.

Until the New Deal during the Great Depression of the 1930s, the federal government provided

disability aid and pensions only to families of veterans of the military and its own employees on

the grounds that problems related to unemployment and injury were local affairs. 2 Franklin

Roosevelt’s administration argued for the expansion of federal involvement during the New Deal

by claiming that the Great Depression was a nationwide problem that needed to be dealt with by

a national government.

           We seek to make sense of the broad array of social welfare programs at all levels of

government across the United States and over time by surveying the cliometric literature on the

history of poverty and social insurance programs during the early twentieth century. Cliometrics

applies economic and statistical analysis to the study of history, represented by the muse Clio,

and thus is particularly well suited to the measurement of the extent of the programs in the

economy. In the course of the paper, we discuss the shifts in responsibility for public social

welfare programs between the local, state, and federal governments and the difficulties these

shifts present for collecting data that fully describe the patchwork system of programs in the U.S.

over time. The benefits offered in the programs varied a great deal across the United States in

the early twentieth century and we explore the degree to which the relative rankings of benefits

across the states remained stable over the course of the twentieth century. After summarizing the
2
    See Moss, Skocpol, Costa, Fishback and Thomasson (2006, volume 2).
                                                                                                   5



existing studies that examine the determinants of benefits across locations prior to 1940, we offer

some preliminary analysis of the political and economic determinants of benefits from 1940

through 2000. Finally, we survey a group of studies that have examined the impact of poverty

and social insurance programs on socio-economic outcomes.

 The Development of the Patchwork System and the Challenges Created for Data

Collection

       The local and state focus of social welfare spending has played havoc with the collection

of quantitative evidence on income maintenance during the eighteenth, nineteenth, and early

twentieth centuries in the United States. Joan Hannon and Stephen Ziliak (2006), who are

among the few cliometricians who have performed quantitative analysis of U.S. poverty

programs during that period, searched high and low to put together time series and cross-sections

on welfare spending prior to 1929 for the Millennial Edition of the Historical Statistics of the

United States. They could only find long time series for a handful of large cities and eastern

seaboard states, state level cross sections of pauper support from the 1850, 1860, and 1870

censuses, and information of the number of paupers in almshouses from the 1880, 1890, 1904,

1910, and 1923 censuses of almshouses. The cross-sectional census comparisons are

problematic in different ways. The state totals from 1850 through 1870 do not match well with

data for New York, where detailed evidence by county is available (Kiesling and Margo 1997).

Meanwhile, the almshouses from 1880 to 1923 account for only part of the income maintenance

programs, missing the people living in their own homes who received “outdoor” relief.

       The public spending numbers also miss the resources provided by private charities, which

were extensive. In the 1870s and 1880s, for example, leaders of the Charitable Organization

Societies (COS) orchestrated the abolition of public outdoor relief programs in major cities in an
                                                                                                      6



attempt to improve the efficiency of the provision of relief, as well as provide more moral

guidance for the poor to aid to achieve the self-reliance that would move them out of poverty.

The move led to a large increase in private charitable donations, and the poor shifted from public

to private relief rolls, but the change had relatively little impact on efficiency. In comparisons to

earlier periods, the poor stayed on the rolls roughly the same length of time, the same share (33

to 40 percent) left the rolls for higher earnings, very few if any achieved higher occupations

under COS management, and the ratios of expenditures per person on indoor and outdoor relief

to the earnings of common labor share have stayed remarkably constant nationwide at around 25

to 30 percent for most of U.S. history. 3 Even as local and state governments regained more

control of relief around the turn of the century, private charitable donations still played a large

role. Recent research by Brendan Livingston (2009) on private and public funding of relief from

1900 to 1930 shows that private charities were prevalent and provided a wide breath of services.

Private charitable payments for income maintenance were roughly about double the payments

made from public funds in Massachusetts between 1900 and 1930. Local spending was also

double state spending, with a majority of spending going towards outdoor relief. 4

           As the U.S. entered the Progressive Era of the late nineteenth and earlier twentieth

century, state governments began playing an increasing role in income maintenance programs for

the poor and disabled. In the 1910s a large number of states adopted workers’ compensation and

mothers’ pension programs, as seen in Table 1. Workers’ compensation provided payments to

the families of workers injured or killed in all accidents arising out of or in the course of


3
    See Ziliak and Hannon 2006, 2-698-9, Ziliak (1996a, 2002b, Lebergott, 1976, 61-65)
4
 Livingston’s (2009) statements are based on data reported by Massachusetts State Board of
Charity from 1900 through 1919 and the Massachusetts Department of Public Welfare for the
years 1920 through 1930.
                                                                                                   7



employment. Mothers’ pensions in most states provided benefits to widows with children. By

1919 about one-third of the states explicitly provided benefits for mothers with children who

were divorced or separated from their husband, two explicitly provided benefits for single

mothers, and seven more established the law for mothers of dependent children without referring

to marital status (Moehling 2007, 120-1). In the late 1920s a handful of states passed laws

creating county options to provide need-based old-age assistance to the elderly to allow them to

live on their own rather than in almshouses. In the early 1930s the states began raising the stakes

and requiring local governments to provide old-age assistance payments and in many cases

providing state funding. In the meantime, many states were also providing payments to the blind

to allow them to live on their own.

       The drastic problems with unemployment led to a series of responses by governments at

all levels. Some state and local governments expanded building programs to provide more jobs

for workers, but their efforts were limited by declining tax revenues and the sharp rise in the

unemployed. In 1933 Franklin Roosevelt described unemployment as a nationwide problem, and

the federal government established the first of a series of relief programs designed to provide aid

to the unemployed and the destitute. The first major program was the Federal Emergency Relief

Administration (FERA), which gave grants to the states to make direct relief payments to

families in need and to provide relief with a work requirement for the able-bodied. For four

months in the winter of 1933-34, the Civil Works Administration (CWA) hired up to 4 million

workers for public projects. Many of the people working on the CWA were shifted to FERA

work relief projects in March 1934 when the CWA was phased out. Throughout the New Deal,

the Civilian Conservation Corps provided an opportunity for young men aged 16 to 24 from poor

families to work on federal conservation projects often located in other states. They worked
                                                                                                   8



roughly 40 hours per week in semi-military troops and were given room and board plus a dollar

per day, of which the lion’s share was paid to their parents.

       Despite the emergency programs in place, estimated national unemployment rates were

still over 20 percent in 1935 (the figure is 14.2 percent if people on work relief were considered

employed, see Darby 1976, 8). Frances Townsend and others led movements calling for

programs to offer payments to the elderly as long as they spent the money quickly. State and

local governments were overwhelmed by the combination of declining state revenues and the

large numbers of poor seeking aid, and they faced constitutional restrictions on the issuance of

debt to run deficits on current spending. Even had they sought to issue debt for public capital

investment, they faced high real interest rates and investors who demanded risk premiums due to

skepticism about the state’s ability to repay the debt.

       The Roosevelt administration and Congress negotiated a realignment of the income

maintenance programs (Wallis, Fishback, Kantor 2007). The Roosevelt administration gained

increased control of the short-run emergency work relief programs for the able-bodied by

replacing the FERA programs with the Works Progress Administration (WPA) and some smaller

programs, all of which ended in the early 1940s when World War II made them redundant. The

federal government returned responsibility for the “unemployable” poor to the state and local

governments. Many people today describe the WPA as a jobs program, but the WPA did not

create jobs at the time the way other federal agencies did. On the Public Works Administration

(PWA), Public Roads Administration (PRA), and Public Buildings Administration (PBA)

projects, the government hired contractors who then hired workers full-time at regular pay rates.

The WPA, like the FERA before it, was a relief program with a work requirement. They paid

enough for basic necessities, but opportunities to work were limited and the average hourly
                                                                                                   9



earnings on these programs were typically half the average hourly earnings on PWA, PBA, and

PRA programs. In some southern agricultural areas, however, the WPA hourly earnings were

comparable to or even higher than local earnings (Howard, 1941; Neumann, Fishback, and

Kantor Forthcoming 2010).

       The long-run programs were established in the Social Security Act of 1935. The Old Age

Survivors’ Insurance (OASI) program, what everybody calls Social Security today, established a

national old-age pension plan for workers with taxes collected by the federal government, which

then paid out benefits to people who had contributed to the plan. The federal government began

collecting the taxes in 1938 and made the first payments to the elderly in 1940. Unemployment

Insurance (UI) programs were federal/state programs in which employers paid into reserve funds

that paid benefits to unemployed workers. The states had leeway to set their own benefits

structure and the federal government provided funds for administering the program (Baicker,

Goldin, and Katz, 1998). Although the federal government had off-loaded responsibility for

direct relief on to state and local governments, it provided matching grants to the states to

provide aid to dependent children (ADC), old-age assistance (OAA), and aid to the blind (AB).

Over the next few years, some states quickly passed enabling legislation that established their

own benefit levels and met the basic federal administrative guidelines, while others delayed

several years (see Table 1). Nearly all states had passed the enabling legislation for

Unemployment Insurance by 1937. The payments of unemployment benefits were delayed until

1938 and 1939 (see Table 1) because each state had to build up a reserve fund for two years

before the unemployed could receive benefits.

       Unlike most developed countries, the U.S. has resisted the creation of a universal health

insurance plan. In the late 1910s a number of states considered adopting sickness insurance laws
                                                                                                 10



that would offer state run programs to provide partial wage replacement for workers when they

were ill. Such funds had been established in many European countries and were associated with

lower adult and infant mortality rates. 5 The state run programs would have replaced many of the

private funds operated by fraternal societies, unions, and employers during the period. John

Murray (2007) finds that the support among the general public for the funds was relatively weak,

as many people with sickness insurance were satisfied with their coverage, and some without

coverage thought the taxes would be too high for the benefits received. The reform-minded

American Association of Labor Legislation was not as effective at bringing together the coalition

that contributed to the passage of workers’ compensation laws. Employers who had supported

workers’ compensation because they feared increasing accident payments under negligence

liability were not as concerned with sickness insurance because there were no legal doctrines

requiring them to pay benefits for illness. Unions and employers with sickness funds did not

push hard for the law because it would have reduced their competitive advantage in attracting

workers. Meanwhile, the American Medical Association actively opposed the legislation in most

states. 6

            The absence of sickness insurance did not prevent state and local governments from

contributing public funds for hospitals and hospital care. The per capita government cost

payments by state and city governments for specific cities in Figure 1 range from $2 to $46 year

1990 dollars with a mean of $10.79 in 1923 and from $2 to 62 in 1930 with a mean of $13.87. In

addition, almshouses often provided some degree of medical care to the poor (Stoian and

Fishback forthcoming). During the Great Depression the Farm Security Administration (FSA)


5
    See Murray and Winegarten (1998) and Bowlbis (forthcoming)
6
    See Murray (2007) and Thomasson (2002).
                                                                                                  11



provided care from doctors and nurses in many underserved agricultural areas (Grey 1999).

Under the auspices of the 1950 amendments to the Social Security Act, the ADC, OAA, and AB

programs began making direct payments to medical providers who treated recipients. State and

local governments continued providing medical services to the people receiving general

assistance payments. These programs were eventually phased out after the introduction of

Medicare for the elderly and Medicaid for the poor in the mid-1960s (Fishback and Thomasson

2006, 2-795).



Geographic Variation and Its Persistence Over Time

       In the patchwork of American programs the variation in benefits varies dramatically

across geographic locations, just as they did in the per capita hospital government cost payments

in Figure 1. The variation is present both before and after the federal government became

heavily involved in social welfare spending in the 1930s. The per capita city and government

cost payments on poverty and unemployment relief in 1923 in Figure 2 varies from lows of less

than $1 in 1990 dollars in several southern cities to a high near $29 for several Massachusetts

cities and a mean of $6.26. By 1930, the spending in Figure 2 had increased in response to the

first full year of the Great Depression to a higher average of $10.76 and the range between the

low southern cities and the high Massachusetts cities had broadened such that benefits ranged

between $0.71 to $56.43. The figure shows that this rise occurred in nearly every city, because

all of the points are clustered in the upper left portion of the diagram.

       Over the course of the 1920s there was a clear sense of persistence in per capita

government cost payments, as shown by the strong positive relationship between 1923 and 1930

spending in Figure 2. The spending per capita across cities around 1930 was influenced not only
                                                                                                   12



by the prior spending per capita in 1923 but also changes in employment. Table 2 shows

regressions run on the natural log of per capita city government spending on care of the poor and

veterans in 1930 as a function of the same measure as of 1923 and the change in the natural log

of state manufacturing employment between 1923 and 1929 (or 1931). The coefficients can be

read as elasticities. The strong path dependence is still there after controlling for changes in

employment. Cities with per capita relief spending one percent higher in 1923, holding other

things constant, tended to have per capita spending in 1929 and in 1931 that was 0.93 and 0.94

percent higher, respectively. Per capita welfare spending responded strongly to offset drops in

the natural log of employment. The negative elasticity implies that a one percent reduction in the

change in the log of employment led to an increase in per capita relief spending of 1.48 percent

in 1929 and 2.52 percent in 1931.

       Unemployment rates reached nearly 25 percent in 1933, when Franklin Roosevelt took

office and started the New Deal relief programs. Federal government involvement led to

sizeable shifts in the per capita spending for relief of the poor and the unemployed. Figure 3

documents the dramatic rise in relief spending from all government and private sources between

1931 and 1939 as every point lies well above and to the left of a 45 degree diagonal line from the

origins. The rise in spending is not necessarily due to a rise in unemployment. These years were

chosen because the national unemployment rates in the two years were similar at 16.3 percent in

1931 and 14.8 percent (including work relief workers as unemployed) in 1940. The federal

government did not become heavily involved in relief efforts until 1933; therefore, the changes

wrought by the federal government involvement in relief become more obvious in comparing

these two years. Boston, Massachusetts and Rochester, New York led the rankings in 1931 at

over $82 per head (1990$). By 1939 the median expenditure per capita was $221 in 1990
                                                                                                    13



dollars and spending in Brocton, Massachusetts was leading the country at over $400 (1990$)

per capita on relief.

        The introduction of federal spending in the 1930s had two effects on the geographic

distribution of resources. The first was a reduction in the dispersion across cities. The

coefficient of variation (the standard deviation divided by the mean) for the 115 cities fell from

0.95 in 1931 before federal involvement to 0.4 by 1939. Second, the persistence in the

geographic rankings across the decade was much weaker across the 1930s than across the 1920s.

The raw correlation is 0.58 in Figure 3 for the 1931/1939 comparison, compared with 0.89 in

Figure 2 for the 1923/1930 comparison. The relationship between 1931 and 1939 per capita

spending levels is even weaker after we control for the state of the economy in the cities in 1931

and 1939. The elasticity from the regression in Table 3 shows that a city with one percent higher

relief spending per capita in 1931 on average had relief spending per capita that was only 0.17

percent higher in 1939. Meanwhile, the per capita spending was strongly influenced by changes

in the labor market. The estimated elasticity of -1.11 implies that a one percent reduction in the

change in the log of state manufacturing employment was associated with a 1.11 percent increase

in per capita relief spending.

        The states still retained a great deal of control over benefit levels after the Social Security

Act transformed the role of the federal government in social welfare programs. Workers’

compensation programs have always been state programs, although federal pressures, discussed

below, led to some convergence of benefits in the 1970s. States retained control of basic benefit

levels in UI and the categorical assistance programs through a shift that broadened ADC to

become Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) in the 1960s and tightened

requirements under Temporary Aid to Needy Families (TANF) in the 1990s. Supplemental
                                                                                                 14



Security Income (SSI) took over control of need-based payments to the elderly and the blind in

the 1970s.

       The legacy of the Social Security Act’s reliance on state decisions about benefits is a

relatively large variation across the country in each program to this day. The measure of

expected workers’ compensation benefits as a percentage of annual income for a worker earning

the national average weekly wage in Figures 4a and 4b show a large range spanning from 0.26 to

0.70 in 1940 that expanded to span 0.20 to 0.77 in 1970. The range then narrowed to span 0.36

to 0.84 in 2000. Similarly, the maximum monthly payments under the various incarnations of

mothers’ pensions, ADC, AFDC, and TANF measured in 1967 dollars had ranges that spanned

$66 to $221 for four-person families under ADC in 1940, $48 to $282 for three-person families

under AFDC in 1970, and $31 to $179 under TANF in 2000. In discussions of the geographic

variation of benefits in these programs we focus on the statutory benefits for workers’

compensation and UI and the monthly maximums offered for need-based programs like ADC,

OAA, and AB. The need-based programs base the payments on the household’s current

resources and supplement them up to a monthly maximum. In essence, the monthly maximum

can be seen as a target base income that they are trying to reach. The maximum has fallen for

ADC and OAA since the 1960s, as the Food Stamp program has eliminated the need to

supplement the food budget.

        Another legacy of the decision to rely on the states has been a relatively strong

persistence of the state rankings of maximum benefits in each program within the same decade

over the period from 1970 to 2000. Table 4 shows the cross-state correlations for benefits for

different pairs of census years. The second diagonal from top right to lower left, the one below

the first diagonal composed entirely of ones, shows the correlations between the end-points of
                                                                                                     15



the same decade. As the diagonal moves downward to the left the span between the years being

compared increases.

       The second diagonal for UI and the family programs shows relatively weak correlations

between 1940 and 1950. The correlations then strengthen over time in comparisons of 1950 to

1960, 1960 to 1970, 1980 to 1990, and 1990 to 2000. This is likely a result of experimentation

by the states in setting their benefits. When the states established the original benefits for UI and

ADC in the late 1930s, states tend to be clumped into distinct groups that chose the same benefit

levels. In Figure 5a there were clusters of states that paid ADC maximums in 1940 of $66, $101,

$125, 137, and $185 in 1967 dollars. Clusters for UI weekly maximums in 1940 are found at

$36, $38, and $43 in 1967 dollars in Figure 6a. Over time the states refined their choices and

there was much less clustering in Figures 5b and 6b. As a result, the correlations between 1940

and 1950 benefits across states was only 0.1069 for UI and 0.34 for AFDC. The correlations for

1950 and 1960 rose to 0.42 for UI and 0.76 for ADC. By the latter part of the twentieth century

the correlations for UI reached as high as 0.8037 for 1990 and 2000 and 0.93 for the same years

for ADC. Workers’ compensation did not go through the same experimentation process in the

1940s and 1950s because most laws were passed in the 1910s. Thus, the correlations between

1940 and 1950 were near or above 0.7 in all comparisons except 1970 and 1980.

       It is worth noting that the relative rankings are not set in stone for the long run. As the

time span increases, comparisons of the correlations as you read down the same column show

that the correlations weaken significantly. Thus the correlations for workers’ compensation

benefits fall from 0.92 for 1930 and 1940 to 0.78 for 1930 and 1950 to 0.68 for 1930 and 1960,

to 0.58 for 1930 and 1970, and below 0.3 for 1930 and later years.
                                                                                                 16



       Differences in the target groups of the income maintenance programs lead to relatively

weak correlations between UI and ADC and between workers’ compensation and ADC in Table

5. UI and workers’ compensation target people who are typically employed, while ADC and SSI

tend to target people without employment or at the very low end of the employment scale. The

correlations between workers’ compensation and UI within the same year in 1940 and 1950 were

nearly zero before they strengthened to rise above 0.4 after 1970. Correlations between workers’

compensation and ADC within the same year rise to peak around 0.55 in 1960 and then weaken a

great deal through 2000. The correlations between UI and ADC within the same year are weak

in 1940 and 1950, they peak at 0.56 in 1960 and then fall to 0.36 by 2000. The correlations

within the same year of SSI with workers’ compensation and UI in 1990 and 2000 are also

relatively weak. The strongest correlations are found between the need-based programs of ADC

and SSI in 1990 and 2000.



The Political Economy of the Variation in Benefits

       Both mothers’ pensions and workers’ compensation were adopted in the majority of the

states in a relatively short period of time during the heyday of the Progressive Era in the 1910s.

Efforts to aid the “worthy” poor who were struck by misfortune through no fault of their own

drew backing from a diverse set of interest groups, ranging from major business and civic leaders

to reform groups. Despite the broad-based support for the basic concepts, there was extensive

debate about the specific features of the laws. The debate surrounding the benefit levels was

particularly contentious.

       In preliminary cross-sectional analyses of the factors determining the generosity of

mothers’ pensions in 1919, 1929, and 1940, Carolyn Moehling (2006) found that states where
                                                                                                                     17



women’s clubs endorsed mothers’ pension legislation earlier tended to choose less generous

pensions. The negative relationship indicates the conflicts in the objectives of pension

advocates. The early leaders of the mothers’ pension movement wanted to provide relief to the

“deserving” poor, but they feared the creation of a permanent pauper class, a common fear

throughout the progressive era. They did not want to raise benefits high enough to encourage

desertion or divorce by spouses. Nor did they want to attract migration to the state to take

advantage of higher benefits. The generosity of benefits was also lower in states with more

blacks and higher in areas where women were a larger share of the labor force.

         Even though significant numbers of employers, workers, and insurers anticipated gains

from workers’ compensation legislation, there were still intense debates over benefits and other

features of the law. 7 In some cases, as in Missouri, the political maneuvering led to delays in

adoption of the law. Fishback and Kantor (1998, 2000) performed an analysis of a panel of

workers’ compensation benefits between 1911 and 1930 to try to examine the factors influencing

the levels of benefits chosen. They found that prior to 1930, employers in high risk industries

generally succeeded in keeping benefits low. On the other hand, states with more unionized

manufacturing industries served as a countervailing force to push benefits higher. Once officials

7
  Fishback and Kantor (2000) showed that the political economy of the original adoption of workers’ compensation
was the result of groups of employers and insurance companies joining with groups of reformers and workers to
pass the laws. The employers anticipated a reduction in uncertainty about their accident liability payments
associated with the negligence laws and changing court decisions. Employers also ending up passing along a
significant portion of the costs of the new workers’ compensation benefits through compensating wage reductions
for nonunion workers. Despite the wage offsets, many non-union workers still benefited from the new law because
they were better insured against accident risk. They typically received payments for nearly all accidents and the
average payouts overall tended to be higher than negligence liability. The insurance companies also benefited from
selling a great deal more workers’ compensation insurance than they had sold previously of the combined package
of employers’ liability insurance and worker’s accident insurance, although they benefited less when the state
created a competitive insurer or lost out in the seven states that created a monopoly state insurer. The issue of state-
provided insurance raised the hackles of insurers and those fearful of government replacement of general business.
Fishback and Kantor (2000) found state insurance schemes were adopted in the states where unions and progressive
reformers had more strength.
                                                                                                 18



were in place to administer workers’ compensation laws they also pressed for higher workers’

compensation benefits. Finally, states in which the legislature shifted parties in both houses also

tended to raise workers’ compensation benefits as part of their new reforms when they took

office.

          In the original debates over workers’ compensation, reformers and workers’ advocates

often accepted compromises on the initial benefits in hopes of putting some law in place and then

seeking to raise the benefits in the future. Benefit levels therefore have continued to be a source

of contention to the present day. A key determinant of the actual benefit levels paid is the

weekly maximum benefit payment, which was originally set as a specific amount in nominal

dollars. The law might state that the worker was eligible to receive as much as two-thirds of

their normal weekly earnings, but a low maximum weekly payment could cut that percentage

sharply. In fact, Allen’s (2004, 2009) analysis of benefits and wages shows that the weekly

maximum was binding for more than 90 percent of workers in various dangerous jobs across

several census years.

          As wages rose with inflation, a very common experience throughout the century,

legislatures had to adjust the weekly maximums for benefits to keep pace with nominal wage

increases. The legislatures, many which met only every two years, often raised the weekly

maximums after inflation eroded the benefits as a share of income. This led to the annual

fluctuations in the national average expected benefit as a percentage of annual manufacturing

wages, holding accident rates constant seen in Figure 7. The national average disguises much

larger fluctuations within the states. The legislative delays also meant that workers’

compensation benefits as a share of manufacturing earnings stayed below its 1930s level until the

early 1970s. As can be seen in the plots of workers’ compensation benefits as a share of annual
                                                                                                    19



income in 1940 and 1970 in Figure 4a, the bulk of the states rest at points below a 45 degree line,

which shows that most state legislatures allowed inflation to erode expected benefits in ways that

caused the benefits relative to wage to be lower in 1970 than they were in 1940.

       Samuel Allen (2009) shows that there was a substantial change in the situation in the

1970s. The federal government sponsored a National Commission on Workers’ Compensation

Laws in 1972 to assess the adequacy of state-mandated benefits. The National Commission

called for several major reforms in state workers’ compensation laws, including a large increase

in benefit levels. Further, it added teeth to these recommendations by recommending that the

federal government take control of workers’ compensation if the states did not adopt substantial

reforms. Indeed, a congressional bill was proposed that would have reopened the claims

procedure in states with “inadequate” benefits and required payment of the benefit shortfall in

those cases.

       One of the Commission’s key recommendations was that the states move away from their

practice of setting nominal maximum levels for weekly benefits every few years to indexing the

benefits to change with changes in the weekly wage rates in the states. Prior to 1972, only a

handful of states had begun indexing their benefits. After the National Commission report, the

vast majority of states made the shift. As a result, the expected benefits as a share of annual

earnings, holding accident rates constant, rises sharply in the 1970s and then displays a slightly

rising trend thereafter. This is seen in Figure 7. Similarly, the plots of expected benefits in each

state in 1970 and 2000 show that the workers’ compensation benefits area all clustered in the

upper left of Figure 4b. Allen performed a hazard analysis of the timing of the shift and found

that states tended to adopt the indexing earlier if they already had high benefits, and had state

senates that were dominated by Democrats. Southern states were slower to adopt the procedure.
                                                                                                               20



In contrast to the Fishback and Kantor studies prior to 1930, neither union representation nor the

administrative structure of workers’ compensation appeared to matter much.

        The shift in procedure for benefit adjustments also led to a sharp change in the impact of

various factors to the level of benefits. Allen set up a panel data set with annual information for

the states for each year from 1940 through 2000 on the real level of benefits as a function of

interest group activity, and political measures with interaction terms that allowed estimation of

the change in the effect of the measures after 1972. The analysis controls for year and state fixed

effects and the structure of industries. Prior to 1972, the level of real wages had a weak positive

relationship with the level of real expected benefits. After the commission report, the

relationship strengthened a great deal; the elasticity implied that a one percent rise in real wages

was associated with a 0.565 percent rise in real benefit levels. In the pre-1972 period, more

unionization was associated with higher benefit levels. In the post-commission period the shift

to indexing weakened the relationship with annual changes in unionization. In a similar fashion,

the effects of Democratic leadership in the state legislature was strong before 1972 and

weakened after the Democrats succeeded in pushing for indexing of wages.

        A large literature debates the reasons why there was a very large variation in the

distribution of all types of New Deal funds, which is surveyed in Fishback, Kantor and Wallis

(2003). 8 We will focus here on the specific factors related to the variation in the per capita

spending on relief. In a famous Fireside Chat, Roosevelt proclaimed that the New Deal would

promote “Relief, Recovery, and Reform.” Conservatives, critics and big businessmen charged

the New Dealers with the more cynical purpose of using government programs to build


8 See Couch and Shughart (1998), Wallis (1984, 1987, 1988 1998, 2001), Wright (1974), Reading (1973),
Anderson and Tollison (1991), Fleck (1994, 1999a, 1999b, 1999c, 2001, 2008); Stromberg (2004), Arrington
(1970), Reading (1973), Mason (2003). For discussions of corruption, see Fishback, Kantor and Wallis (2004).
                                                                                                                 21



patronage and to “buy” voters to ensure the continuation of the Democrat’s hegemony over the

federal government. Many modern programs have explicit formulas that determine the

distribution of federal spending through matching grants and specific counts. The inner

workings of the emergency New Deal programs are more difficult to fathom. Explicit formulas

for matching funds written into the FERA legislation were largely deemed unworkable after the

first three months. Senate testimony from FERA administrators on the distribution of funds

offers a long list of factors that were considered but little guidance on the weights each factor

was given. Similarly, the WPA matching requirements were routinely ignored and the shares of

funds provided by state and local governments varied widely.

        Nearly all of the statistical analysis of the distribution of relief spending and emergency

jobs have estimated regressions using cross-sections of counties, cities, or states. All find that

the relief programs distributed funds to areas with at least one or more of the following: higher

unemployment earlier in the 1930s, more of a decline in income, and lower long-term incomes.

They also find, however, that there is evidence of political maneuvering in a variety of

sophisticated forms. 9 Various studies have shown that more monies were distributed in areas

with higher voter turnout, more swing voting, and loyal voters (Fleck 1999c, 2001a; Fishback,

Kantor, and Wallis 2003; Wright 1974; Stromberg 2004; Couch and Shughart 1998). Fleck

(2001a) fine tuned the analysis to show that loyal voters mattered more in states loyal to the

Democrats and swing voters mattered more in states where swing voting was more common.

Stromberg (2004) showed that the Roosevelt administration spent more money where there were

more radios, which gave them an advantage in gaining credit for the monies. More recently,


9
 See Fleck (1999a, 1999b) shows that greater voter turnout, swing voting, and loyal voters all mattered to the
distribution of FERA spending and WPA work relief jobs. Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis (2003)
                                                                                                    22



Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010? forthcoming) have used a panel of monthly evidence to

examine the extent to which the Roosevelt administration used the timing of relief spending to

influence elections. There was a clear pattern in the raw data showing increased spending near

election times, particularly in 1936 and 1938. The WPA defended the timing by arguing that

these were periods of high unemployment (Howard 1941). After controlling for changes in

employment and nationwide shocks, the panel study finds that there were rises in spending in the

months immediately before the November elections and a decline in spending in December.

       To supplement the work by Sam Allen on the factors influencing workers’ compensation

benefits from 1930 through 1940, we have done some preliminary analyses on the relationships

between the benefit maximums for the family aid programs and UI and political parties and

incomes across states for the years 1940, 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000. The

estimating equation takes the following form.



               Bst = β0 + β1 Yst + β2 Pst + Δ +   + Δ*time + εst,



where Bst is the natural log of the maximum benefit in 1967 dollars in year t and state i. Yst is

the natural log of average income in 1967 dollars over the decade (average for 1931 through

1940 for 1940, 1941 through 1950 for 1950, etc.). Pst is a vector of averages across the decade

of political measures, including the average of the percent voting for the Democratic presidential

candidate, the average percent voting for other presidential candidates aside from Democrats and

Republicans, the share of years in which the state simultaneously had a Democratic governor and

the percent Democrat exceeded the percent Republican in both houses of the state legislature, the

previous Democratic state dominance measure interacted with a southern dummy, the share of
                                                                                                    23



years in which the state simultaneously had a Republican governor and the percent Republican

exceeded the percent Democrat in both houses of the state legislature, and the share of years in

which both legislatures shifted party dominance during the decade. The Δ is a vector of state

dummies that control for features of the states that do not vary over time, and    is a vector of

year dummies to control for nationwide shocks to the political economy. The vector Δ is

interacted with a time counter (1900=0) to control for state-specific time trends. The error term

εst captures factors that are not measured in the analysis. Results are shown in Table 6 with and

without the state and year fixed effects and the state specific time trends to show how the

inferences change when these are not included.

       The relationships between benefits and income change sharply as we add more controls

to the analysis. When the state and year fixed effects and the state-specific time trends are not

included, there is a strong positive relationship between personal income in the state and the

maximum UI weekly benefit. The statistically significant coefficient implies that a one percent

rise in state per capita income is associated with a 0.336 percent rise in the maximum UI benefit.

Once state effects are included to control for long-term features of the state and nationwide

changes associated with the years, the effect becomes statistically insignificant and slightly

negative, and the effect gets smaller still when the state-specific time trends are added.

Meanwhile, the relationship between ADC Benefits and average personal income is negative in

the absence of the state and year fixed effects and trends. Once we control for all three, the

relationship changes markedly and becomes positive and statistically significant, so that richer

states are more generous to the poor. A one percent rise in state per capita personal income is

associated with a family maximum benefit that is 0.448 percent higher. In the case of the
                                                                                                   24



dependent children benefits, it is particularly important to add the year fixed effects to control for

changes in the definition of the measure being used.

        The effect of political parties tends to show strongly without the extra controls. Both

types of benefits tended to be higher in states that tended to vote for Democrats for president and

when there were more shifts in party dominance in the state legislature in the prior decade. In

addition, the dependent children benefits were lower in states that voted for someone besides

major party candidates in presidential elections and in southern states where Democrats

dominated all parts of state government. The benefits were higher in areas where Republicans

succeeded in capturing control of all aspects of state government. However, these effects are

much weaker and statistically insignificant as we add the state and year fixed effects and then the

state-specific time trends.

       There is some debate among social scientists about the use of state and year fixed effects

and state-specific time trends. Some claim that the extra controls are correlated with components

of the remaining variables in the analysis. For example, if a state is fundamentally Democratic,

the coefficient of the state fixed effect may also be picking up the role of Democrats in the state.

Thus the coefficient of the Democratic variable when the state fixed effect is included is just

capturing deviations from the long term fundamental Democratic nature of the state. On the

other hand, there may be other time-invariant factors that are not measured in the model being

estimated that influence the benefit levels and happen to be correlated with the Democrats. If so,

the coefficient of the Democrat variable in an equation that eliminates the fixed effects and time

trends is going to be biased in ways that will cause mis-measurement of the relationship.

       We can get a sense of which states are most generous after controlling for income and

political party by examining the coefficients of the fixed effects. For unemployment insurance
                                                                                                 25



benefits, the states in the top ten include Connecticut, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, New York, New

Jersey, Wisconsin, Massachusetts, Colorado, Delaware and Kansas. The states in the bottom ten

include Mississippi, Indiana, Alabama, South Dakota, Arizona, South Carolina, Florida,

Missouri, Tennessee, and Georgia. For dependent child benefits the top ten include Connecticut,

New Hampshire, Wisconsin, California, New York, Minnesota, Vermont, Massachusetts, Utah,

and Washington and the bottom ten are Mississippi, Alabama, South Carolina, Arkansas,

Tennessee, Texas, Louisiana, Georgia, Florida, and Kentucky.



The Impact of Public Income Maintenance Programs on Socio-Economic Outcomes Before

1950

       There is a growing cliometric literature on the impact of social insurance and poverty

programs on various measures of socio-economic welfare in the U.S. between 1900 and 1950.

The stated primary goal of each program was to provide resources to people who have

experienced either a drop in income or are permanently stuck in a low income situation. It seems

obvious that receiving poverty and social insurance payments would make the person better off

in the short run. Absent fraudulent activity, the recipient’s income is higher during a period

where their income is low. Some of the policy analyses therefore focus on how the programs

influenced non-income measures for a class of people, such as mortality rates, family formation,

crime rates, and other factors. Others show how the programs influence the incentives for other

decision makers in the rest of the economy. For example, an increase in public spending on

poverty relief might lead to reductions in private charitable giving or might lead to downward

adjustments in wages in the labor market because potential recipients are better protected by the
                                                                                                    26



public policy against bad times. Such changes, whether unintended or recognized in advance by

policy makers, tend to offset the benefits of the public program to the recipients of the benefits.

       The studies summarized in Table 8 tend to follow a similar set of procedures. The

policies all varied across state and sometimes counties, so researchers have collected information

on key features of the policies for each location. In most cases the researchers have put together

panel data sets in which there is both variation across locations in any one year and variation

across time within locations in the outcome measure and the policy measure. The number of

years in the panels ranges from 2 years to more than 10 years. Most of the studies use state or

county averages in a particular year as the unit of observation. Given that the policies typically

varied by state and time, use of averages for the outcome variables may not lead to severe

aggregation bias. A small number of studies have access to information on individuals, but they

do not have information on the same individual for more than one year and so the cross-sections

are pooled into “pseudo-panels.”

       All the studies seek to identify the impact of the policy on the outcome in multi-variate

analysis that includes other factors that influence the outcome. Over the past twenty years,

economic historians have paid increasing attention to elimination of “endogeneity bias,” which

might arise when the policy measure is correlated with the error term in the regression equation

to be estimated. This type of bias can occur if key variables that are correlated with both the

outcome and the policy are not included in the analysis. This “omitted variable bias” in the

coefficient is a multiplicative function of the correlation between the left-out variable and the

outcome variable and the correlation between the left-out variable and the policy measure.

Endogeneity bias might also arise if there is a feedback relationship such that the outcome

variable itself influences the decision makers when they design the policy measure. For
                                                                                                      27



example, in a study of the impact of a program on average incomes, there are likely to be

situations where decreases in average incomes lead to adoption of a more generous poverty

policy. This feedback will cause the estimates of the impact of the poverty program to be less

positive than the true causal relationship between the program and income.

       To deal with the omitted variable problem, all of the studies adopt some form of the

following estimating equation. In this case the estimation is performed on a panel with each

observation as an average from state s in year t.



               Ost = β0 + β1POLICYst + β2 Xst + Δ +       + Δ*time + εst,



where Ost is the outcome measure in year t and state s, POLICYst is a measure of the policy, and

Xst is a vector of a set of factors that vary across states and time that influence the outcome

measure. To control for factors in each state that do not vary across time within a state but do

vary across states, a vector Δ of state fixed effects is included. Such factors might include the

fundamental legal environment, the climate, and other factors. A vector        of year effects can be

included to control for factors that hit all states in the same year but vary across years, such as

wars, monetary policy, and the introduction of new nationwide knowledge. Another vector of

state-specific time trends (Δ*time) can be used to control for trends within each state that vary

across states. The error term (εst) is the sum of all of the unmeasured factors.

       The coefficient β1 is an estimate of the relationship between a change in policy and a

change in the outcome. In statistics, there is no way to ascribe true causation to this estimate of

the relationship because statistics can only get at correlation. If the POLICYst measure is not
                                                                                                  28



correlated with the error εst, then β1 is often considered an unbiased measure of the relationship.

Economists also use the term “causal” in this situation.

       In seeking to control for omitted variable bias, some of the earlier studies only included

the vector Xst of variables that varied across time and place. Worries that there are many factors

that have gone unmeasured has led economists to increasingly use the state and year fixed effects

and state-specific time trends to reduce the potential problems with omitted variable bias. These

extra controls have the advantage of controlling for all sorts of factors that had gone unmeasured,

but that were correlated with both the outcome and policy variables. On the other hand,

researchers do not necessarily know which factors are being controlled by the fixed effects and

some researchers are worried that the fixed effects and state time trends are picking up some

aspects of the policy and causing the β1 estimate to understate the policy effects.

       To some extent, the fixed effects and state time trends control for the feedback form of

endogeneity. Researchers have also explored using instrumental variable (IV) analysis in which

they seek a variable that is correlated to a reasonable degree with the policy measure but is

uncorrelated with the error term εst. It should be emphasized that this is composed of the

unobservables after controlling for all of the other factors in the equation. Nearly all of the

studies that use the IV approach use a Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) approach in which a

first-stage equation of the following form is estimated.



       POLICYst = α0 + α1Instrumentst + α2 Xst + Δ1 +       1   + Δ1*time + ust,
                                                                                                    29



Note that the equation includes all of the factors in the right hand side of the earlier equation

along with the instrumental variable. Then a prediction of the Policy variable is substituted in

the final stage outcome equation.



               Ost = γ0 + γ1Predicted POLICYst + γ2 Xst + Δ2 +      2   + Δ2*time + εst,



This technique is designed to capture the impact of the portion of the actual policy measure that

is correlated with the instrument, and thus not correlated with the error term in the final equation.

There are potentially a number of instruments that might be used and there is no guarantee that

the results will always be the same for each instrument.

       Most of the studies in Table 7 show comparisons of the results with estimates of the raw

relationship between the policy and the outcome in the absence of any controls, as well as

estimates with the various controls included. In many cases, the inclusion of the controls reduces

the absolute value of the coefficient, suggesting that omitted variable bias is a problem when just

looking at raw correlations or graphs of the relationship between the outcome and policy

variable. In a number of cases, but not all, the use of IV estimation leads to stronger

relationships between the policy measure and the outcome that was disguised in the coefficient

estimates performed without instrumental variables.

       The studies of workers’ compensation, the first of the major social insurance programs

summarized in Table 7, show that the switch to workers’ compensation laws served to raise the

average amounts of post-accident compensation received by workers when they were injured.

The changes in liability rules and in the size of benefits were associated with reductions in non-

union hourly earnings in dangerous industries like coal mining and lumber. Unionized workers
                                                                                                 30



were more effective at staving off these reductions and thus gained more from the legislation.

The initial introduction of social insurance, however, did not always influence wages. When

unemployment insurance programs began paying benefits in the late 1930s, there is no sign that

hourly earnings adjusted downward (Balkan, 1998).

       The impact of workers’ compensation on accident rates was more complex and largely

determined by the relative costs of preventing accidents for workers and employers. Since

workers’ compensation insurance premiums were experience-rated, higher post-accident benefits

gave employers more incentive to prevent accidents while allowing workers to be less careful.

Panel data studies by several scholars show that workers’ compensation laws were associated

with higher accident rates in coal mining, where the costs to employers of preventing accidents

were high enough that they chose to pay higher premiums rather than incur the very high costs of

doing more to prevent accidents in each miner’s workplace deep in the mine. In manufacturing,

where employers had much more control over the conditions in the workplace, some studies

show a reduction in accident rates when workers’ compensation was introduced.

       When mothers’ pensions were introduced in many states, the opponents feared that the

provision of benefits to female-headed households might lead to higher divorce or separation

rates. The compromise solution in a number of the states was to limit payments to widowed

mothers. Carolyn Moehling has assessed the impact of mothers’ pension and ADC laws on

family formation using individual level data from the Census during several years. Her results

suggest that divorce rates and separation rates were higher in states with more generous mothers’

pension programs by 1920. She does not find the same kinds of effects for the years 1940,

1950, and 1960 after the Social Security Act established the federal matching programs for the

state ADC programs that replaced mothers’ pensions in the late 1930s. She does find a relatively
                                                                                                   31



strong positive relationship between family break-ups and ADC benefits for white women in

1970.

        The original state old-age assistance laws declared that one goal was to provide enough

benefits to the elderly to live on their own. Dora Costa (1999) has found that higher benefits

under the federal matching grant version of old-age assistance established under the Social

Security framework after 1935 allowed more women to live on their own. Work by Leora

Friedberg (1999) and Donald Parsons (1991) shows that OAA allowed a significant number of

elderly to stay out of the labor force.

        OAA did not have as many salutary effects on the mortality rates of the elderly. Even

though raw correlations suggest that the introduction of OAA was associated with lower death

rates among the elderly between 1930 and 1938, Stoian and Fishback (forthcoming 2010) find

that death rates fell as much or more in the same states for other age groups not eligible for

OAA. They suggest that OAA had little effect on death rates in the 1930s because it largely was

substituting for benefits through almshouses and other programs that the elderly were receiving

under the general poverty programs. Andreea Balan Cohen finds that OAA is associated with

lower death rates in the 1940s and 1950s in part because a broader range of the elderly received

benefits. In addition, new technologies like penicillin in the early 1940s meant that relatively

small increases in benefits in the 1940s and 1950s could be used to purchase much more

effective treatments of some mortal illnesses that had not been treatable in the 1930s.

        On the other hand, poverty relief programs in the 1920s and 1930s were more successful

at reducing death rates among the most vulnerable population in society, infants below the age of

one. Jonathan Fox (2009) finds that an additional $780,000 (in 2007$) of spending in cities on

poverty relief before the New Deal was associated with the reduction of one infant death. Public
                                                                                                32



health education programs were even more successful. Death rates for children older than one

were not influenced nearly as much by these programs. The federal government began offering

very large amounts of relief funds in 1933 that swamped the spending by state and local

governments before. Fishback, Haines and Kantor (2007) find that about $2 million (in 2000$)

in additional relief spending associated with reduction of one infant death, half a homicide, one

suicide, 2.4 deaths from infectious disease, one death from diarrhea in large urban areas between

1929 and 1940. Greater relief spending also gave families enough income to allow them to

return to more normal fertility rates.

       Relief spending also contributed to reductions in property crime rates. Shawn Kantor,

Ryan Johnson and Price Fishback (forthcoming) examine crime rates in 81 cities during the

1930s. They find that work relief poverty programs, like the WPA, served to reduce property

crime rates. A ten percent increase in spending on work relief was associated with a 1.5 percent

reduction in property crime. In most specifications the effect of relief payments without a work

requirement was smaller in part because people on direct relief were not having their hours

soaked up by a work requirement during the day. Relief spending was not as successful as

private employment in reducing property crime. The estimates suggest that a one percent decline

in employment in a city was associated with a one percent rise in property crime rates in the

1930s. The employment results are similar to findings in a study of the U.S. between 1979 and

1997 published by Steven Raphael and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer in the Journal of Law and

Economics in 2001.

       The federal government’s spending on emergency relief programs like the FERA and the

WPA during the 1930s led to complaints by some employers that they created disincentives for

workers to accept private employment, and thus work relief jobs in particular might crowd out
                                                                                                  33



private employment. The debate in the 1930s mirrored the long standing discussions of the

issue, which suggested that benefits for the unemployed provided an outside option that raised

unemployed workers’ reservation wage when seeking private employment. What was unusual in

the 1930s was that the unemployment rate was so high, over 20 percent in several years, that

there seemed to be plenty of unemployed workers to soak up before crowding out could occur.

        A series of labor market studies cited in Table 7 offer conflicting pictures of the impact of

relief programs on private employment in the 1930s. Studies of cross-sectional data using IV

estimation by Robert Fleck (1999) for county data in 1937 and 1940 and by John Wallis and

Daniel Benjamin (1981) using city data in 1934/1935 suggest that areas with higher relief

employment did not experience a reduction in private employment.

        On the other hand, studies using panel data sets, which allow the research to take

advantage of variation both across geographic areas and over time, find some degree of crowding

out that varies across time. In the early years of the decade when unemployment was at its peak

above 20 percent, Kent Matthews and Daniel Benjamin (1992) find that the addition of one work

relief job reduced private employment by about one-third of a job, while Todd Neumann, Price

Fishback, and Shawn Kantor (forthcoming 2010) find a slight positive effect of relief spending

on private employment. After 1935, when unemployment rates fell below 20 percent, both

studies find that an additional work relief job was associated with a reduction of up to nine/tenths

of a private job.

        The relief jobs may have helped workers in ways that, oddly enough, caused the official

measures of unemployment to rise. High unemployment rates often discourage workers from

seeking work. These discouraged workers are not considered unemployed under standard

definitions of unemployment, which require that someone be actively seeking work to be defined
                                                                                                  34



as unemployed. Meanwhile, during the 1930s relief workers were treated as unemployed in the

official statistics. As a result, when a relief job in the 1930s became available and was filled by a

discouraged worker, the number of unemployed in the official statistics rose by one. Hence we

see the odd effect that the creation of an additional relief job could make the official

unemployment statistics look worse during the 1930s.

       The impact of public works and relief programs extended well beyond the labor market.

An added dollar of public works and relief spending in a U.S. county was associated with an

increase in retail sales of roughly 40 cents (Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor 2005). Given typical

ratios of retail sales to income, this suggests that incomes in the county grew roughly 85 cents at

the mean when a dollar was added to public works and relief spending. Counties with greater

public works and relief spending appeared to be more attractive to workers, as these counties

experienced more in-migration during the 1930s (Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor, 2006;

Sorensen, Fishback, and Kantor 2008).


Summary

       Social welfare programs in the United States are designed to serve as safety nets for

people who hit hard times, which contrasts with the universal approach found in many other

developed western nations. Even though the focus is more on the safety net, modern U.S. public

social welfare spending per capita spending rivals the spending in other western countries in

comparisons based on purchasing power parity. Include private social welfare spending and the

U.S. ranks among the highest in the world in total per capita social welfare spending.

       The average for the U.S. disguises enormous variation in the extent of the programs

within across states within the United States. This variation arose in part because most public

social welfare programs were the responsibility of local and state governments until the New
                                                                                                    35



Deal programs were introduced during the Great Depression. Even after the federal government

became involved, many federal programs have left decisions about benefit levels and other

features in the hands of the states, after setting some base rules and offering matching grants.

Thus, there still remains extensive variation across states over time. For most types of programs,

the cross-state correlations of benefit levels at the end-points of a decade are relatively high,

although the strength of the correlation weakens as the interval between years compared rises.

There were some periods when federal intervention or threats of intervention led to a re-ordering

of benefit levels across states, including the New Deal’s impact on per capita relief spending

during the 1930s and the shifts in workers’ compensation benefits seen in the 1970s. The

patchwork nature of the safety net is illustrated best by the correlations of benefit levels for

different programs in the same year. The correlations are relatively low suggesting that benefit

generosity in one program was not tightly matched by generosity in other programs within the

same state. Analysis of the economic and political determinants of benefit levels suggests that

both economic and political factors influenced the process, although their importance varies from

program to program.

       All of the programs are designed to provide resources to people in dire straits. It seems

obvious that more resources makes the recipient better off in the short run; therefore, most of the

cliometric studies of the benefit programs have focused on the indirect and/or unintended

consequences of the programs. Wage reductions for nonunion workers were associated with

increases in workers’ compensation benefits in the early years although not with the introduction

of unemployment insurance programs in the late 1930s. The introduction of workers’

compensation had varied effects on accident rates that depended strongly on the costs to

employers of preventing accidents. Mothers’ pension programs contributed to an increase in
                                                                                                  36



separations and divorces when they were first introduced, but the matching-grant Aid to

Dependent Children programs that replaced mothers’ pensions in the 1930s showed little

relationship to breakups until after 1960. Old Age Assistance programs had little impact on

elderly death rates in the 1930s, in part because the elderly were being moved off of general

welfare rolls. By the 1940s when penicillin was introduced, the programs contributed to

reductions in death rates. The programs also allowed more elderly women to live on their own

and reduced the labor supply of the elderly in 1940 and 1950. Studies of a range of effects of

general relief and work relief programs in the 1920s and 1930s suggest that they contributed to

reduced death rates for infants and for specific types of diseases, lowered crime rates, increased

economic activity and stimulated in-migration into the counties with more spending.
                                                                                                                       37



                                                     Table 1
               The Presence of State Social Welfare Programs in the United States in the Early 1900s

                Workers Compensation              Mothers' Pension           Old-Age      Aid to the Unemployment
                                                                            Assistance      Blind      Insurance
State          Year Law      Year Added        Year           Year             Year        Making      Year of First
              Permanently       Some         Enacted if    Switched to       Enacted if     Cash       Payments to
                Enacted      Coverage of    before 1935      Aid to         before 1935   Payments     Unemployed
                             Occupational      when        Dependent       when Federal     as of
                               Disease      Federal Act     Children        Act Passed    August 1,
                                              Passed                                        1935
Alabama          1919            1951          1931            1936             ----         No            1938
Alaska           1915            1945          1917            1945            1915          No            1939
Arizona          1913            1943          1917            1936            1933          No            1938
Arkansas         1939            1940          1917            1936             ----        Yes            1939
California       1911            1915          1913            1936            1929         Yes            1938
Colorado         1915            1945          1912            1936            1927         Yes            1939
Connecticut      1913            1930          1919            1941             ----        Yes            1938
Delaware         1917            1937          1917            1936            1931          No            1939
Florida          1935            1945          1919            1938             ----         No            1939
Georgia          1920            1945           ----           1937             ----         No            1939
Hawaii           1915            1930          1919            1937            1933          no            1939
Idaho            1917            1939          1913            1936            1931          yes           1938
Illinois         1911            1930          1911            1941             ----         yes           1939
Indiana          1915            1937          1919            1936            1933          yes           1938
Iowa             1913            1947          1913            1943            1934          yes           1938
Kansas           1911            1953          1915            1937             ----         yes           1939
Kentucky         1916            1936          1928            1942            1926          yes           1939
                                                                   38



Louisiana        1914   1953   1920    1936    ----   yes   1938
Maine            1915   1945   1917    1936   1933    yes   1938
Maryland         1912   1939   1916    1936   1927    yes   1938
Massachusetts    1911   1930   1913    1936   1930    no    1938
Michigan         1912   1937   1913    1936   1933    no    1938
Minnesota        1913   1921   1913    1937   1929    yes   1938
Mississippi      1948   1962   1928    1941    ----   no    1938
Missouri         1926   1931   1917    1937    ----   yes   1939
Montana          1915   1953   1915    1937   1923    no    1939
Nebraska         1913   1935   1913    1936   1933    yes   1939
Nevada           1913   1947   1913    1955   1925    yes   1939
New              1911   1947   1913    1936   1931    yes   1938
Hampshire
New Jersey       1911   1929   1913    1936   1931    yes   1939
New Mexico       1917   1945   1931    1936    ----   no    1938
New York         1913   1920   1915    1937   1930    yes   1938
North Carolina   1929   1935   1923    1937    ----   no    1938
North Dakota     1919   1925   1915    1937   1933    no    1939
Ohio             1911   1929   1913    1936   1933    yes   1939
Oklahoma         1915   1953   1915    1936    ----   yes   1938
Oregon           1913   1943   1913    1937   1933    yes   1938
Pennsylvania     1915   1937   1913    1936   1934    yes   1938
Rhode Island     1912   1936   1923    1937    ----   no    1938
South Carolina   1935   1949    ----   1937    ----   no    1938
South Dakota     1917   1947   1913    1940    ----   no    1939
Tennessee        1919   1947   1915    1937    ----   no    1938
                                                                                                                                   39



Texas                   1913             1947           1917             1941              ----          no             1938
Utah                    1917             1941           1913             1936             1929           yes            1938
Vermont                 1915             1951           1917             1936              ----          no             1938
Virginia                1918             1944           1918             1938              ----          no             1938
Washington              1911             1937           1913             1936             1933           yes            1939
West Virginia           1913             1935           1915             1936             1931           no             1938
Wisconsin               1911             1929           1913             1936             1925           yes            1936
Wyoming                 1915             1966           1915             1936             1929           yes            1939



Sources: See Fishback and Thomasson (2006, 2-709). Workers' Compensation Laws: See Fishback and Kantor (2000) for date of
initial enactment. See Balkan (1998, 64) and Allen (2004, 170-1) for the dates in which occupational diseases were covered. The date
of initial enactment of the workers’ compensation law listed above is the date at which a permanent law was enacted. New York
passed a compulsory law in 1910 and an elective law in 1910, but the compulsory law was declared unconstitutional, and the elective
law saw little use. New York passed a compulsory law in 1913 after passing a constitutional amendment. The Kentucky law of 1914
was declared unconstitutional and was replaced by a law in 1916. The Missouri General Assembly passed a workers’ compensation
law in 1919, but it failed to receive enough votes in a referendum in 1920. Another law passed in 1921 was defeated in a referendum
in 1922 and an initiative on the ballot was again defeated in 1924. Missouri voters finally approved a workers’ compensation law in a
1926 referendum on a 1925 legislative act (see Kantor and Fishback 1994). Maryland (1902) and Montana (1909) passed earlier laws
specific to miners that were declared unconstitutional.

Mothers’ pension laws: For laws enacted prior to 1920, see Thompson, 1919, pp. 7-11 and for laws enacted after 1920 see Theda
Skocpol (1992, p. 457). In the states of Missouri (1911), (California pre1913), Wisconsin (1912), Michigan (1911), and Oklahoma
(1908) there were state provisions that provided funds similar to mothers’ pensions in indirect ways. Some of the provisions were
limited to specific cities and others were indirect means of providing funds to dependent children. Arizona in a 1914 referendum
passed a mothers’ pension and old-age pension system that hinged on the abolishment of the almshouses in the state, but it was found
unconstitutional (Thompson, 1919, pp. 7-9). More detail on the specifics of mothers’ pension laws as of 1934 are available in Stevens
1970, pp. 28-29 and Committee on Economic Security 1937, pp. 233-249). Carolyn Moehling provided information on the year in
which the state switched to an aid to dependent children program that was eligible for matching grants under the Social Security Act.
                                                                                                                                   40



Old-Age Pensions: See Stevens, 1970, 20-24 and Committee on Economic Security, 1937, pp. 160-71. Arizona set up an old-age
pension subject to the elimination of almshouses in a referendum in 1915, but the pension was declared unconstitutional.
Pennsylvania passed an old-age pension law in 1923 that was declared unconstitutional in 1924. Nevada also passed an act in 1923
that was replaced by the 1925 act listed above. Information contained there also offers more detailed descriptions of the laws.

Aid to the Blind: See “Public Provision for Pensions for the Blind in 1934,” Monthly Labor Review 41 (3) (September 1935), pp.
584-601; reprinted in Stevens, 1970, 29-31.

Year of First Payment of Unemployment Insurance Benefits to the Unemployed: Balkan (1998, 75).
                                                                                               41



                                             Table 2


 Elasticities from Regressions of the Natural Log of Per Capita Relief Spending in City (1967$)
  in Year t on the Natural Log of Per Capita Relief Spending in 1923 and Change in Log State
                       Manufacturing Employment from 1923 to Year t.
                              (t-statistics below each coefficient)
                                                              ln(per capita poor
                                                                  relief) fsc
                                                             1929        1931
Natural Log of Per Capita Poor Relief in City in 1923         0.9306      0.948
                                                                22.98      16.62
Change in Natural log of state manufacturing                  -1.482       -2.52
employment from 1923 to year                                     -2.31      -2.53
Constant                                                      0.2644     0.3705
                                                                   4.5       1.16
R-squared                                                      0.817        0.68
Number of Observations                                            167        147



Sources: Manufacturing employment from U.S. Bureau of Census (Manufacturing Censuses),
1929 and 1931; city per capita poor relief from U.S. Bureau of the Census Financial Statistics of
Cities (1925c, 1932).
                                                                                              42



                                             Table 3
 Elasticities from Regressions of the Natural Log of Per Capita Relief Spending in City (1990$)
  in 1939 on the Natural Log of Per Capita Relief Spending in 1931 and Change in Log State
                        Manufacturing Employment from 1931 to 1939.

                                                     Elasticity
                                                      t-statistic
 Per Capita Public Relief in 1931 in 1990$                    0.17
                                                               6.14
 Change in Natural Log of State Manufacturing                -1.11
 Employment, 1939-1931                                        -4.60
 Constant                                                     4.89
                                                              47.26



Sources: Manufacturing employment from U.S. Bureau of Census (Manufacturing Censuses),
1929 and 1931; City per capita poor relief in nominal terms from Baird (1942). They are
adjusted to 1990 dollars using the 1967 CPI from U.S. Bureau of the Census 1975, series E-135,
p. 211 and then multiplying by 3.91, which is the CPI conversion factor for 1967 dollars to 1990
dollars from Officer and Williamson’s Measuring Wealth website.
                                                                                                43



                                         Table 4
 Cross-State Correlations of Maximum Benefits from Income Maintenance Programs Between
                                     Different Years

         Maximum Weekly Unemployment Payments in 1967 Dollars
             1940    1950     1960     1970      1980      1990            2000
  1940          1
  1950     0.1069       1
  1960     0.3534  0.4201        1
  1970     0.0462  0.4291    0.534        1
  1980      0.078   0.375   0.2474   0.4323         1
  1990     -0.022   0.448   0.2485   0.5169    0.6552         1
  2000    -0.1714   0.501   0.2898   0.4383    0.5141    0.8037               1

         Workers' Compensation Expected Benefits
             1930      1940      1950      1960       1970      1980       1990      2000
  1930           1
  1940     0.9203         1
  1950     0.7834    0.7658         1
  1960     0.6761    0.6551     0.913          1
  1970     0.5833     0.598    0.7968    0.8552           1
  1980     0.2724    0.2903    0.3632    0.4235      0.5045         1
  1990     0.2758    0.3118    0.3876    0.4044      0.4683    0.8441         1
  2000     0.2624    0.2824    0.4046    0.3926       0.426     0.624    0.6868         1

         Mothers’ Pension (1919)/Aid to Dependent Children (1940-1960)/Aid to Families
         With Dependent Children (1970-1990)/Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
         (2000)
              1919      1940      1950      1960      1970       1980      1990      2000
  1919           1
  1940      0.4074          1
  1950      0.3618    0.3416          1
  1960      0.1769    0.2935    0.7624         1
  1970     -0.0199    0.3382    0.4965    0.6963          1
  1980      0.1335    0.5034    0.3832    0.6425    0.9079          1
  1990       0.224    0.4773    0.2367    0.4802    0.8697     0.9383          1
  2000       0.206    0.4437     0.199    0.4551    0.8135     0.8849    0.9577         1


Sources: Workers’ compensation expected benefits are from data set created by Samuel Allen
and described in Allen (2004, 2009). Weekly maximums for unemployment are Moehling from
Moffitt, Green Book, Allen 2004, 2009. The 1919 figures for mother’s pensions are from
Moehling (2007). For states with no maximum we chose a value that exceeded the highest
maximum in the rest of the states. In all cases states with no law were treated as missing values.
The values for Aid to Dependent Children in 1940 are the actual maximum paid by the state to a
                                                                                          44



family of four from data used by Carolyn Moehling (2006, 2007). States that had not yet
switched to aid to dependent children were treated as missing in 1940.
                                                                                           45



                                           Table 5
               Correlations Across States Between Programs in Various Years

                                  1940
                                                          Aid to                    Average
                            Workers'      Unemployment    Dependent     Personal    Weekly
                            Comp.         Insurance       Children      Income      Earnings
Workers' Compensation                 1
Unemployment Insurance           0.0259               1
Aid to Dependent Children        0.0867          0.1282             1
Personal Income                  0.1881          0.0871        0.5891           1
Average Weekly Earnings          0.3692          0.1505        0.5623      0.7966          1

                                  1950
                                                          Aid to                    Average
                            Workers'      Unemployment    Dependent     Personal    Weekly
                            Comp.         Insurance       Children      Income      Earnings
Workers' Compensation                 1
Unemployment Insurance          -0.0007               1
Aid to Dependent Children        0.2521           0.047             1
Personal Income                  0.2305          0.1286        0.7052           1
Average Weekly Earnings          0.3925          0.1888        0.7462      0.7331          1

                                  1960
                                                          Aid to                    Average
                            Workers'      Unemployment    Dependent     Personal    Weekly
                            Comp.         Insurance       Children      Income      Earnings
Workers' Compensation                 1
Unemployment Insurance           0.2953               1
Aid to Dependent Children        0.5498          0.5682             1
Personal Income                  0.4184          0.4233        0.6805           1
Average Weekly Earnings          0.2026          0.3638        0.3701      0.2777          1

                                  1970
                                                          Aid to                    Average
                            Workers'      Unemployment    Dependent     Personal    Weekly
                            Comp.         Insurance       Children      Income      Earnings
Workers' Compensation                 1
Unemployment Insurance           0.4044               1
Aid to Dependent Children        0.3636          0.4884             1
Personal Income                  0.4924           0.569        0.6258           1
Average Weekly Earnings          0.2881          0.1462        0.4145      0.6194          1

                                  1980
                                                                                            46



                                                          Aid to                     Average
                            Workers'      Unemployment    Dependent      Personal    Weekly
                            Comp.         Insurance       Children       Income      Earnings
Workers' Compensation                 1
Unemployment Insurance           0.4376               1
Aid to Dependent Children         0.382          0.3345              1
Personal Income                  0.4336           0.148         0.6173           1
Average Weekly Earnings          0.3602          0.0979         0.3653       0.528          1

                                  1990
                                                                         Aid to
                            Workers'      Unemployment                   Dependent Personal
                            Comp.         Insurance       SSI            Children  Income
Workers' Compensation                 1
Unemployment Insurance           0.4187               1
SSI                              0.0816          0.2265              1
Aid to Dependent Children        0.2753           0.407         0.7096           1
Personal Income                  0.3584          0.4883         0.5741      0.6883          1
Average Weekly Earnings          0.3688          0.3243         0.3575      0.4819      0.487

                                  2000
                                                                         Aid to
                            Workers'      Unemployment                   Dependent Personal
                            Comp.         Insurance       SSI            Children  Income
Workers' Compensation                 1
Unemployment Insurance           0.3079               1
SSI                              0.0431          0.1672              1
Aid to Dependent Children         0.275          0.3572          0.691           1
Personal Income                  0.1388          0.5258         0.4743      0.4838          1
Average Weekly Earnings          0.1619          0.3055         0.0872      0.1507     0.4147

Sources: See Table 4.
                                                                                                                                                             47



                                                             Table 6
Regressions of the Natural Log of Benefit Levels in Census Years on Decade-Long Averages of Income and Political Variables With
                                           and Without Fixed Effects and Time Trends


                                              Expected Workers'                Maximum Weekly UI Benefit              Maximum ADC Benefit Base
                                             Compensation Benefit
Decade Averages
Percent Voting Democrat for President    0.004        0.011        0.010        0.004        0.003        0.000        0.014        0.000        -0.012
                                              2.14         7.09         4.82         3.51         2.03         -0.1        4.28          0.03     -2.36
Percent Voting for a Presidential        0.002        0.007        0.003        0.002        0.002        -0.002      -0.001        0.000        -0.012
Candidate outside the Major Parties           0.97          3.2          1.2         1.02         1.17     -0.87           -0.37         -0.1     -1.56
Democrats control Governor and Both      0.081        0.072        0.032        0.014        0.055        0.008        0.104        -0.040       -0.083
Houses of State Legislatures                  1.07         1.26         0.56         0.32         1.35         0.18        0.94      -0.62        -1.37
Democrats control Governor and Both     -0.254        -0.229       -0.106       -0.060       -0.070       -0.007      -0.764        0.092        0.175
Houses of State Legislatures in South         -3.7     -2.51        -1.04           -1.46           -1     -0.07           -5.76         0.86         1.83
Republican Control of Governor and      -0.243        0.037        -0.066       -0.063       0.029        0.009        0.160        -0.030       -0.033
Both Houses of State Legislature              -3.5          0.6     -1.08           -1.34         0.57         0.16        1.48      -0.45        -0.57
Years in which Both Houses of State     -0.025        0.087        -0.037       0.368        0.192        0.271        1.124        -0.146       0.175
Legislature Shifts                           -0.09         0.48     -0.16            2.14         1.26         1.54        2.17      -0.53            0.77
Natural Log of Per Capita State          0.777        0.186        -0.429       0.336        -0.040       0.023       -0.604        0.001        0.144
Personal Income in $1967                     23.91         1.68     -2.02           13.29     -0.47             0.2        -5.54           0          0.43
Year Fixed Effects                      No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes
State Fixed Effects                     No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes
State Time Trends                       No           No           Yes          No           No           Yes          No           No           Yes

Notes and Sources: Dependent variables are in natural logs and come from sources in Table 4. Decade-long averages of state per
capita income were calculated with data collected by Samuel Allen (2009).
                                                                                                                                           48



Table 7
Results of Cliometric Studies of Impact of Social Welfare Programs during the Period 1900 to 1950

Program                 Citation              Effect                            Data                      Method
Workers'                Fishback and Kantor   Wages: Higher workers'            Panel: Annual state       Controls plus state, year, and
Compensation, 1907-     (1995)                compensation expected benefits    averages for              occupation fixed effects with
1923                                          associated with lower wages for   occupations 1907-1923     proxy measure of WC Benefits
                                              nonunion workers but not union                              to control for endogeneity
                                              workers.
Workers'                Balkan (1998)         Wage Rates: Workers'              Unbalanced panel of       Correlates and state and year
Compensation, 1930s                           compensation was associated       hourly earnings for 72    fixed effects. Lagged proxy of
                                              with lower wages                  industries in 48 states   workers' compensation benefit.
                                                                                for years 1933, 1935,
                                                                                1937, and 1939
Workers'                Fishback and Kantor   Savings: Higher workers'          Cross Section of          Control for income, family
Compensation, 1917-     (1996)                compensation expected benefits    individual working        structure, age, accident risk.
1919                                          associated with reduced           class families, 1917-     Measure of Expected Benefit
                                              savings.                          1919                      used workers' actual wage.
Unemployment            Balkan (1998)         Wages: Introduction of            Unbalanced panel of       Correlates and state and year
Insurance, 1930s                              Unemployment Insurance in         hourly earnings for 72    fixed effects. Lagged measure
                                              late 1930s had little impact on   industries in 48 states   of UI maximum paid for
                                              wages                             for years 1933, 1935,     maximum duration.
                                                                                1937, and 1939
Workers'                Fishback (1987)       Accident Rates: Introduction      Panel: Annual state       Controls for mine inspections,
Compensation, 1903-                           of workers' compensation laws     averages for coal         coal mining activity, technology,
1930                                          associated with higher fatal      industry, 1903-1930       unions, mine size.
                                              accident rates in the coal
                                              industry.
                                                                                                                                          49



Workers'              Chelius (1977)    Accident Rates: Introduction       Panel: 26 states from      State fixed effects plus controls
Compensation, 1900-                     of workers' compensation law       1900 to 1940               for state inspections
1940                                    associated with fall in nonfatal
                                        machinery accident rates per
                                        member of labor force.
Workers'              Buffum (1992)     Accident Rates: Introduction       Panel: 26 states from      Controls for factory inspection
Compensation, 1900-                     of workers' compensation           1900 to 1940               spending and various measures
1940                                    associated with lower nonfatal                                of structures of industry
                                        machinery accident rates.
Workers'              Buffum (1992)     Accident Rates: Fatal              Panel 8 states from        Controls for factory inspection
Compensation, 1900-                     industrial accidents per 100,000   1900 to 1940               spending and various measures
1940                                    workers rise in workers'                                      of structures of industry
                                        compensation states.
Workers'              Buffum (1992)     Accident Rates: Fatal accident     Panel of 24 coal mining    State effects and variety of
Compensation, 1900-                     rate in bituminous coal mining     states, 1900-1930          controls.
1930                                    higher in workers'
                                        compensation states.
Mother's Pensions     Moehling (2007)   Family Structure: More             Pooled Individual data     Equivalent of state and year
(precursor of ADC),                     generous Mothers' pensions         of different people from   fixed effects with controls for
1910-1920                               associated with increases in       1910 and 1920 census       many correlates.
                                        divorces and separations.          from 48 states.
                                        States that extended eligibility
                                        to mothers other than widows
                                        experienced increases in births
                                        to single mothers.

Aid to Dependent      Moehling (2007)   Family Structure: ADC              Individual cross-          Controls for individual
Children, 1940-1970                     benefits not associated with       sections from 1940,        characteristics and state-level
                                        more single motherhood for         1950, 1960, and 1970       economic factors.
                                        blacks in years 1940-1970 or       from census.
                                        for whites 1940-1960. Positive
                                        elasticity of 0.23 to 0.37 for
                                        whites in 1970.
                                                                                                                                                50



Old Age Assistance,   Costa (1999)          Family Structure: Elderly            Pooled Cross-Sections      Controls for individual
1940 and 1950                               women more likely to live on         of Different Individuals   characteristics, state and region
                                            own.                                 from Census, 1940 and      fixed or random effects,
                                                                                 1950                       differencing between eligible
                                                                                                            and noneligible populations.
Old Age Assistance,   Friedberg (1999)      Labor Force Participation:           Pooled Cross-Sections      Probit with controls for
1940 and 1950                               Higher Old Age Assistance            of Different Individuals   individual characteristics and
                                            Benefits lowered Labor Force         from Census, 1940 and      state economic conditions with
                                            Participation Among the              1950                       state and year fixed effects.
                                            Elderly                                                         Additional regressions to show
                                                                                                            no effect for people not eligible
                                                                                                            for program
Old Age Assistance,   Parsons (1991)        Labor Force Participation:           Panel of State             Pooled regressions with controls
1930-1950                                   OAA benefits account for about       Averages, 1930, 1940,      and with random effects.
                                            half of the decline in the elderly   and 1950
                                            work force between 1930 and
                                            1950
Old Age Assistance,   Balaan Cohen (2009)   Death Rates of Elderly: Old          Pane: Annual               State and year fixed effects and
1934-1955                                   Age Assistance reduced several       Averages for 48 states,    state specific time trends with
                                            types of mortality after 1940        1934-1955; 1937-1955;      instrument for Old-Age
                                            but not before.                      1940-1955                  Assistance variable, plus
                                                                                                            regression to show no effects for
                                                                                                            people not eligible for program
Old Age Assistance,   Stoian and Fishback   Death Rates of Elderly: Old          Panel: Annual              Difference between eligible and
1930-1938             (forthcoming)         Age Assistance did not reduce        averages for 75 cities,    non-eligible age groups with city
                                            elderly death rates                  1930-1940                  and year fixed effects and
                                                                                                            instrument for Old Age
                                                                                                            Assistance variable
                                                                                                                                          51



Local Public Aid to   Fox (2009)           Infant and Child Death Rates:      Panel: Annual              Controls for city characteristics,
Poor, 1923-1932                            About $781,000 (in 2007$) of       averages for 67 cities,    city and year fixed effects, city-
                                           poverty relief associated with     1923-1932                  specific time trends.
                                           reduction of one infant death in
                                           fixed effects estimates. Effect
                                           reduced by city-specific time
                                           trends. No effect on children of
                                           other ages.

New Deal Relief       Fishback, Haines,    Death and Birth Rates: About       Panel: Annual              Controls for city characteristics,
Spending, 1929-1940   and Kantor (2007)    $2 million (in 2000$) in           averages for 114 cities,   city and year fixed effects,
                                           additional relief spending         1929-1940                  instruments.
                                           associated with reduction of
                                           one infant death, half a
                                           homicide, one suicide, 2.4
                                           deaths from infectious disease,
                                           one death from diarrhea. A
                                           one-standard deviation increase
                                           in relief spending associated
                                           with 0.82 standard deviation
                                           rise in general fertility rate

New Deal Relief       Johnson, Fishback,   Crime Rates: Ten percent rise      Panel: Annual              Controls for city characteristics,
Spending, 1930-1940   and Kantor           in work relief spending            averages for 81 large      city and year fixed effects, city-
                      (forthcoming)        associated with 1.5 percent        cities, 1930-1940          specific time trends, and
                                           reduction in property crime                                   instruments.
                                           rate. Smaller effect of direct
                                           relief spending.
New Deal Emergency    Fleck (1999)         Private Employment:                Separate Cross Sections    Large number of correlates and
Relief Employment,                         Increase of one emergency          of County Averages in      instrument for relief jobs.
1937, 1940                                 relief job associated with an      1937 and again in 1940
                                           increase in measured
                                           unemployed but little effect on
                                           private employment
                                                                                                                                              52



New Deal Federal         Wallis and Benjamin   Private Employment: Little or      Cross Section of 52       In wage equation correlates for
Emergency Relief         (1981)                no effect of FERA cases per        cities in fiscal year,    aggregated demand and prior
Administration                                 capita spending on private         1934-1935                 wages. In case equation
Employment, 1935                               monthly wages. Little effect of                              correlates and instruments for
                                               FERA average benefits on                                     FERA benefit levels.
                                               FERA caseloads.
New Deal Relief          Neumann, Fishback,    Private Employment: Positive       Panel of monthly          Panel VAR with differencing
spending, 1932-1940      and Kantor (2010      effect of relief spending on       averages from January     and controls for serial
                         forthcoming)          private employment prior to        1933 through              correlation. No endogeneity if
                                               1936. Negative effect of relief    December 1939 for 44      there is a one-month or more lag
                                               spending on private                major cities.             in effects of each variable on
                                               employment after 1936.                                       other variables.
Relief Spending, 1930s   Matthews and          Private Employment: An             Panel of annual state     Pooled regressions with controls
                         Benjamin (1992)       additional New Deal relief job     averages, 1932            and instruments
                                               crowded out about one-third of     Through 1939
                                               a private job in 1933 and about
                                               nine/tenths of a private job in
                                               1939
New Deal Relief and      Fishback, Horrace,    Retail Sales: Dollar increase of   Cross-section of          Large number of correlates and
Public Works             and Kantor (2005)     public works and relief            Growth rates for U.S.     instrument for public works and
Spending, 1933-1939                            spending per capita associated     Counties, 1929-1939,      relief.
                                               with rise in retail sales per      1929-1935, 1933-1939
                                               capita of roughly 40 cents.
New Deal Relief and      Fishback, Horrace,    Net Migration: Increase in         Cross-section of county   Large number of correlates and
Public Works             and Kantor (2006)     public works and relief            averages during 1930s.    instrument for public works and
Spending, 1933-1939                            spending leads to increase in                                relief.
                                               net migration.
New Deal Relief and      Sorensen, Fishback,   Internal Migration: Public         Cross-section of 460      Several correlates and
Public Works             and Kantor (2009      works and relief spending led to   state economic areas,     instrument for public works and
Spending, 1933-1939                            15 percent more internal           1935-1940                 relief in a structural choice
                                               migration within the U.S.                                    model.
                                                                                                                             53



New Deal Relief   Hungerman and   Private Charitable Spending:      Panel of annual state    State and year fixed effects,
Spending          Gruber (2008)   An additional dollar of New       averages, 1933 through   region-specific time trends,
                                  Deal spending reduced church      1939.                    instruments
                                  charitable spending by about 29
                                  percent of the maximum it
                                  could have reduced it.
                                                                                                                                      54



                                        Figure 1
Per Capita Government Cost Payments on Hospitals by Cities and States in U.S, 1923 and 1930
(State Abbreviations)


                                   70

                                                                                                                       mi
                                   60                                                                   ny
1930 Per Cap. Govt. Cost Payment




                                                                                                        ma ma
                                                                                                      nj
                                   50                                                                 ma
                                                                                                     ma
                                                                                                     nj
                                                                                 mi                               tx
                                                                                                   ny
                                   40                                                                        ma
                                                                                      ny       ny
                                                                                                mi      ga
                                                                                    ga ma
                                                                                       ma
                                   30             ne                  ny nyny            il
                                                                            ny flcanjoh ga
                                                                    cony wiminy  mo ca mo
                                                                                   oh
                                                                                    ny
                                                                              pa
                                                                              ma
                                                                               nyn y   mi
                                                                              md
                                                                              ma   ma
                                   20                             ny ok    in ma
                                                                               mn
                                                                               ma
                                                                               ma
                                                                            njga tn
                                                                                ma
                                                                               ma
                                                 pa               nyoh
                                                                 mi    ct ri va
                                                                              ma
                                                                               ma
                                                            nj nyny
                                                                  nynymi
                                                                   oh
                                                                   wa
                                                                  nj
                                                                   ri
                                                                    nh   ny tn tn nc
                                                                             sc
                                                                    mn
                                                                  njil ct tx
                                              tx arortn rinj      ky
                                                           njde
                                                            va
                                                            tx
                                                            oh
                                                           njnj
                                                             lami
                                                               nj
                                                               miia
                                                               miia   ct ct ia
                                                                  mictct
                                                 co
                                                  oh
                                                   tx nj me
                                                          la  cami ca                         la
                                   10            va al
                                                   ohwa
                                                         pa
                                                        wi
                                                        nj
                                                        oh
                                                       mn
                                                        ky
                                                        oh
                                                            pa
                                                            fl
                                                           nc in
                                                             ca caca
                                                               ca
                                                              ca
                                                        ilil ca
                                                        in
                                                vane
                                                 ok
                                                  pa  floh
                                                     in
                                                     in
                                             wvga
                                              txva
                                               wi pa
                                                 va
                                                 pa
                                                tx
                                                moohwa
                                                    pa
                                                    ohmt
                                             wvmo
                                               tx
                                               ut scka
                                                    ka     nc
                                             wv
                                            al
                                            txnc
                                               ky
                                              ut tx
                                            al
                                   0
                                        0                   10                     20         30         40       50        60   70
                                                                                    1923 Per Cap. Govt. Cost Payment


Sources: Estimates for U.S. cities are the sum of per capita spending on hospitals in the city plus
per capita spending on hospitals for the state in 1923 and 1930 from the U.S. Bureau of the
Census’s Financial Statistics of Cities and Financial Statistics of States for 1923 and 1930 (U.S.
Bureau of the Census 1925c, 1925s, 1932c, 1932s). The 1923 and 1930 values for the U.S. cities
were adjusted to 1990 dollars using the CPI comparisons at Officer and Williamson’s Measuring
Worth website. We did not include spending on hospitals listed as transfers from state
government to other governments to avoid double-counting if such state spending might have
been used to fund city spending. County government spending is missing.
                                                                                                                                            55



                                                                 Figure 2
                         Rough Estimates of Per Capita Government Cost Payments on Poverty and Unemployment
                         Relief in 1923 and 1930 by State and City Governments in 244 U.S. Cities in 1990 Dollars
                               60
                                                                                                                  ma

                                                                                                          ma ma

                               50
                                                                                                     ma
                                                                                              ma
                                                                                             ma
                                                                                              ma
                                                                                   ma
1930 Per Capita Relief




                                                                             miny     ma
                                                                                      ny
                               40                                                  ny
                                                                                             ma

                                                                                ma me  ma
                                               mi                                 ma     ma
                                                                               me         ma
                                                                            ny
                                                                           nyma       ma
                                                                                      ma
                               30                                                                   ma ma
                                                                              nj nj            ny
                                                                     mi           wi nj
                                                                wi                  ct ny
                                                                                    ma
                                                                                ca         ca
                               20                         wi        ri           ma         ct ny
                                                                       ri      ma pama
                                                    ky               ny     ctnj ct ma
                                                          ny           oh                     ma
                                                                          rinjny ctco
                                                                       njny
                                                                        ny
                                                  oh            ny ctsc
                                                          miny miva                    nyny
                                       orka mi                  njilwi
                                                               mn
                                                                wi     ny
                               10    patx     ny ohmi
                                                           pa
                                                            wa
                                                            oh   njmo
                                                              panj
                                                                nj      wi
                                                tnminh     mi va
                                                             in
                                                             nj
                                                             kynjmo ny
                                      mioh           oh oh
                                                       md ca
                                                         mi
                                                         ca    oh mo
                                                              mi
                                                           njmn
                                                    flsc
                                                   wi
                                                  oh
                                                   va  ga
                                                        mtva
                                     gaoh
                                      panc
                                       de
                                      pa   va
                                           ca   tn
                                                va
                                                ohohga
                                                     m oh
                                                       co
                                                      ok nok
                                     pa
                                     paoh
                                       ga
                                      pa
                                      tn
                                      ga  tn  wi
                                              txtxla
                                                  ilwv
                                                     in
                                                    pa
                                                    nc
                                                   la
                                                  alin  ca
                                                       tx ka
                                                          ia
                                                         ia mo
                                                           ia
                                                          ia
                                      ca
                                      wa
                                      ka
                                      ca
                                      tx
                                     ar
                                     wv
                                     ca  ilne
                                        in
                                       tx
                                      ne
                                     wa
                                     ky  mi
                                        nc iliflwv
                                          tx
                                       fltx
                                        in ok
                                          ilil   liluttxla
                                                tx
                                           iililn
                                           al   in
                                                ut       nc
                                                         ia
                                     al
                                0
                                    0                            10                             20             30            40   50   60
                                                                                                      1923 Per Capita Relief


Sources: Estimates for U.S. cities are the sum of per capita spending in the city plus per capita
spending for the state in 1923 and 1930 from the U.S. Bureau of the Census’s Financial
Statistics of Cities and Financial Statistics of States for 1923 and 1930 (U.S. Bureau of the
Census 1925c, 1925s, 1932c, 1932s). The 1923 and 1930 values for the U.S. cities were adjusted
to 1990 dollars using the CPI comparisons at Officer and Williamson’s Measuring Worth
website. The per capita city spending includes governmental cost payments by the city
government on outdoor poor relief, poor institutions, care of children, other charities, and
mothers’ pensions. The state per capita spending includes governmental cost payments for
outdoor poor relief, state poor institutions care of children in state institutions, care of blind,
deaf, and mute in state institutions, other charities in state institutions, relief to mothers and relief
to all others. We did not include spending on poor institutions all other, care of children all
other, care of blind, deaf and mute all other, and other charities all other to avoid double-
counting if such state spending might have been used to fund city spending. Inclusion of this
spending changes the positions in the figure only slightly. County government spending is
missing.
                                                                                                                    56



                                        Figure 3
Per Capita Government Direct and Work Relief Spending in 114 U.S. cities in 1931 and 1939 in
                                      1990 Dollars


                                         mn ma
                         400       in                         ma
                                                   ma
                                                   wi
                                   paoh
                                            oh
                         350        oh
                                    pa
                                                 nj
                                           in        ma
                                       mn        ca wi ma
                                     mn ca      ny ma
                         300      paia               mama
                                                      ma
1939 Per Capita Relief




                                   wa          mi
                                   pailpa
                                       il ca             wi
                                        oh
                                        pa                         ny
                         250    lane
                                   copa mama mi
                                kaohwi    in ca
                                              ny
                                    utiaohoh          ny
                               mo         oh in
                               wvoh              orct    ny
                                   fl        mi
                         200        wany  cany
                                     painrinj nj
                                 mopa              ct
                                                  mi  ct
                               scka
                                  tx                  ny
                                ga       ma  mi   ct
                                  al ka      me
                         150   nc
                               ok
                                           ny
                                 de
                                 pa
                               tx
                                nc
                               al
                               md
                               tn
                         100     txky
                                 va
                               vafl
                                tx
                               nc
                               txnc
                               va
                          50   la


                           0
                               0                 50                100   150      200      250    300   350   400
                                                                         1931 Per Capita Relief

Source and notes. Data are from Baird (1942). They are adjusted to 1990 dollars using the 1967
CPI from U.S. Bureau of the Census 1975, series E-135, p. 211 and then multiplying by 3.91,
which is the CPI conversion factor for 1967 dollars to 1990 dollars from Officer and
Williamson’s Measuring Wealth website. Per capita relief spending includes spending from
federal, state, and local sources. It includes direct relief payments, work relief payments, and
public assistance through old-age assistance, aid-to-the-blind, and aid to dependent child
(mothers’ pensions).
                                                                                                                                        57



                                                     Figure 4a
               Ratio of Expected Workers’ Compensation Benefits to Annual Manufacturing Earnings for
              Typical Worker Paid National Average Manufacturing Wage with Three Dependents by State,
                                                   1940 and 1970


                              .9

                              .8                                                    OR

                                                                                                          AZ
                              .7
WC Benefit/Annual Wage 1970




                                                            CT
                                                                                                     NY
                              .6
                                                                                               WI    NV
                                                               ME NJ
                                                                               ND
                              .5
                                                                RI PA
                                                     VT           MI
                                                                     MD         WA
                                                                        IL
                              .4                                       MNMT
                                                     NH                CA       WV
                                                          IN   MA                 MO
                              .3                    CO    DE         OH        WY
                                                         NM
                                                     SDTN
                                                        VA  KYUTNC
                                                             NE
                                                              LA
                                                              FL  TX
                                                                   AL
                                                    GA IA KS      ID
                                                                 SC
                              .2                    OK



                              .1

                              0
                                   0   .1    .2          .3     .4       .5     .6                    .7            .8        .9
                                                        WC Benefit/Annual Wage 1940



                                                                         Figure 4b
                                                                       1970 and 2000
                              .9
                                                                                                                    OR
                                                          WY
                                                          DE
                              .8                   KY                RI
                                                                  MDVT
                                                                    PA
                                                  TX            WA                              NY
                                             OK IA
                                                 NE OHMOWV                           NDNJNV
                                                  UT                                      WI          CT AZ
                              .7                   SD CO      AR IL
WC Benefit/Annual Wage 1900




                                                             MT
                                                         NH
                                                 LA
                                                GA          MN
                              .6
                                                                                       ME
                                                      NM                  MI
                                                   SC NC
                                                     TN        IN
                                                    AL
                                                    VA
                              .5                  KS            CA
                                                   ID
                                                               MA
                                                   FL
                              .4
                                              MS

                              .3

                              .2

                              .1

                               0
                                   0    .1    .2           .3     .4       .5     .6                           .7        .8        .9
                                                          WC Benefit/Annual Wage 1970
                                                                                                 58




Source: Source: See Allen (2009, 2004). The average expected benefit as a share of annual
manufacturing earnings shows the typical workers’ compensation payments for different types of
injuries weighted by the probability of the accident in 1940 divided by a measure of the national
average wage. The ratio here is for a worker with the national average weekly earnings. State
workers’ compensation benefits are calculated based on the workers average earnings, the extent
of the injury, and waiting periods. Payouts for different types of injuries turn out to vary in ways
across states that do not lead to especially high correlations across types of accidents. As a
result, Samuel Allen (2009, 2004) and Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor (2000) developed a
comprehensive expected benefits measure for workers’ compensation based on the discounted
present value at the time of the accident of the typical stream of workers’ compensation benefits
for four types of accidents: temporary total disability that lasts five weeks, a permanent partial
disability of the loss of a hand (adjusted downward because most permanent partial disabilities
are less severe), permanent total disability, and death). The discount rate for the present value is
assumed to be 5 percent, which has been a typical discount rate chosen when states paid out
lump sums. The “typical” worker was assumed to be a married man with a wife and two
children ages 8 and 10, and he was earning the national average in the year. The present values
of the payout are then weighted by the probability of each type of accident in 1940. This
expected benefit is then reported as a percentage of the annual earnings someone would receive
earning the national weekly wage for the year. The goal in the measure is to show how the
expected benefits as a share of the wage change across time and place based on the parameters in
the law. Had we allowed the accident rates used to weight the payments for each type of injury
to vary across years, the expected benefit ratio would have trended downward because accident
rates trended downward over the course of the century.
                                                                                                                                        59



                                                                       Figure 5a
                                Aid to Dependent Children to Family of 3 in 1970 and Maximum Payment to Family of 4 in
                                                                 1940 in 1967 Dollars
                                     300

                                                                                                          NJ
                                     250
Real Maximum ADC Payment 1970




                                                                                                         NY
                                                                        VT      PA                              MA
                                                                        WA                               NH
                                                                                     MN

                                     200                                             VA KS          RI
                                                                                                          MI
                                                                        WY
                                                                        ID      ND
                                                                        MT
                                                                        CO
                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                       OR
                                                                                                       WI
                                                                                                       UT
                                     150                                NE
                                                                        MD                          DE OH
                                                                        OK           NM
                                                                           NC
                                                                        AZ                          ME
                                                                                IN
                                     100                   TN           WV
                                                                        FL
                                                                        GA
                                                                        MO
                                                           AR      SC                          LA

                                                                        AL
                                      50


                                       0
                                           0         50             100        150       200                               250    300
                                                                  Real Maximum ADC Payment 1940

                                      Figure 5b
Aid to Dependent Children Maximum Payment to Family of 3 in 1970 and ADC/Temporary Aid
               to Needy Families Maximum Payment in 2000 in 1967 Dollars
                                     300


                                     250
Real Maximum ADC Payment 2000




                                     200



                                     150
                                                                                                                 VT
                                                                                          WI
                                                                                          CA                          CT
                                                                                                                NHMA NY
                                                                                                         RI    WA
                                                                                                               MN
                                     100                                     ME NM   UTOR MT NDMIKS              SD
                                                                                  MD       IA                    PA         NJ
                                                                                  OHNE   CO         IL
                                                                    WV NV    AZ   DE          WY VA
                                                                   GAFLIN
                                                                  MO          NCOK
                                                                               KY
                                                                                              ID
                                      50                    SC
                                                             AR                 TX
                                                    MSAL     LA     TN



                                       0
                                           0        50              100        150       200                          250        300
                                                                  Real Maximum ADC Payment 1970
                                                                                          60



Sources: The 1940 payments are from data set provided by Carolyn Moehling from her 2006
and 2007 papers. The 1970 and 2000 payments are from U.S. House of Representatives, Ways
and Means Committee 1990, 2000). The 1940 payments are the highest payments reported for
ADC for families of four. In a number of cases the actual maximum exceeded the maximum
listed in the state statute. A number of states had no maximums. The 1970 and 2000 payments
are the maximums listed in the law.
                                                                                                                  61



Figure 6a
Maximum Weekly Unemployment Benefits in 1940 and 1970 in $1967

                                  100

                                  90
1970 UI Weekly Maximum in $1967




                                  80

                                  70
                                                          CT
                                                          CO
                                  60                      NJ
                                                          WI
                                                          NY    CA
                                                          MA
                                                          MD
                                                          NH
                                                          PA
                                                          KS
                                                          IA
                                  50                      MO
                                                          MN
                                                          NM
                                                          VT RI ID
                                                          OR
                                                          DE UT WY
                                                          ME
                                                          KY
                                                          ND
                                                          AZ
                                                          NC
                                                          SC
                                                          WV
                                                          GA    LA
                                                          NE
                                                          VA
                                                          NV
                                                          TN
                                                          OH
                                                          AR
                                                          AL MI
                                  40                      TX IL
                                                          WA
                                                          MT
                                                          SD
                                                          IN
                                                          MS
                                                          FL
                                                          OK
                                  30

                                  20

                                  10

                                   0
                                        0   10   20    30     40     50    60     70           80    90    100
                                                      1940 UI Weekly Maximum in $1967

Maximum Weekly Unemployment Benefits in 2000 and 1970 in $1967


                                  100

                                   90
                                                           WA
                                                                            MA       NJ
2000 UI Weekly Maximum in $1967




                                   80                                 RI
                                                                           PA
                                                                                          CT
                                                                                NY
                                   70                             NC OR
                                                                         MN        CO
                                                                AR
                                                                 WVKYDE
                                                                      UT KS
                                   60                          MI
                                                              TX       VT NH    WI
                                                         OK   ILOH
                                                                NV ND
                                                          FL            ID
                                                                  GAME
                                                                   LAWYNMIA
                                   50                     INMT TNSC        MD
                                                                 VA     MO    CA
                                                           SD
                                                                 NEAZ
                                   40                     MS    AL

                                   30

                                   20

                                   10

                                    0
                                        0   10   20    30     40     50    60     70            80    90    100
                                                      1970 UI Weekly Maximum in $1967
                                                                                     62



Source: The data on unemployment weekly maximums can be found on the United States
Department of Labor: Employment and Training Administration’s website.
http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/statelaws.asp#sigprouilaws
                                                                                                                                     63



                                                                                Figure 7

                                                   Expected Workers' Compensation Benefits
                                  .8     (As a Percentage of National Average Annual Manufacturing Wage)
         Average Expected Benefit
                .4    .2 .6




                                       1930         1940          1950              1960          1970      1980       1990   2000
                                                                                           Year

                                                                           Average Benefit               Plus 1 S.D.
                                                                           Minus 1 S.D.
                                        Injury Probabilities fixed at 1940 levels




Source: Allen 2009.
                                                                                               64



References
Abrams, Burton and Schmitz, Mark. (1978) The “crowding-out” effect of governmental transfers
       on private charitable contributions. Public Choice 53(1):
Abrams, Burton A. and Schmitz, Mark D. (1984) The crowding-out effect of governmental
       transfers on private charitable contributions: cross-section evidence. National Tax
       Journal 37(4): 563-68.
Allen, Samuel. (2004) The Economics and Politics of Workers’ Compensation, 1930-2000.
       Ph.D. Dissertation at the University of Arizona.
Allen, Samuel. (2009) State variation in workers’ compensation insurance: the political economy
       of benefits, 1930-2000. Virginia Military Institute Working Paper.
Baicker, Katherine, Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz. (1998) A distinctive system: origins
       and impact of U.S. unemployment compensation, in the Defining Moment: The Great
       Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, edited by Bordo,
       Michael, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Balan-Cohen, Andreea. (2008) The effect on elderly mortality: evidence from the old age
       assistance programs in the United States.” Unpublished working paper. Tufts
       University.
Bowlbis, John. (forthcoming) “The decline in infant death rates, 1878 -1913: The role of early
       sickness insurance programs.” Journal of Economic History.
Buffum, David. (1992) Workmen's Compensation: Passage and Impact. Ph.D. dissertation,
       University of Pennsylvania.
Clark, Robert L., Lee Craig, and Jack Wilson. (2003) A History of Public Sector Pensions in the
       United States. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Chelius, James R. (1976) Liability for industrial accidents: a comparison of negligence and strict
       liability systems. Journal of Legal Studies 5: 293-309.
Chelius, James R. (1977) Workplace Safety and Health: The Role of Workers' Compensation.
       Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.
Costa, Dora L.. (1998) The Evolution of Retirement: An American Economic History, 1880-
       1990. Chicago, Il: University of Chicago Press.
Costa, Dora L. (1999) A house of her own: old age assistance and the living arrangements of
       older nonmarried women. Journal of Public Economics 72: 39-59.
Couch, Jim, and Shugart, William. (1998) The Political Economy of the New Deal. New York,
       NY: Edward Elgar.
Darby, Michael R. (1976) Three and a half million U.S. employees have been mislaid: or, an
       explanation of unemployment, 1934-1941. Journal of Political Economy 84: 1-16.
DeParle, Jason. (2009) For victims of recession, patchwork state aid. New York Times May 10.
Emery, George and John Charles Herbert Emery. (1999) A Young Man’s Benefit: The
       Independent Order of Odd Fellows and Sickness Insurance in the United States and
       Canada, 1860-1929. Montreal, CA: McGill-Queens Press.
Fishback, Price. (2009) Social expenditures in the United States and the Nordic Countries: 1900-
       2003. Paper presented at the International Economic History Association Congress in
       Utrecht, the Netherlands in August 2009.
Fishback, Price V., Michael R. Haines and Shawn Kantor. (2001) The impact of the New Deal
       on black and white infant mortality in the south. Explorations in Economic History 38:
       93-122.
                                                                                              65



Fishback, Price, William Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. (2005) The impact of New Deal
       expenditures on local economic activity: an examination of retail sales, 1929-1939."
       Journal of Economic History 65: 36-71.
Fishback, Price, William Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. (forthcoming 2010) Do federal programs
       affect internal migration? The impact of New Deal expenditures on mobility during the
               Great Depression. Explorations in Economic History.
Fishback, Price, Shawn Kantor and John Wallis (2003) Can the New Deal’s Three R’s be
       rehabilitated? A program-by-program, county-by-county analysis.” Explorations in
       Economic History (October): 278-307.
Fishback, Price and Shawn Kantor. (2000) Prelude To The Welfare State: The Origins of
       Workers’ Compensation. Chicago, Il: University of Chicago Press.
Fishback, Price, Shawn Kantor and John Wallis. (2006) Institutional designs and the problem of
       corruption during the New Deal. Corruption and Reform, edited by Claudia Goldin and
       Edward Glaeser. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fishback, Price and Melissa Thomasson. (2006) Social welfare: 1929 to the present. In Carter,
       Susan, Gartner, Scott Sigmund, Haines, Michael, Olmstead, Alan, Sutch, Richard and
       Wright, Gavin (eds.) Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition,Volume
       2. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Fleck, Robert. (1999a) Electoral incentives, public policy, and the New Deal realignment.
       Southern Economic Journal 63(January): 377-404.
Fleck, Robert. (1999b) The marginal effect of New Deal relief work on county-level
       unemployment statistics. Journal of Economic History 59(September): 659-87.
Fleck, Robert. (1999c) The value of the vote: a model and test of the effects of turnout on
       distributive policy. Economic Inquiry 37(October): 609-623.
Fleck, Robert. (2001a) Inter-party competition, intra-party competition, and distributive policy:
       a model and test using New Deal data. Public Choice 108(July): 77-100.
Fleck, Robert. (2001b) Population, land, economic conditions, and the allocation of New Deal
       spending. Explorations in Economic History 38(April): 296-304.
Fleck, Robert. (2002) Democratic opposition to the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938. Journal of
       Economic History 62(March): 25-54.
Fox, Jonathan. (2009) “Public Health Movements, Local Poor Relief and Child Mortality in
       American Cities: 1923-1932.” Unpublished working paper. University of Arizona.
Friedberg, Leora. (1999) The effect of old age assistance on retirement. Journal of Public
       Economics. 71:,213-232.
Gruber, Jonathan and Hungerman, Daniel. (2007) Faith-based charity and crowd-out during the
       Great Depression. Journal of Public Economics 91.
Hannon, Joan Underhill. (1984) Poverty and the antebellum Northeast: the view from New York
       State’s poor relief rolls. Journal of Economic History 44: 1007-1032.
Hannon, Joan. (1984) The generosity of antebellum poor relief. Journal of Economic History
       44(3).
Hannon, Joan. (1985) Poor relief policy in antebellum New York State: the rise and decline of
       the poorhouse. Explorations in Economic History 22(3).
Hannon, Joan Underhill. (1997) Shutting down welfare: two cases from America’s past.
       Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 37: 419-438.
                                                                                            66



Kiesling, Lynne and Robert Margo. (1997) Explaining the rise in antebellum pauperism: 1850-
        1860. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 37: 405-18.
Lindert, Peter. (1994) The rise of Social Spending, 1880-1930. Explorations in Economic
        History 31: 1-37.
Lindert, Peter. (2004) Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth Since the
        Eighteenth Century. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Livingston, Brendan. (2009) The safety net in Massachusetts, 1900-1930: a study of the demand
        for poverty relief. Unpublished working paper. University of Arizona. Massachusetts
        State Board of Charity. Annual Report of the State Board of Charity of Massachusetts.
        Boston: Wright & Potter Printing Co., for the years 1900 through 1919.
Massachusetts Department of Public Welfare. Annual Report of the Department of Public
        Welfare. Boston: Wright & Potter Printing Co., for years 1920 through 1930
Matthews, Kent and Daniel Benjamin. (1992) U.S. and U.K. Unemployment Between the Wars:
        A Doleful Story. London: Institute of Economic Affairs.
McJimsey, George. (1987) Harry Hopkins: Ally of the Poor and Defender of Democracy.
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Moehling, Carolyn. (2006) Mothers’ pension legislation and the cross-state variation in welfare
        generosity. Unpublished working paper. Yale University, August.
Moehling, Carolyn. (2007) The American welfare system and family structure: an historical
        perspective. Journal of Human Resources 42: 117-155.
Murray, John. (2007) Origins of American Health Insurance: A History of Industrial Sickness
        Funds. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007.
Officer, Lawrence H. and Samuel H. Williamson. (2009) Purchasing power of money in the
        United States from 1774 to 2008. MeasuringWorth. URL:
        http://www.measuringworth.com/ppowerus/.
Orloff, Ann. (1993) The Politics of Pensions: A Comparative Analysis of Britain, Canada, and
        the United States. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Parsons, Donald O. (1991) Male retirement behavior in the United States, 1930-1950. Journal of
        Economic History 51: 657-674.
Raphael, Steven and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. (2001) Identifying the effect of unemployment on
        crime. Journal of Law and Economics 64(April): 259-283.
Reading, Don C. (1973) New Deal activity and the States, 1933 to 1939 Journal of Economic
        History 33(December): 792-810.
Skocpol, Theda. (1992) Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of Social Policy
        in the United States. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Social Security Administration. Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statistical Supplement
        (SSBASS), various years.
Stoian, Adrian and Price Fishback. (2010) Welfare spending and mortality rates for the elderly
        before the Social Security era. Explorations in Economic History, forthcoming.
Stromberg, David (2004) Radio’s impact on public spending. Quarterly Journal of Economics
        119 (February): 189-221.
Sule, Balkan. Social Insurance Programs and Compensating Wage Differentials in the United
        States. University of Arizona PhD. Dissertation, 1998.
Thomasson, Melissa. (1998) From Sickness to Heath: The Twentieth Century Development of the
        Demand for Health Insurance. PhD dissertation, University of Arizona, 1998.
                                                                                                67



Thomasson, Melissa. (2002) From sickness to health: the twentieth century development of U.S.
        health insurance. Explorations in Economic History 39: 233-253.
Thompson, Laura. (1919) Laws relating to ‘mothers’ pensions’ in the United States, Canada,
        Denmark, and New Zealand.U. S. Department of Labor, Childrens’ Bureau Publication
        No. 63, Legal Series No. 4. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1923) Birth, Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics, 1921: Seventh
        Annual Report. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1925a) Biennial Census of Manufactures, 1923. Washington:
        Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1925b) Financial Statistics of Cities Having a Population over
        30,000, 1923. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1925c) Financial Statistics of States, 1922. Washington:
        Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1931a) Financial Statistics of Cities Having a Population over
        30,000, 1929. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1931b) Financial Statistics of States, 1929. Washington:
        Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1932a) Financial Statistics of Cities Having a Population over
        30,000, 1929. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1932b) Financial Statistics of States, 1930. Washington:
        Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1933a) Fifteenth Census of the United States, Manufactures: 1929,
        Volume III. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1934) Biennial Census of Manufactures, 1931. Washington:
        Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1943) Sixteenth Census of the United States, Manufactures: 1939,
        Volume III. Washington: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (2007) Income, poverty, and health Insurance coverage in the United
        States: 2006. Current Population Reports, P60-233. Washington, D.C.: Government
        Printing Office.
U.S. Children’s Bureau. (1930) Eighteenth Annual Report of the Children’s Bureau.
        Washington, DC: Government Printing Office..
United States Committee on Economic Security. (1937) Social security in America; the factual
        background of the Social security act as summarized from staff reports to the Committee
        on Economic Security. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Wallis, John Joseph. (1984) The birth of the old federalism: financing the New Deal, 1932-
        1940. Journal of Economic History 44(March): 139-59.
Wallis, John Joseph. (1985) Why 1933? The origins and timing of national government growth,
        1933-1940. Research in Economic History 4:1-51.
Wallis, John Joseph. (1987) Employment, politics, and economic recovery during the Great
        Depression. Review of Economics and Statistics 69(August): 516-20.
Wallis, John Joseph. (1991) The political economy of New Deal fiscal federalism. Economic
        Inquiry 39(July): 510-524.
Wallis, John Joseph. (1998) The political economy of New Deal spending revisited, again: with
        and without Nevada. Explorations in Economic History 35(April): 140-70.
                                                                                             68



Wallis, John Joseph. (2001) The political economy of New Deal spending, yet again: a reply to
        Fleck. Explorations in Economic History 38(April): 305-14.
Wallis, John Joseph, and Benjamin, Daniel K. (1981) Public relief and private employment in the
        Great Depression. Journal of Economic History 41(March): 97-102.
Wallis, John Joseph. (1989) Private employment and public relief during the Great Depression.
        Working paper. Department of Economics, University of Maryland.
Winegarden, C.R. and John E. Murray. (1998) The contributions of early health-insurance
        programs to mortality declines in pre-World War I Europe: evidence from fixed-effects
        models. Explorations in Economic History 35(4): 431-446
Wright, Gavin. (1974) The Political Economy of New Deal Spending: An Econometric
        Analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics 56(February): 30-38.
Ziliak, Stephen. (1996) The end of welfare and the contradiction of compassion. Independent
        Review 1: 55-73.
Ziliak, Stephen. (1997) Kicking the Malthusian vice: lessons from the abolition of “welfare” in
        the late nineteenth century. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 37: 449-68.
Ziliak, Stephen. (2002a) Pauper fiction in economic science: paupers in almshouses and the odd
        fit of Oliver Twist. Review of Social Economy 60: 159-81.
Ziliak, Stephen. (2002b) Some tendencies of social welfare and the problem of interpretation.
        Cato Journal 21(Winter): 499-513.
Ziliak, Stephen and Joan Hannon. (2006) Public Assistance: Colonial Times to the 1920s, in
        Carter, Susan, Gartner, Scott Sigmund, Haines, Michael, Olmstead, Alan, Sutch, Richard
        and Wright, Gavin (eds.) Historical Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition,
        Volume 2. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, pp. 2-693 to 2-702 and 2-720 to
        2-733
