                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE POLITICAL RESOURCE CURSE

                                           Fernanda Brollo
                                          Tommaso Nannicini
                                            Roberto Perotti
                                            Guido Tabellini

                                         Working Paper 15705
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15705


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2010




Financial support by the European Research Council (Grant No. 230088) is gratefully acknowledged.
We thank Frederico Finan, Macartan Humphreys and seminar participants at Bologna University,
CIFAR, NBER Political Economy Program Meeting 2009, IGIER-Bocconi, and Wallis Conference
2009 for helpful comments; Eliana La Ferrara, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea for sharing their
data on the 1980 Census; and Gaia Penteriani for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Fernanda Brollo, Tommaso Nannicini, Roberto Perotti, and Guido Tabellini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political Resource Curse
Fernanda Brollo, Tommaso Nannicini, Roberto Perotti, and Guido Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 15705
January 2010
JEL No. D72,D73,H40,H77

                                              ABSTRACT

The paper studies the effect of additional government revenues on political corruption and on the quality
of politicians, both with theory and data. The theory is based on a version of the career concerns model
of political agency with endogenous entry of political candidates. The evidence refers to municipalities
in Brazil, where federal transfers to municipal governments change exogenously according to given
population thresholds. We exploit a regression discontinuity design to test the implications of the theory
and identify the causal effect of larger federal transfers on political corruption and the observed features
of political candidates at the municipal level. In accordance with the predictions of the theory, we
find that larger transfers increase political corruption and reduce the quality of candidates for mayor.


Fernanda Brollo                                      Roberto Perotti
Universita' Bocconi                                  IGIER Universita' Bocconi
Via Rontgen 1                                        Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano                                         20136 Milano
Italy                                                Italy
fernanda.brollo@unibocconi.it                        and NBER
                                                     roberto.perotti@unibocconi.it
Tommaso Nannicini
IGIER Universita' Bocconi                            Guido Tabellini
Via Roentgen 1                                       IGIER Universita' Bocconi
20136 Milano                                         Via Roentgen 1
Italy                                                20136 Milano
tommaso.nannicini@unibocconi.it                      Italy
                                                     guido.tabellini@unibocconi.it
1         Introduction
Suppose new oil is discovered in a country, or more funds are transfered to a locality from
a higher level of government. Are these windfalls of resources unambiguously beneficial to
society? This is a key question in the study of a variety of issues in macroeconomics and
development economics, such as intergovernmental relations, transfers to lagging regions
like the European Union’s Structural Funds, and international aid to developing countries.
        Until a few years ago, the only reason for a negative answer to this question would
have been provided by the “Dutch disease literature:” a natural resource windfall, such
as oil revenues, can lead to a decline in income via a market mechanism, notably an
appreciation of the real exchange rate. In the last few years a growing literature, and
much anecdotal evidence, has argued that a windfall of natural resources can have further
adverse effects through the political process and the interaction among interest groups,
leading for instance to increased rent-seeking (as in the dynamic common pool models of
Tornell and Lane, 1999; and Velasco, 1999) or even to civil war (as in Besley and Persson,
2008; Caselli and Coleman, 2008; and Ross, 2006).1
        In this paper, we argue that windfall government revenues can worsen the functioning of
political institutions, because they exacerbate the political agency problem and deteriorate
the quality of political candidates. This idea has been voiced before in policy debates, for
instance with reference to the Italian South (Rossi, 2006), but without spelling out a
precise mechanism and only on the basis of anecdotal evidence. Here we show that it is
supported by both rigorous theory and systematic evidence.
        The theory is based on a political agency model with career concerns and endogenous
entry of political candidates. The model focuses on the electoral competition between
an incumbent and a set of challengers, all with different political abilities and different
opportunity costs of entering politics. The incumbent faces a trade-off between using
public resources for personal gains (corruption) and maximizing the probability of election.
Although the model has been studied before (Persson and Tabellini, 2000), we emphasize
some new implications on the effects of a windfall of revenues, and we extend it to allow
for endogenous entry and selection of political candidates with different abilities.
    1
        See also Ross (1999), Rosser (2006), and the references cited therein.



                                                        1
   The model highlights three specific channels of operation of windfall government rev-
enues through the political process. First, an increase in resources available to a govern-
ment leads to an increase in corruption of the incumbent (a moral hazard effect). This
happens because, with a larger budget size, the incumbent has more room to grab politi-
cal rents without disappointing rational but imperfectly informed voters. Second, a larger
budget induces a decline in the average ability of the pool of individuals entering politics
(a selection effect). This is a byproduct of the first result (that rents increase with bud-
get size) and of the assumption that political rents tend to be more valuable for political
candidates of lower ability. Third, there is an interaction between these two effects that
further increases the adverse consequences of a windfall of revenues on political corrup-
tion: an incumbent facing less able opponents can marginally grab more rents without
hurting his reelection prospects. Finally, the selection effect highlighted above also implies
that windfall revenues increase the equilibrium probability of reelection of the incumbent,
despite his grabbing more rents.
   We then test the implications of this model on micro data from a sample of Brazilian
municipalities. The obvious problem in testing the effects of government revenues is, as
always, how to identify exogenous changes: one can think of a number of reasons why
local government revenues might be correlated with corruption and the composition of the
pool of politicians. For instance, corrupt politicians might have a comparative advantage
in obtaining higher transfers from other levels of government; or poorer areas might select
low-quality politicians and, at the same time, receive more transfers for redistribution
purposes. To address this endogeneity issue, we combine three different datasets. The
first contains information on a program of federal transfers to municipal governments,
determined in a stochastic but discontinuous fashion by population size; the second con-
sists of data on a program of random audits on local governments, with detailed reports
on corruption charges; the third provides biographical and electoral information on the
incumbent mayors and their opponents in municipal elections.
   We exploit a key feature of the federal transfers program: all municipalities in the
same state and in a given population bracket should receive the same amount of trans-
fers. Indeed, although in the data there exist multiple cases of misassignments around
the policy thresholds, the amount of federal transfers received by municipal governments


                                              2
displays visible jumps at each threshold. We therefore use a (fuzzy) regression discontinu-
ity approach—with population discontinuities as an instrument for the transfers actually
received—to study the impact of a discrete change in revenues between municipalities just
above or below the thresholds on the corruption of the incumbent mayors (as measured by
the random audit program) and on the composition of the pool of opponents (as captured
by their years of schooling and private sector occupation).
   The empirical findings accord well with the implications of the theory. Specifically, an
(exogenous) increase in federal transfers by 10% raises the incidence of a broad measure of
corruption by 12 percentage points (about 17% with respect to the average incidence), and
the incidence of a more restrictive measure—including only severe violation episodes—by
10.1 percentage points (about 24%). At the same time, larger transfers (by 10%) worsen
the quality of the political candidates challenging the incumbent, decreasing the fraction
of opponents with at least a college degree by 3 percentage points (about 7%). As a
result, the incumbent who receives higher transfers experiences a raise in his probability
of reelection by 4.1 percentage points (about 7%).
   At the theoretical level, our paper combines three separate strands of literature, besides
the career concerns model discussed by Persson and Tabellini (2000). The first is the
literature on windfall resources and rent-seeking mentioned above. Our closest antecedent
here is Robinson, Torvik, and Verdier (2006), who use a partisan model with patronage
to study the optimal extraction of resources and the optimal patronage by a government
facing reelection. A second strand of literature studies the selection of politicians, and
how different institutions affect the pool of elected officials and candidates (Besley, 2004;
Caselli and Morelli, 2004; Besley and Smart, 2007; Mattozzi and Merlo, 2008; Galasso
and Nannicini, 2009). A third, older strand of literature studies the allocation of talents
in economies characterized by different incentives to different types of talents (Baumol,
1990; Murphy, Vishny, and Shleifer, 1991).
   With regard to the evidence, to our knowledge, we are the first to estimate the effect
of transfers from a higher level of government on political corruption and on the quality of
politicians of local governments. Each one of the above three Brazilian datasets has been
used before to study related outcomes, but they have never been combined and they have
not been used to study how federal transfers affect political corruption and the features


                                             3
of candidates for mayor. Litschig (2008a) is our closest antecedent: he uses the same
Brazilian dataset on federal transfers and a similar regression discontinuity methodology
to show that higher federal transfers increase municipal spending on public schools and
improve literacy rate outcomes. Although he does not talk about corruption, his findings
are consistent with ours. Litschig and Morrison (2009) use the same approach and data for
the municipal term 1984–88 to estimate the impact of federal transfers on the reelection
probability of the incumbent party in mayoral elections, detecting a positive and significant
effect. Using a tailored household survey, Vicente (2009) shows that the discovery of oil
in the island of São Tomé and Principe was associated with a significant rise in perceived
corruption, relative to the control island of Capo Verde. Caselli and Michaels (2009)
show that oil discoveries in Brazilian municipalities have a positive impact on public
good spending, but little or no effect on the quality of public good provision. They
also provide indirect evidence that this might be due to rent-seeking and corruption.
Ferraz and Finnan (2008, 2009a) use instead the dataset on randomized audits to study,
respectively, the effect of corruption disclosure on the election outcome and the effect
of electoral accountability on political corruption: they find that mayors found to be
corrupt have a lower reelection probability, and that municipalities where mayors can
be reelected experience less corruption. Brollo (2008) uses similar data and finds that
corrupt municipalities are also punished by a reduction in the (discretionary) infrastructure
transfers they receive from higher levels of government after the release of the reports.
   Our paper is also related to a recent literature on political selection, which has focused
on the impact of monetary and non-monetary incentives on the decision of citizens to
run for an elective office (Diermeir, Keane, and Merlo, 2005; Messner and Polborn, 2004;
Gagliarducci, Nannicini, and Naticchioni, 2008; Gagliarducci and Nannicini, 2009; Ferraz
and Finan, 2009b). So far, however, this literature has not investigated how the quality of
political candidates is affected by the size of the government budget or by transfers from
higher levels of government.
   The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the theory and derives its
empirical implications. Section 3 discusses the relevant Brazilian institutions and describes
the data. Section 4 illustrates the econometric strategy. Section 5 presents a number of
validity tests and the estimation results. We conclude with Section 6.


                                             4
2         Theory
2.1         A career concerns model
This section studies a version of the “career concerns” model of Persson and Tabellini
(2000). In order to focus on the selection of politicians, we extend that framework by
introducing differences in the ability of candidates and endogenous entry into politics.
Although that model can be formulated with an infinite horizon (see Section 4.5.2 in
Persson and Tabellini, 2000), for simplicity we assume only two periods. Throughout, we
refer to the politician in office as the incumbent mayor.
        In the first period (t = 1) an incumbent mayor sets policy for that period. Then
elections are held, and the elected mayor sets policy once more for a second (t = 2) and
last period. In both periods, a budget of fixed size τ can be allocated to two alternative
uses: rents rt that only benefit the mayor; and a public good gt that only benefits the
voters. The cost of providing the public good depends on the identity of the mayor, and
more competent mayors can provide the same public good (expressed in terms of voters’
utility) at a lower resource cost. Specifically, the government budget constraint is:

                                                   gt = θ(τ − rt )                                              (1)

where θ reflects an individual’s competence (if elected to office) in providing the public
good: a higher value of θ corresponds to a lower cost of providing the public good, and
hence a more competent mayor. Thus, the policy can be thought of as rents (rt ) captured
by the mayor in that period, while the public good gt is residually determined from the
budget constraint.
        We assume political competence to be a random but permanent feature of an individual.
Specifically, θ is a random variable uniformly distributed with density ξ and a known mean.
The realization of θ is drawn from two alternative distributions, with the same density
but different means, depending on the individual’s type. Specifically, for an individual of
type J the mean of θ is 1 + σ J , where J = H, L, and σ H = σ = −σ L, with 1 > σ > 0 a
known parameter. Thus, individuals of type H on average are more competent if elected
to office. But in specific instances it could very well be that the actual competence of an
individual of type H is lower than that of an individual of type L.2
                                                                                       1             1
    2
        Under our assumptions, the range of realizations of θ for type J is: [1 +σ J − 2ξ , 1 +σ J + 2ξ ], J = H, L.

                                                           5
       In keeping with the career concerns model, we assume that the realization of θ becomes
known to each individual, and also to voters if that individual is elected to office and
becomes mayor, only at the end of period 1. The mayor’s type is known beforehand to
everyone, however. At the time of elections, voters also observe their own utility (i.e., the
public good g1 ), but do not observe political rents. All the parameters of the model are
known to the voters.
       This formulation captures two important features of political agency conflicts. On the
one hand, as in the standard career concerns model, the voters’ imperfect information
about the incumbent’s true competence creates an incentive for the incumbent to please
the voters through public good provision, so as to appear competent. On the other hand,
not all politicians are ex-ante identical: voters know something about political candidates,
besides what is learned by observing policy outcomes. Throughout this section we refer
to the mayor’s type J as simply high or low quality, but more generally J stands for
any observable variable (other than policy outcomes) that enables voters to predict the
mayor’s performance if elected. In the empirical section, we measure J by the politicians’
education or market experience. For now, the politician’s type is exogenous. In the next
subsection, we make it endogenous by analyzing the entry decision of candidates.
       In line with the institutions in Brazil, we assume that rent-seeking (corruption) by the
mayor is discouraged by an audit technology. Specifically, with probability d(rt ) = qrt
a mayor who grabbed political rents rt is caught and suffers utility loss of λJ , where
λH > λL > 0.3 Thus, the loss of utility for a high quality mayor who is caught cheating
is harsher. This assumption plays a crucial role below, where we analyze the entry of
political candidates, and it is further discussed there. It is meant to capture the idea
that a highly educated or very talented politician has more valuable opportunities outside
of politics. Hence, for such a politician the reputation cost of being caught in an act of
corruption is higher than for someone with lower opportunity costs from being in politics.
       As standard in the literature on political agency, politicians care about political rents
(net of the expected penalty), and enjoy other exogenous benefits from being in office (ego
rents), summarized by the exogenous variable R. Thus, the expected utility of a mayor of
   3
    As explained in footnote 5 below, the results of interest would be reinforced if we assumed that the
probability of being caught depends on the fraction of the budget devoted to rents (rather than on the
absolute amount of rents as assumed here).


                                                   6
type J who is in office in periods 2 and 1 respectively is:

                                V2J = αJ r2 + R                                          (2)
                                V1J = αJ r1 + R + pJ V2J                                 (3)

where αJ = 1 − λJ q denotes the expected value of political rents for type J, and pJ is the
probability of being reelected, as perceived by the incumbent in period 1, when setting
the optimal rent r1 . We assume that λJ < 1, so that αJ > 0 for all J .
   Voters only care about the public good, hence their preferences in each period are:

                                          Wt = gt                                        (4)

   Finally, we assume that rents cannot exceed a given upper bound that depends on the
size of the budget, namely:
                                         rt ≤ ψτ ≡ r                                     (5)

   The timing of events is as follows:

   - At the start of period 1, the incumbent sets r1 . He knows his own type, but he
     does not yet know the actual realization of his competence, θ, nor the identity of his
     future opponent. Specifically, the incumbent expects his opponent to be of type L
     with probability π, and of type H with probability 1 − π, where for now 1 > π > 0
     is given, but will be endogenized later (the assumption that the incumbent does not
     yet know his opponent’s identity is made to simplify notation and with no loss of
     generality).

   - The identity of the opponent is revealed and his type H or L (but not the actual
     realization of his competence θ) becomes known to all.

   - Elections are held. When voting, voters observe g1 , but not r1. They also know the
     incumbent’s as well as the opponent’s type. After the elections, the audit takes place
     and the penalty is paid (if cheating is detected).

   - In period 2 the elected mayor sets r2 , and then a second and final audit takes place.




                                              7
2.2       Equilibrium rents
To solve the model, we work backwards. In the last period, whoever is in office sets
maximal rents. This follows from the assumption that the expected penalty is insufficient
to deter corruption (αJ > 0 for all J ). Hence, r2 = r̄ ≡ ψτ irrespective of who is elected.
      Next, consider the voters’ behavior in period 1. Since the period 2 policy is the same
irrespective of who is in office, voters only care about competence, and they vote for the
candidate with the higher expected competence. Thus, an incumbent of type J wins
against an opponent of type O if:

                                 E(θ|g1 , J ) ≥ 1 + σ O         J, O = H, L                                (6)

where the left hand side of (6) is the expected value of θ conditional on the voters obser-
vation of g1 and their knowledge of the incumbent’s type J, while the right hand side is
the unconditional mean of θ for an opponent of type O.
      By (1) it is easy to see that (see also Persson and Tabellini, 2000):
                                                             g1
                                         E(θ|g1 , J ) =                                                    (7)
                                                          (τ − r1eJ )
where r1eJ denotes the voter’s expectation of how an incumbent of type J sets rents in
period 1. Exploiting (1) once more we also have that, from the point of view of the
incumbent
                                                             τ − r1J
                                          E(θ|g1 , J ) = θ                                                 (8)
                                                             τ − r1eJ
where r1J denotes the rents actually set by a type J incumbent. Thus, by (6)-(8), an
incumbent of type J running against an opponent of type O wins the election with prob-
ability
                                             τ − r1eJ
                             pJO = P r[θ ≥            (1 + σ O )]                                          (9)
                                             τ − r1J
                                     1          J        τ − r1eJ
                                   =   + ξ(1 + σ ) − ξ          J
                                                                  (1 + σ O )                              (10)
                                     2                   τ − r1
where the first equation follows from (6)-(8), and the second equation from the assumption
about the distribution of θ.4
  4
      Specifically, given that θ is drawn from a uniform distribution with density ξ and mean 1 + σ J ,
                                                     1
                                      P r[θ > X] =     + ξ(1 + σ J − X)
                                                     2



                                                      8
      When the incumbent sets policy, however, he does not yet know the identity of his
future opponent, and he assigns probabilities π and 1 − π to the events that the opponent
will be of type L and H, respectively. Thus, as perceived by the incumbent when choosing
rents, the relevant probability of reelection is:

                                    1                   τ − r1eJ
                             pJ =     + ξ(1 + σ J ) − ξ          (1 + σ̂)                (11)
                                    2                   τ − r1J
where σ̂ is the expected competence of the opponent, as perceived by the incumbent when
setting rents in period 1:
                                      1 + σ̂ ≡ 1 + σ(1 − 2π)                             (12)

      We are now ready to discuss the determination of public policy in period 1. The incum-
bent maximizes (3) with respect to r1 , subject to (11) and, by the incentive compatibility
condition, taking the voters expectations r1eJ as given. At an interior optimum, the first
order condition of the incumbent’s problem is:

                                     ∂V1J        ∂pJ J
                                          = αJ +    V =0                                 (13)
                                     ∂r1         ∂r1 2
where in equilibrium the expected utility from being in office in period 2 is:

                                    V2J = αJ r + R ≡ αJ ψτ + R                           (14)

Taking the partial derivative of pJ with respect to r1J , for a given value of r1eJ , and then
imposing the equilibrium condition that r1eJ = r1J , by (11) we have that in equilibrium:

                                      ∂pJ    ξ(1 + σ̂)
                                        J
                                          =−           <0                                (15)
                                      ∂r1     τ − r1J
Thus, a higher rent reduces the probability of reelection because it reduces g1 and therefore,
given r1eJ , the voters’ estimate of the incumbent’s ability. We call the absolute value of
(15) the “electoral punishment” of the marginal rent.
      Combining (13)-(15), the equilibrium rent set in period 1 by an incumbent of type J
is:
                                r1J = τ − ξ(1 + σ̂)(ψτ + R/αJ )                          (16)

where, to have an interior optimum, we implicitly assume that the right hand side of
(16) is positive. We call this the “partial equilibrium” rent, to emphasize the fact that

                                                  9
it is conditional on a given expected competence of the opponent σ̂; later we will endo-
genize σ̂. For future reference, we call the expression (ψτ + R/αJ ) “value of reelection”
and the expression ξ(1 + σ̂) “electoral threshold” (strictly speaking, these expressions are
transformations of the expressions capturing these concepts). Thus, at an optimum the
incumbent grabs the whole budget less a quantity that is a function of the electoral thresh-
old times the value of reelection. Intuitively, a higher electoral threshold (i.e., a higher
expected competence of the opponent) reduces the rent because, from (15), it increases
the electoral punishment of the marginal rent.
   Finally, imposing the equilibrium condition that actual and expected rents coincide,
the equilibrium probability that an incumbent of type J defeats an opponent of type O is:
                                                 1
                                       p∗J,O =     + ξ(σ J − σ O )                          (17)
                                                 2
where we have used (10) and the “*” superscript denotes equilibrium. Correspondingly,
the equilibrium probability of reappointment, based on the information available to the
incumbent, is:
                                         1
                                           + ξ(σ J − σ̂)
                                         p∗J =                                       (18)
                                         2
Note that these equilibrium probabilities only depend on the difference in expected com-
petence between the incumbent and the (actual or expected) opponent. Intuitively, voters
have the same information as the incumbent. Hence, they correctly guess political rents
and the incumbent’s true competence. In equilibrium, election outcomes are only de-
termined by the relative expected competence of the two candidates, and not by actual
policies. Nevertheless, electoral incentives exert a powerful influence on public policies.
   We can now state the main properties of the equilibrium, giving particular emphasis
to the effects of a larger budget size, since these are the implications that are tested in the
empirical analysis below. We confine attention to period 1, which is more interesting.

                                                                        ∂r1J
Proposition 1 Rents are an increasing function of budget size:          ∂τ
                                                                               > 0.

   This is an immediate implication of (16), together with the assumptions needed to
have strictly positive rents at an interior optimum. Intuitively, the electoral punishment
             ∂pJ
for rents,   ∂r1
                 ,   becomes smaller in absolute value as τ rises (see equation 15). This in turn
is implied by how voters form their inferences: from (8), as the budget grows in size, a

                                                   10
dollar stolen has a smaller impact on voters’ inferences about the incumbent’s unobserved
ability. At the margin, this diminishes the incentive of political incumbents to please the
voters. This result is quite intuitive: if the budget size is very large, there is more room
to grab political rents without disappointing the voters.5

Proposition 2 Rents are a decreasing function of the expected competence of the opponent:
∂r1J
∂ σ̂
       < 0.

       This result too follows immediately from (16) and (15). From (6), the expectation
of a more competent opponent entails a higher competence threshold to reappoint the
incumbent, and reduces the probability of reappointment, for any level of rents consistent
with voters’ expectations. At this higher reelection threshold, the probability of winning
the election is more sensitive to political rents (see equation 11). This sharpens the
incumbent’s incentive to please the voters, and as a result equilibrium rents fall. Note
that the expected competence of the opponent (as perceived by the incumbent) in turn
depends on π, the probability that the opponent is a low quality type. Thus, the higher
is this probability, the lower is the expected quality of the opponent and the higher are
equilibrium rents.

Proposition 3 The effect of budget size on rents is larger the lower is the expected com-
                              ∂ 2r1J
petence of the opponent:      ∂τ ∂ σ̂
                                        < 0.

       This interaction effect between τ and σ̂ reflects the same forces that account for the
previous two propositions. Intuitively, when the budget size increases by one dollar, we
know from (16) that the incumbent grabs the extra dollar less a quantity which is a
function of the electoral threshold times the value of reelection; hence, a higher expected
competence of the opponent (a higher electoral threshold) reduces the share of the extra
dollar of budget that the politician appropriates. Not only does a larger budget size
   5
     Note that, almost by assumption, period 2 rents are also an increasing function of budget size. This
dampens the effect of budget size on period 1 rents, because it raises the value of reelection, but (at an
                                                                                                      J
interior optimum) it is not enough to offset the effect of τ on r1J that operates through the term ∂p
                                                                                                    ∂r1
                                                                                                        . It
is also easy to see that Proposition 1 would be strengthened if we assumed that the probability of being
caught was increasing in the fraction of the budget devoted to rents (d(rt ) = qrt /τ ), rather than in the
absolute amount of rents (d(rt ) = qrt ). Intuitively, under the alternative assumption, a larger budget
would reduce the probability of detection, inducing the incumbent mayor to grab even more rents.


                                                    11
increase political rents (Proposition 1), but it also does so to a larger extent if the opponent
is more likely to be of low quality (if σ̂ is small or, equivalently, if π is large).

2.3    The quality of political candidates
The model emphasizes the role of elections in selecting the more competent candidate, and
the implied effects on the incumbent’s incentives. But the pool of candidates was taken
to be exogenous, neglecting how individuals respond to incentives in deciding whether or
not to stand as a political candidate. In this subsection we address this issue, and allow
the proportion of high and low quality types in the pool of candidates to be determined
endogenously in equilibrium. For this we need additional assumptions.
   Let 2N be the overall population, with N a discrete large number. In the population
there are two groups of individuals indexed by J = H, L, with each group of size N. All
the assumptions outlined above continue to hold. In particular, if an individual in group
J holds office, his competence is drawn from a uniform distribution with mean 1 + σ J .
   Within each group, individuals differ by the opportunity cost of entering into politics:
individual i in group J has opportunity cost βi y J , for i = 1, 2...N. To simplify the algebra,
we assume that βi = i. Thus, for the first individual in group J the opportunity cost of
being into politics is y J , for the second individual it is 2y J , and so on until the last one
has opportunity cost Ny J . Throughout we assume that y H > y L > 0. Thus, consistently
with the previous political interpretation, high quality individuals (J = H) have a higher
expected competence if they become mayor and also have a higher opportunity cost of
being in politics. The parameter βi instead is unrelated to political competence, so that
the relationship between political competence and the opportunity cost of being in politics
is not one for one. This formulation captures the idea that political competence is related
to features, such as education or sheer talent, that also make an individual more productive
in the private sector. But the decision to enter politics also reflects other considerations
besides income, and the skills needed to be a successful politician do not coincide with
those that yield high income or success in other professions. The positive correlation
between market skills (outside opportunities) and political competence is common in the
models on political self-selection, such as Caselli and Morelli (2004) and Besley (2004).
   At the start of period 1, individuals decide whether or not to enter politics. Entering


                                               12
politics means that, with some probability, the individual is selected to run as the single
opponent to the incumbent mayor in the elections that are held at the end of period
1. In other words, entering politics is equivalent to entering the pool of candidates from
which the opponent is selected. We do not model how parties select a hierarchy of political
candidates, and simply assume that all individuals in the pool of candidates have the same
probability to be selected as the opponent, irrespective of their types J and i. Specifically,
suppose that nJ individuals from group J have decided to enter politics, J = H, L. Then
                                                                                          1
the pool of candidates has size n = nH + nL , and each one of them has probability        n
                                                                                              to
become the single opponent who will challenge the incumbent. This captures the notion
that not all politicians get a chance to become serious political candidates for mayor.
   To simplify the notation and with no loss of generality, we also assume that, when
deciding whether or not to enter politics, individuals know their own type but do not
know yet the identity of the incumbent and assign equal probabilities to the event that
the incumbent is of type H or L. Thus, by (17) in the previous subsection, the expected
probability that an opponent of type J wins the election is (1/2 + ξσ J ), where with a
slight abuse of notation here we use the symbol J to denote the opponent (rather than
the incumbent) type.
   Under these assumptions, if individual i in group J stays out of politics, then he gets
                                                              1
utility iy J . If he enters politics, then with probability   n
                                                                  he is selected to become the
opponent, and with probability (1/2 + ξσ J ) he wins the election and gains office in period
2. By the notation in the previous subsection, the expected utility of being in office in
period 2 for an individual of type J is V2J . A political candidate who loses the election or
is not selected to be the opponent, gets zero utility.
   With this notation, the i-th individual in group J prefers to enter politics if
                                         1        
                                     J     2
                                             + ξσ J J
                                   iy ≤              V2                                   (19)
                                              n
Ignoring integer constraints, nJ is determined by the indifference condition:
                                           1       
                                     J J    2
                                              + ξσ J J
                                   y n =              V2                                  (20)
                                               n
Using (20) we can solve for n:
                                 s
                                     V2H 1         V2L 1
                            n=          (  + ξσ) +    ( − ξσ)                             (21)
                                     yH 2          yL 2

                                             13
Then from (20) we have                       1          
                                    VJ            + ξσ J
                                 n = 2J
                                    J         2
                                                           ,   J = H, L                (22)
                                     y             n
Hence, the share of L types in the pool of opponents is:

                                               nL       1
                                        π=           =                                 (23)
                                             nH + nL   1+x
where
                                                       1
                                             V2H y L   2
                                                           + ξσ
                                        x≡             1        ≷1                     (24)
                                             V2L y H   2
                                                           − ξσ
Note that π ≶ 12 . This is intuitive: high quality individuals have higher opportunity costs
(y H > y L) and lower expected benefits from being in office (V2H < V2L ), but they also
have higher probability of winning against the yet unknown incumbent, so the net effect
of these forces is ambiguous.
   We now briefly discuss the properties of π, again focusing on the effect of budget size.

Proposition 4 The fraction of low quality types in the pool of opponents is an increasing
                           ∂π
function of budget size:   ∂τ
                                > 0.

   To see this, note that:
                                          V2H   αH ψτ + R
                                              =
                                          V2L   αL ψτ + R
So that, after some transformations:

                                    V2H        ψR
                                ∂     L
                                        /∂τ =         (αH − αL ) < 0                   (25)
                                    V2        (V2L )2

which in turn implies that ∂π/∂τ > 0—see (23-24). In words, a larger budget size τ leads
to a worse composition of the pool of opponents. Intuitively, because the value of rents
is higher for the low quality mayors, a larger budget increases the value of office by more
for the low quality than for the high quality candidates. Hence, at the margin more low
quality candidates enter the pool of opponents, deteriorating the composition.
   This result reflects two important assumptions in the model. First, we assumed that
the penalty if caught is higher for a high quality type (λH > λL ), which implies that rents
are less valuable for a high quality type (αH < αL ). If this assumption were reversed, the
empirical implication too would be the opposite. Thus, although we find our assumption a


                                                     14
priori plausible, it can be jointly tested with the model. Second, the model focuses on the
decision of individual candidates to enter politics, but it has nothing to say on how parties
select amongst alternative candidates (since we assumed that all prospective candidates
have the same probability 1/n of running as the opponent). Without a richer model of
intra-party politics it is difficult to assess how restrictive this omission is.6

2.4        The total effect of budget size
Putting it all together, we can now determine the total effect of budget size, taking into
account also its effects on the quality of the opponents. Combining (16) with the definition
of σ̂ (12) and with (23), we get
                                                 
                                               1−x
                            r1J   = τ −ξ 1−σ          (ψτ + R/αJ )                                    (26)
                                               1+x
which we call the “general equilibrium” rent to distinguish it from the “partial equilibrium”
rent (16). It is easy to see that the equivalent of Proposition 1 holds also for the general
equilibrium rent (26).

                                                                                   dr1J
Proposition 5 The overall effect of budget size on rents is positive:               dτ
                                                                                          > 0.

       In fact, the total derivative of r1J with respect to τ is:

                                     dr1J  ∂rJ   ∂rJ ∂bσ
                                          = 1 + 1        >0                                           (27)
                                     dτ    ∂τ σb ∂b
                                                  σ τ ∂τ
where both terms of the sum on the right hand side are positive; the first term by Propo-
sition 1, the second because, from Proposition 4, ∂b
                                                   σ/∂τ < 0.
       Equation (27) illustrates well the two main forces at work in this model. The first is
the positive effect of τ on rents holding constant the composition of the pool of opponents,
i.e., holding constant π; this is the moral hazard effect. The second is the positive effect
of τ on rents due to the response of the composition of the pool of opponents; this is the
interaction between the moral hazard and the opponent selection effects.
   6
     In this simple model, if we assumed that parties maximize expected rents, they would always choose
the high quality type as candidate. The reason is that he would have a higher probability of winning and
second period rents are the same for all types. But this is clearly too simplistic, because of both the two
period restriction and the neglect of intra-party conflict. The literature on how parties choose candidates
is still rather scarce - but see Carillo and Mariotti (2001), Galasso and Nannicini (2009), and Persico,
Rodriguez Pueblita, and Silverman (2009).

                                                    15
2.5    The probability of reelection
The model also has predictions on the effect of budget size on the probability of reelection.
Consider expression (18), the probability of reelection based on the information available
to the incumbent. By the law of large numbers, this is also the average probability of
reelection of an incumbent of type J.

Proposition 6 The probability of reelection of an incumbent of type J is an increasing
                           dp∗J
function of budget size:    dτ
                                  > 0.

   This follows directly from the effect of a larger budget size on the average competence
of the opponents: as the budget size increases, more low quality individuals are drawn into
the pool of opponents (Proposition 4). Thus, despite grabbing more rents, in equilibrium
the incumbent is more likely to be reappointed. This result reflects voters’ rationality.
Voters realize that equilibrium rents have increased with a larger budget, but they only
care about the competence of future mayors. Hence, as the pool of opponents deteriorates
in quality, voters become less demanding and apply a lower quality threshold for reelecting
the incumbent. As a result, the incumbents’ chances of winning go up.
   Propositions 4 and 6 highlight an important implication of the analysis: a windfall of
revenues is harmful not only because it tempts public officials into more corruption, but
also because over time it leads to a deterioration of the quality of elected officials. This
result is related to those obtained by Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1991). But whereas
they consider the allocation of talent between productive and rent-seeking activities in the
private sector, here we highlight the implications of windfall revenues for the selection of
talents into public office.

2.6    Discussion
Although the model is highly stylized in its description of the political process, it gener-
ates several interesting implications. We highlight one such set of results, namely those
relating to the effects of a windfall of government revenues. The remainder of the paper
tests these implications on Brazilian municipal data, exploiting an institutional feature
whereby federal transfers to municipal governments vary exogenously according to given


                                             16
population thresholds. The parameter τ in the model therefore corresponds to federal
transfers received by municipal governments.
   The theory generates predictions about the size of corruption (political rents, rt ) and
the frequency of detection (qrt). In the data, we observe only the frequency of detection
(and possibly the size of corruption conditional on being detected). By the law of large
numbers, the theory predicts that larger federal transfers should be associated with:

   i) more frequent episodes of political corruption by the mayor (Propositions 1 and 5);

  ii) a lower observed quality of the pool of political opponents in the elections for mayor
      (Proposition 4);

 iii) more frequent reappointment of the incumbent mayor (Proposition 6).

   Given the richness of the data, we can also test two additional implications of the
theory concerning the interactions between these effects, namely:

 iv) episodes of political corruption are more frequent when the opponents are of lower
      quality (Proposition 2);

  v) the positive effect of federal transfers on the frequency of corruption is more pro-
      nounced when the opponents are of lower quality (Proposition 3).

   However, the empirical tests of these last two implications—unlike those of the first
three—must rely on descriptive rather than quasi-experimental evidence, because the RDD
setup only applies to transfers (τ ) as a treatment.
   Finally, the model has other implications, that we do not take to the data because they
have already been investigated before. In particular, Ferraz and Finan (2009a) have used
this same dataset to show that term limits induce more frequent corruption in the last
term of office of the mayor (one of the implications of this model). And several empirical
studies (such as Persson and Tabellini, 2003) have investigated the presence of electoral
business cycles in different countries, also an implication of infinite horizon versions of this
model where elections take place in different periods.




                                              17
3         Institutions and Data
This section describes the institutional framework and the data we use in the empirical
analysis. The main variables of interest refer to federal transfers to municipal governments
(the variable τ in the model), corruption (the variables rt and qrt in the model), and the
observed quality of political candidates (their type J ). The empirical counterpart of each
of these variables is described in a separate subsection below.

3.1        Federal transfers to municipal governments
3.1.1       Institutional framework

Brazilian municipal governments are managed by an elected mayor (Prefeito) and an
elected city council (Camera dos Vereadores). Mayors are directly elected by voters with
plurality rule. Since 2000, the term limit for mayors has been extended from one to two
terms. The mayoral term lasts four years, and elections are usually held in October (oath
of office taking place in January of the following year).
        Municipal governments are in charge of a relevant share of the provision of public
goods and services related to education, health, and infrastructure projects. Most of
the municipal resources are intergovernmental transfers from either the federal or state
government.7 For municipalities with less than 50,000 inhabitants—those included in
our sample—local taxes represent only 6% of total revenues. The single most important
source of municipal revenues (40%) is the Fundo de Participação dos Municipios (FPM),
consisting of automatic federal transfers established by the Federal Constitution of Brazil
(Art. 159 Ib). FPM transfers amount to 75% of all federal transfers and, according to
the rules that regulate the allocation of these funds, municipal governments must spend
15% of them for education and 15% for health care, while the remainder is unrestricted.8
Our study focuses on this type of transfers, both for their relevance and because the
amount of FPM resources received by each municipality depends on population size in a
discontinuous fashion that is crucial for our identification strategy (see next section).
    7
    Brazil is divided into 26 states and 1 federal district (Brasilia).
    8
    There are other current transfers that follow a constitutional rule and are completely tied to education
(FNDE), social assistance (FNAS), and health care (SUS). However, FPM transfers represent 79% of all
current federal transfers, SUS 8%, FNAS 1%, and FNDE 2%.



                                                    18
       According to the FPM allocation mechanism, municipalities are divided into popula-
tion brackets that determine the coefficients used to share total state resources earmarked
for the FPM, with smaller population brackets corresponding to lower coefficients. Since
each state receives a different share of the total resources earmarked for FPM, two munic-
ipalities in the same population bracket receive identical transfers only if they are located
in the same state. More precisely, define F P Mik as the amount of FPM transfers received
by municipality i in the state k. The revenue-sharing mechanism is:
                                                   F P Mk λi
                                         F P Mik = P
                                                      i∈k
                                                          λi

where F P Mk is the amount of resources allocated to state k and λi is the FPM coefficient
of municipality i based on its population size.9
       Table 1 reports the population brackets and the associated FPM coefficients.10 As
discussed below, because of sample size limitations, we restrict the empirical analysis to
municipalities with population below 50,940 (about 90% of Brazilian municipalities and
34% of the total population) and focus on the initial seven thresholds: 10,189; 13,585;
16,981; 23,773; 30,564; 37,356; and 44,148. The intervals between the initial three thresh-
olds are equal to 3,396, while the intervals between the subsequent thresholds amount to
twice as much (6,792). For the sake of symmetry, we then restrict our sample to munici-
palities from 3,396 below the first threshold to 6,792 above the seventh threshold. Within
this population range, there are no other legislative or institutional discontinuities, with
only one exception: at 10,000 inhabitants, the cap in the wage of city councillors increases
by 50% (from 1,927 to 2,891 Brazilian reais, as of 2004).
       The coefficient of each municipality is set by the Federal Court Account (Tribunal de
Contas União, TCU), based on the population estimates calculated yearly by an inde-
pendent statistical agency, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (Instituto
Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatı́stica, IBGE). IBGE uses a top-down approach so that the
municipality estimates are consistent with the state estimates, which in turn are consistent
with the estimated population of the whole country, calculated on the basis of birth rates,
   9
     At the federal level, the resources earmarked for FPM transfers are 22.5% of total revenues from the
federal income tax and 22.5% of revenues from industrial products tax. The resources are then allocated
to the different states (F P Mk ), with poorer states generally receiving a larger share.
  10
     See Decree No. 1881/81, August 1981.


                                                   19
mortality rates, and net immigration between Censuses. In Appendix I, we describe the
exact statistical procedure followed by IBGE to calculate its population estimates.
       As further discussed below, population estimates from IBGE in a given year, however,
do not perfectly predict the FPM transfers each municipality receives in the subsequent
year. There may be various reasons for that. During the 1990s, several municipalities split
and this reduced the population size of pre-existing municipalities. As a result, a munici-
pality that had lost part of its population should have had its coefficient reduced according
to the new population. However, several law amendments froze the FPM coefficients and
this practice generated major distortions. In order to avoid these distortions, the federal
government established that by 2008 all municipalities should be framed in FPM coeffi-
cients corresponding to their actual population estimate.11 To avoid shocks in the finance
of the involved municipalities, however, the law established a transition period to the new
regime, so that in the period 2001–08 some municipalities still received FPM transfers
that were not consistent with their population. Furthermore, the FPM allocation proce-
dure is not audited. The population figures used by TCU and the associated coefficients
are published in the Diário Oficial da União. For some years, we compared population
estimates from IBGE and those used by TCU, and they do not perfectly coincide.12

3.1.2      Data on transfers

Our data cover two mayoral terms: January 2001–December 2004 and January 2005–
December 2008. We measure two key variables of the FPM revenue-sharing mechanism:
the amount of federal transfers and the IBGE population estimates.
       Data on FPM transfers received by each municipality are available from the website of
the Brazilian National Treasury (Tesouro Nacional). The variable we use in the empirical
analysis is the average amount of transfers in the first three years of each term (in real
values), therefore excluding the year in which the next election is held.13 This value is a
proxy for the amount of transfers that mayoral candidates in the 2000 and 2004 elections
  11
     See Supplementary Law No. 91/97, as amended by Law No. 106/2001.
  12
     We could retrieve only a few years for the population estimates used by TCU, because they are not
available in electronic format. Note that Litschig (2008b) detects some evidence of manipulative sorting
above the FPM thresholds in the TCU population figures for the years 1989 and 1991.
  13
     We cannot use 2008 (the electoral year at the end of term 2005–2008) because the IBGE population
estimates for 2007 are not available; we therefore exclude also 2004 (the electoral year at the end of term
2001–2004) for consistency. Estimation results are not sensitive to this choice.

                                                    20
should expect to receive during the next term, in case they won the electoral race. The
averaging across years within the same term also allows us to minimize measurement error.
      Population estimates are directly available from the IBGE website. We use them to
construct the “theoretical transfers” that each municipality in every state should receive,
if other factors did not play any role. In theory, the amount of transfers each municipality
receives should be calculated according to the IBGE population estimates that are sent
to TCU in the previous year. Therefore, for the term 2001–2004, we use an average of the
IBGE population estimates for the years 2000, 2001, and 2002; for the term 2005–2008,
we use estimates for the years 2004, 2005, and 2006.
      As explained below, for reasons of data availability, we exploit two samples of munici-
palities: a small and a large sample. Table 2 reports descriptive statistics, by population
intervals, on the actual and theoretical FPM transfers in both samples. On average, mu-
nicipalities in our large sample receive 33.79 hundred thousand Brazilian reais at 2000
prices (standard deviation 12.63). Theoretical transfers are slightly lower, with an average
of 33.44 (standard deviation 13.20).
      Figure 1 depicts the actual (top panel) and theoretical (bottom panel) FPM transfers
against the IBGE population estimates in the large sample. The left figure in the top
panel displays the scatterplot of the received transfers over the period 2001–2007; the
seven vertical lines represent the FPM population thresholds. The right figure in the top
panel shows the same association in a different way: a scatterplot where FPM transfers
are averaged over cells of 100 inhabitants, plus the smoothed average of transfers (solid
line) calculated separately in each interval from one threshold to the next. Both figures
display visible jumps at the FPM thresholds, with the exception of the seventh, where
sample size is also starting to get smaller.14 Some noise, however, persists around each
threshold, pointing to possible cases of misassignment. This is evident when the above
figures are compared with those in the bottom panel of Figure 1, which display the the-
oretical transfers. There—by construction—the jumps at the seven thresholds are clean.
Note that also theoretical transfers show some within-bracket variability because of the
different shares received by the states, and this variability increases with population size.
 14
      The results of the empirical analysis are not sensitive to the exclusion of the seventh threshold.




                                                      21
   Figure 2 emphasizes an additional peculiarity of the FPM allocation mechanism: since,
within each state k and population bracket λ, municipalities obtain the same resources,
the per-capita amount of both received and theoretical transfers is a decreasing function
of population size within each bracket.
   Finally, to check whether the increase in FPM transfers completely crowd-out other
types of revenues, leaving the budget size unchanged, we also collected data on munici-
pal finance, available from the Brazilian National Treasury website (FIMBRA dataset).
However, these budget data—unlike the data on FPM transfers—are self-reported and
therefore come from a different source.

3.2     The Brazilian anti-corruption program
3.2.1   Institutional framework

In 2003, the Brazilian federal government launched a major anti-corruption program. Since
then, municipalities have been randomly chosen by lottery to be audited on a monthly
basis. Auditors examine the use of federal transfers at the local level. Members of the
government, the media, and the general public may attend the lottery. The Corregedoria
Geral da União (CGU) is the independent body that conducts the audits. For each
municipality selected by lottery, auditors collect documents and information from the
period 2001 to the present. A few months after the audit, reports are sent to all levels
of governments and are also made available on the CGU website. Each report contains
information on the total amount of federal transfers audited. More importantly, the report
contains a list that describes the full details of the irregularities found by the auditors
and the related sector (health, education, social assistance, or infrastructure). Example of
irregularities are: fraud, non-competitive bidding in procurement contracts, over-invoicing,
diversion of funds, lack of completeness, non-utilization of the funds, as well as others.
   Between 2003 and 2004, in each lottery, 50 municipalities were randomly selected to be
audited. Since 2004, 60 municipalities have been selected in each lottery. To date, the total
number of audited municipalities is over 1,500. The program thus provide a valuable source
of information on budget irregularities and corruption episodes in municipal governments.
   Most of the audits concern projects or public works financed by specific federal trans-
fers other than the FPM transfers, although some projects financed or co-financed by


                                             22
the municipality unconstrained resources (therefore including FPM transfers) are also au-
dited.15 Thus, in the analysis below, we ask how an exogenous increase in FPM transfers
around the population thresholds affects corruption in the use of all sources of municipal
revenues. Since 70% of FPM transfers are unrestricted and given that FPM transfers
account for the largest fraction of municipal revenues, this question corresponds to a test
of Propositions 1 and 5 in the model (how rents react to a change in overall budget size τ ).
Specifically, the theory predicts that, as FPM transfers increase, municipal governments
feel less restrained in pleasing the voters and engage in more abuses of all kinds, and not
just abuses concerning the FPM transfers.
       We now describe in more detail how we classify each occurrence in the audit reports,
in the spirit of Ferraz and Finan (2008).

3.2.2      Data on corruption

Because of sample size limitations in the audited local governments, we restrict the sample
to municipalities with less than 50,940 inhabitants, corresponding to the first seven FPM
thresholds (see Table 1). In the two mayoral terms of our analysis, 606 municipalities were
randomly selected through the first 17 lotteries of the Brazilian anti-corruption program.16
The bad administration and corruption occurrences reported in the audit reports are thus
related to the municipal administration that was in power during the two terms (551
municipalities in 2001–2004 and 55 municipalities in 2005–2008).
       Many types of irregularities are detected by the audits. Illegal procurement practices,
diversion of funds, over-invoicing of goods and services, and fraud are the most common
occurrences. We introduce two definitions of corruption: broad corruption, which includes
irregularities that could also be interpreted as bad administration rather than as overt
corruption; and narrow corruption, which only includes severe irregularities. For both
definitions, we construct a binary variable (whether any irregularity was found or not)
and a discrete indicator (the number of detected violation episodes). As a robustness
  15
      In particular, to obtain discretionary transfers (covenio, most of them for infrastructures), municipal-
ities should contribute for a share of the project (contrapartida), whose amount is defined according to
limits based on the municipal financial capacity as established by the Lei de Diretrizes Orçamentárias.
Municipalities with population below 50,000 should finance from 2% to 4% of the total cost of the project.
   16
      Starting with the 18th lottery, the audit reports changed structure, making the classification of vio-
lation episodes more difficult.



                                                     23
check, we also consider an additional measure for each definition of corruption, namely
the ratio between the total amount of funds involved in the violation and the total amount
audited. The results for these additional measures are similar to those for the number of
violations reported in Section 5 and are available upon request.
       The definition of broad corruption includes the following categories of violation episodes:
1) illegal procurement practices, occurring when any of these episodes are reported: a) com-
petition has been limited, for example, when associates of the mayor’s family or friends
receive non-public information related to the value of the project, b) manipulation of the
bid value, c) an irregular firm wins the bid process, d) the minimum number of bids is not
attained, or e) the required procurement procedure is not executed; 2) fraud ; 3) favoritism
in the good receipt; 4) over-invoicing, occurring when there is evidence that public goods
or services are purchased for a value above the market price; 5) diversion of funds; 6)
paid but not proven, occurring when expenses are not proven. In Appendix II, we report
relevant examples for each violation category.
       The definition of narrow corruption includes the following irregularities: 1) severe illegal
procurement practices; 2) fraud ; 3) favoritism; 4) over-invoicing. In our opinion, many of
the irregularities regarding the two categories diversion of funds and paid but not proven do
not necessarily imply corruption (see Appendix II). Also some illegal procurement practices
might result more from bad administration than from outright corruption: therefore,
narrow corruption includes these episodes only if they resulted in severe violations, such
as favoring one specific firm or manipulating the bid value.
       In the following, we refer to “small sample”—consisting of 606 observations—as the
(random) sample for which we have information on the corruption measures. Descriptive
statistics on these variables—by population intervals—are reported in Table 3. According
to our broad measure of corruption, 71% of mayors in the municipalities in our sample
are found to be corrupt. This figure is decreasing with population size. For the more
restrictive measure, 42% of the mayors are found to be corrupt. This measure shows
higher variability, but with no clear pattern across intervals. The number of corruption
episodes, on average, is 1.99 and 0.73 for the broad and narrow definition, respectively.17
  17
   Note that our definition of broad corruption is close to the measure used by Ferraz and Finan (2009a,
Table 1), whose incidence is 78%.



                                                  24
       Note that, among the 606 observations in the small sample, 229 (about 38%) refer to
mayors who are in their first term and then decide to stand for reelection. This corresponds
exactly to the first period analyzed in the model. Since the model predicts that the
behavior of the mayor could differ depending on the term of office, as a robustness check
below we also restrict attention to these mayors.

3.3       Measuring the quality of politicians
In the model of Section 2, the observed quality of political candidates (their type J ) is
correlated both with their potential talent in government, and with their opportunity cost
of being in politics. We measure these individual features with reference to education
and to the previous occupation outside of politics. Since the unit of analysis is the mu-
nicipality in a legislative term, we refer to the average features of the pool of candidates
in each municipal election included in our sample. Specifically: 1) college denotes the
fraction of candidates with at least a college degree; 2) years of schooling denotes the
candidates’ average years of schooling; and 3) high-skilled occupation denotes the fraction
of candidates previously employed in occupations associated with a high opportunity cost
of entering politics.18 The source for these variables is the dataset on elected officials from
the Brazilian Electoral Court (Supremo Tribunal Eleitoral) website. We collected data for
all municipalities in the relevant population brackets, for the elections held in 2004 and
2008, irrespective of whether or not they were audited. Therefore, this corresponds to
a much larger sample of municipal governments than the small sample for which we can
measure corruption.
       The relevant variable in the model (π) refers to the quality (or type) composition of the
pool of opponents in the first-term reelection of the incumbent mayor. We thus restrict
attention to municipalities and mayoral terms in which the mayor is actually running for
reelection, within the relevant population brackets . We refer to this set of observations
as the “large sample” (2,788 observations). Here, in accordance with the model, the set of
candidates for which we measure education and previous occupation corresponds to the
  18
     We have classified as high-skilled these seven occupation categories: lawyers (7% of the sample),
physicians (8%), managers (3%), entrepreneurs (11%), agricultural entrepreneurs (15%), and other pro-
fessionals (12%). The remaining occupation categories include: blue collars (2%), general employees, such
as office assistants, waiters, secretaries, etc. (2%), self-employed (15%), politicians (5%), public employees
(10%), retired (3%), and other (7%).


                                                     25
pool of opponents faced by the incumbent mayor. Thus, the variable college measures the
fraction of opponents with a college degree, and so on.
       For this large sample, Table 4 reports descriptive statistics on the opponents’ charac-
teristics and the reelection frequency of incumbent mayors, by population intervals. On
average, the political opponents in our sample have about 11.9 years of schooling, and
44% of them went to college. As one would expect, educational attainments increase with
population size. Local politicians are relatively highly educated, as only 8% of the Brazil-
ian population aged between 25 and 64 have a college degree.19. As for occupation, 57% of
politicians had a high-skilled job before entering politics. Finally, 59% of the incumbent
mayors running for another term win their bid for reelection.20
       Clearly, this sample is not random, since it only refers to the elections in which the
incumbent mayor has chosen to run for reappointment. As a robustness check, below
we also report results for the larger sample referring to all municipalities of the relevant
population size on which data are available, and that includes also the observations where
the mayor does not run for reelection (either because he is in the second term, or because he
chooses not to run). There, the set of candidates for which the average quality is reported
corresponds either to all political candidates (since we cannot distinguish between an
incumbent and a set of opponents), or to all political candidates but the candidate of the
political party of the incumbent mayor.


4        Econometric Strategy
In this section, we formalize the econometric strategy that allows us to identify the effect
of federal transfers on both corruption and the patterns of political selection in Brazilian
municipalities. Basically, the institutional setup described in the previous section delivers
a treatment assignment mechanism typical of a (fuzzy) Regression Discontinuity Design
(RDD). Treatment assignment—receiving high versus low federal transfers—depends on
the running variable—population size—in a stochastic manner, but in such a way that the
propensity score—the probability of being treated conditional on the running variable—is
  19
   Source: Pesquisa Nacional de Amostra por Domicı́lios, PNAD, 2004.
  20
   Although we do not consider gender and age as outcome variables, note that the politicians in our
sample are predominantly male (89%) and, on average, 50.4 years old.



                                                26
known to have relevant discontinuities at multiple thresholds. The fuzzy design arises
from the fact that, as discussed in the previous section and shown in the top panel of
Figure 1, there are cases of misassignment around the cutoffs, with municipalities near
each threshold appearing both in the treatment and control group. In other words, not
all municipalities receive the amount of (theoretical) transfers they should receive based
on their IBGE population estimate (Pi ) and the state they belong to.
       At each threshold Pj , separating population brackets j and j + 1 in the FPM revenue-
sharing mechanism, “theoretical” transfers (τ̂ ) sharply increase from a lower (`j ) to a
higher level (hj ): τ̂i = `j if Pj−1 < Pi < Pj , and τ̂i = hj if Pj < Pi < Pj+1 , with hj > `j .
Theoretical transfers are thus a step function of Pi . Actual transfers (τ ), however, do
not necessarily follow through. One can think of theoretical transfers as the treatment
assignment and actual transfers as the observed treatment, in a situation of imperfect
compliance. Treatment assignment is exogenous around the policy thresholds, although
the observed treatment may also be influenced by additional factors, such as politicians’
ability in sidestepping the exogenous assignment rule or other random elements. As long
as actual transfers depend on theoretical transfers, however, we can use the latter as an
instrument in a (fuzzy) regression discontinuity setup. To capture that both the outcome
of interest (y) and actual transfers depend on theoretical transfers and other stochastic
elements, we can use a potential outcome notation, where yi (τ̂) and τi (τ̂ ) are the poten-
tial values of the outcome variable and actual transfers, both expressed as a function of
theoretical transfers (i.e., treatment assignment).21
       Formally, under the assumption of continuity of the conditional regression functions of
potential outcomes at the cutoff Pj (see Hahn, Todd, and Van der Klaauw, 2001; Imbens
and Lemieux, 2008), we can identify the reduced-form (or intention-to-treat) effects of
theoretical transfers on both actual transfers and corruption as:

             E[τi (hj ) − τi (`j )|Pi = Pj ] = lim E[τi |Pi = P ] − lim E[τi |Pi = P ],                 (28)
                                              P ↓Pj                   P ↑Pj

             E[yi (hj ) − yi (`j )|Pi = Pj ] = lim E[yi |Pi = P ] − lim E[yi |Pi = P ].                 (29)
                                              P ↓Pj                   P ↑Pj


In our framework, the continuity assumption simply requires that: i) there are no other
  21
    For the sake of simple notation, we omit time subscripts, but in our data observations also vary across
(two) periods. In the empirical analysis, we control for that by including time dummies in all specifications
and clustering the standard errors at the municipality level.

                                                      27
policies using a population discontinuity at Pj ; ii) municipalities cannot manipulate popu-
lation estimates to sort above Pj and receive more transfers. We already checked the first
condition in Section 3.1; we will formally test the second in Section 5.1.
   The above reduced-form effects can be consistently estimated in the following way (see
Imbens and Lemieux, 2008; Garibaldi et al., 2009):

                            τi = g(Pi ) + ατ τ̂i + δt + γp + ui ,                          (30)
                             yi = g(Pi ) + αy τ̂i + δt + γp + ηi ,                         (31)

where g(.) is a high-order polynomial in Pi , δt time fixed effects, γp state fixed effects, and
both error terms ui and ηi are clustered at the municipality level. In a trade-off between
accuracy and transparency, we estimate these equations both in the overall sample and
around each threshold Pj , as long as sample size allows us to do that.
   The next step is to use the above reduced-forms to identify the causal effect of FPM
transfers on the outcome of interest. Under the same continuity conditions, we have that
the quantity
                        limP ↓Pj E[yi |Pi = P ] − limP ↑Pj E[yi |Pi = P ]
                                                                                           (32)
                        limP ↓Pj E[τi |Pi = P ] − limP ↑Pj E[τi |Pi = P ]
identifies the average effect of actual transfers on the outcome y for compliers, that is,
for those municipalities above (below) the cutoff that receive more (less) transfers exactly
because of their higher (lower) theoretical transfers, that is, because of their treatment
assignment based on the IBGE population estimates.
   The causal interpretation of this IV estimand rests on two additional assumptions (see
Angrist and Lavy, 1999; Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin, 1996): i) exclusion restriction; ii)
monotonicity. The first condition states that theoretical transfers—which are a deter-
ministic (and discontinuous) function of population estimates—affect the outcome only
through the transfers actually received by municipalities; and this is plausible as long as
other policies do not share the same discontinuities. The monotonicity condition states
that, at each threshold, municipalities assigned below the cutoff do not effectively receive
more transfers than if they had been assigned above the cutoff. This assumption—like
the exclusion restriction—is untestable because it involves potential outcomes, but it is
more than plausible in our context. Indirectly, in Figure 1, the visible jumps in observed


                                                28
transfers at the FPM thresholds (all of them in the same, positive direction) are reassuring
about the validity of the monotonicity condition.
    Finally, it is worth noting that the causal effect we are identifying is local in a twofold
meaning. First, because of the RDD setup, it only refers to observations around the
thresholds. Second, because of the IV setup, it only refers to compliers, that is, munic-
ipalities that received larger transfers because of the (exogenous) FPM revenue-sharing
mechanism. The external validity of our exercise is of course enhanced by the presence of
multiple thresholds. Yet, the identification on compliers leaves aside a subpopulation that
might be of interest on its own: the always takers, that is, municipalities receiving larger
transfers irrespective of their position above or below each population threshold.
    We can implement (32) by estimating the following equation:

                                yi = g(Pi ) + βr τi + δt + γp + i ,                          (33)

where theoretical transfers τ̂i are used as an instrument for τi , g(.) is a high-order polyno-
mial in Pi , δt time fixed effects, γp state fixed effects, and the error terms i are clustered at
the municipality level. As above, we estimate (33) both in the overall sample and around
each threshold Pj . This estimation, depending on the outcome, delivers direct tests of
Propositions 1 and 5 (if y measures corruption), Proposition 4 (if y measures opponents’
quality), and Proposition 6 (if y is incumbent’s reelection) in our theoretical model.


5     Empirical Findings
5.1    Validity tests and preliminary results
Our identification strategy is valid if the population estimate we use as an instrument—
the IBGE population data—is not manipulated by local governments to sort above the
thresholds. Figure 3 shows the frequency of municipalities with less than 50,941 inhab-
itants, using different binsizes (283, 566, and 1,132 inhabitants) that never contain our
seven thresholds, identified by the vertical lines. The population distribution is positively
skewed. More importantly, visual inspection does not reveal any frequency discontinuity
at the FPM thresholds.
    We formally test for the presence of a density discontinuity at the seven thresholds in
Figures 4 and 5, where we perform a battery of McCrary tests by running kernel local

                                                29
linear regressions of the log of the density separately on both sides of each threshold (see
McCrary, 2008). In Figure 4, we run the tests using our population measure—averaged
over the term of office—both in the pooled thresholds used in our estimations (1–7 and 1–
3) and separately in each of the seven thresholds. We implement the pooling of thresholds
1–7 and 1–3 by merging the thresholds together and normalizing population size as the
distance from the closest threshold (with symmetric intervals around each threshold so
that no municipality belongs to more than one interval). As a result, each interval runs
from the midpoint below to the midpoint above every threshold (with a length of 3,396
around the first three thresholds and of 6,792 around the others). As we can see from
the figure, the log-difference between the frequency to the right and to the left of each
threshold is never statistically significant.22
       In Figure 5, we perform the same test for the pooled threshold 1–7 but separately in
every year, in order to control that our average population over the term is not masking
manipulative sorting in a particular year. Again, the log-difference between the frequency
to the right and to the left of each threshold is never statistically significant, despite some
(visual) evidence of a little sorting in the population estimates for 2001.23
       In Table 5, we further check for manipulative sorting by performing balance tests on the
available invariant town characteristics. If there were nonrandom sorting, we should expect
some of these characteristics to differ systematically between treated and untreated mu-
nicipalities around each threshold. The invariant characteristics we look at are the size of
the municipal area (measured in km2) and the geographical location according to Brazil-
ian macro-regions (North, Northeast, Center, South, Southeast), because all the other
variables in our dataset are endogenous to the policy. The balance tests are performed
by estimating discontinuities in the invariant characteristics at every pooled or individual
threshold as the jump in a (split) third-order polynomial fitted separately on either side
of each threshold. No pre-treatment characteristics show a significant discontinuity.
  22
     Point estimates (standard errors) for the tests in Figure 4 are as follows. Thresholds 1–7: -0.080
(0.198); thresholds 1–3: -0.168 (0.205); threshold 1: -0.229 (0.352); threshold 2: 0.319 (0.325); threshold
3: -0.690 (0.397); threshold 4: 0.304 (0.351); threshold 5: 0.719 (0.691); threshold 6: -0.518 (0.761);
threshold 7: -0.405 (1.240). Optimal bandwidth and binsize as in McCrary (2008).
  23
     Point estimates (standard errors) for the tests in Figure 5 are as follows. Year 2000: 0.040 (0.159);
year 2001: 0.258 (0.175); year 2002: 0.169 (0.171); year 2004: -0.157 (0.154); year 2005: 0.130 (0.166);
year 2006: -0.221 (0.187). Optimal bandwidth and binsize as in McCrary (2008).



                                                    30
   As the current FPM thresholds were established in 1981, we can also use information
from the 1980 Brazilian Census to check whether some proxies for the (pre-treatment)
development level of the municipalities are balanced around the (future) thresholds. For
this purpose, we use data from La Ferrara, Chong, and Duryea (2008) on the average
employment, the average ownership of durables (such as car, radio, and refrigerator),
and the average house access to public infrastructures (such as water and sewer) at the
municipal level. These additional balance tests, however, can be performed only on a
(selected) subsample of municipalities in our dataset, that is, those that already existed in
1980. From the original 2,788 municipalities in our large sample, we thus end up with 2,217
observations. Table 6 reports the estimation results. No (pre-treatment) employment or
wealth variables show a significant discontinuity.
   All of the above suggests that the running variable of our fuzzy RDD does not show
any evidence of manipulation, so that we can safely use it as a (local) source of exogenous
variation in the neighborhoods of our seven FPM thresholds. This is indeed what we
should expect, given how IBGE population estimates are constructed by combining past
Census information and imputing a certain rate of population growth to each municipality
according to the cell it belongs to (see Appendix I for more details). If manipulative sorting
were at work in the actual Census population numbers—for example, if mayors were able to
attract more inhabitants to obtain larger transfers—we would expect the IBGE estimates
to remove this problem by means of the estimation procedure. If manipulative sorting were
instead at work in the official figures released to obtain the transfers, we would expect this
to happen in the TCU data, and the use of IBGE estimates as an instrument would thus
serve the purpose of removing this problem.
   Finally, to verify that indeed our seven FPM thresholds correspond to relevant changes
in municipal fiscal policy, we regress some observed budgetary items against our measure
of theoretical transfers. This is relevant, because FPM transfers do not correspond to
the totality of federal or state transfers to municipal governments. Hence, to test the
predictions of the model, we need to assume that the increase in FPM transfers that
occurs at the population thresholds is not entirely offset by a corresponding reduction
in other (discretionary) federal or state transfers. The results are displayed in Table 7,
where we implement equation (30) with the (log of) the budget indicators as dependent


                                             31
variables, and the (log of) theoretical transfers as the regressor of interest. All variables
are reactive to the policy thresholds. In particular, the elasticity of total revenues is
positive and significant, although slightly lower than it would be expected if other sources
of revenues remained invariant, keeping into account the FPM share (about 40%). This
suggests that local governments react to the additional transfers by reducing local taxes,
as indeed shown in column 2 of Table 7. Local expenditures also go up with larger federal
transfers (see the remaining columns of the table), indicating that the reduction in local
taxes does not entirely offset the extra federal revenues. Note that the sources of data on
the budgetary items displayed in Table 7 are not the same as for the FPM transfers, so
that these coefficients ought to be treated with caution.

5.2     Estimation results and robustness checks
In this section, we implement the (fuzzy) RDD estimations discussed in Section 4 and test
the predictions of our model.

5.2.1   Transfers and corruption

We start by investigating the effect of federal transfers on corruption (Propositions 1 and
5 above). The results, consistently with the theory, point to a large and significant effect
of fiscal windfalls on the frequency of corruption episodes.
   Table 8 estimates the first stage and the reduced-form regressions—equations (30)-(31).
Throughout, we control for a third-order polynomial in population size, as well as time
and state dummies. The table reports the estimated coefficients of theoretical transfers,
in a regression where the dependent variable corresponds to each column heading. The
row “Thresholds 1–7” is obtained by estimating a single regression on the entire sample,
and implicitly constraining the coefficient on theoretical transfers to be the same at all
thresholds. Accordingly, the row “Thresholds 1–3” does the same over the first three
thresholds. The remaining rows correspond to different subsamples, where observations
are partitioned in symmetric intervals around each of the first three thresholds.
   The first column reports the estimated first-stage coefficient, namely the effect of theo-
retical transfers on actual FPM transfers. The coefficient is positive and highly significant,
but smaller than one. The finding that the impact of theoretical on actual transfers is less


                                             32
than one-for-one is not surprising: it might reflect manipulative sorting by the govern-
ment body responsible for assigning an FPM coefficient to each municipality (i.e., some
municipalities just below the threshold might be deliberately misclassified by TCU as
being above the threshold); measurement error in our constructed variable—theoretical
transfers—might also lead to a downward bias.
       The remaining columns in Table 8 report the reduced-form estimates for the different
definitions of corruption. By the estimated coefficients in the second and third columns, an
increase in theoretical transfers equal to one standard deviation (11.364 hundred thousand
reais in this small sample on corruption) translates into a 34% overall increase in the
incidence of our broad definition of corruption and a 49% increase in the incidence of the
narrow measure. The impact on the number of violation episodes is significant for narrow
corruption, but not for broad corruption.24
       Figure 6 provides a graphical representation of the discontinuities in the corruption
variables induced by the FPM policy (the intention-to-treat effects). We pool the seven
thresholds together by normalizing population size according to the distance of each mu-
nicipality from the above or below threshold; as above, intervals around each threshold
are symmetric and constructed in such a way that no municipality appears in more than
one interval. As expected, the scatterplots and the fitted third-order polynomials show
relevant discontinuities at zero, especially for the two corruption dummies.
       Table 9 estimates the baseline IV regressions—equation (33)—where theoretical trans-
fers are used as instruments for the actual transfers. Consistently with the size of the
first-stage coefficients, the IV point estimates in Table 9 are almost twice as large as
the intention-to-treat effects. An increase in the amount of actual transfers equal to one
standard deviation (11.275 hundred thousand reais in this small sample) translates into a
60% increase in broad corruption, 86% in narrow corruption, and 93% in the number of
episodes of narrow corruption. Note that also a lower—but more plausible—increase in
FPM transfers by 10% has a relevant impact, increasing broad corruption by 12 percent-
age points (i.e., by about 17%), narrow corruption by 10.1 percentage points (24%), and
  24
    Note that using a treatment dummy rather than theoretical transfers, exactly as we have done for the
balance tests in Tables 5 and 6, yields similar results with respect to the RDD estimations. In particular,
for the pooled thresholds 1–7, we obtain the following estimates (standard errors). Broad corruption:
0.304 (0.068). Narrow corruption: 0.320 (0.076). Episodes of broad corruption: 0.382 (0.249). Episodes
of narrow corruption: 0.442 (0.151). Results for the other thresholds are available upon request.


                                                    33
the number of episodes of narrow corruption by 0.19 (26%). Looking separately at the
individual thresholds, we can see that moving from the average amount of transfers due
to municipalities below the second threshold to the amount for those above it (an increase
of approximately 6.1 hundred thousand reais) would increase broad corruption by about
51% and narrow corruption by about 52%. For the third threshold, the jumps would be
of about 40% for broad corruption and 89% for narrow corruption.
   In Table 10, we implement a series of robustness checks to evaluate the sensitivity of
our results with respect to the functional form of the control function in population size,
G(Pi ), included in equation (33), or to the presence of a confounding policy on the wage
of city councillors at 10,000 (see Section 3.1). As for the functional form, we specify G(Pi )
as either a spline third-order polynomial (with each interval going from a midpoint to the
next), a second-order polynomial (spline or not), or a fourth-order polynomial (spline or
not): in all of these cases, the results are very similar to those reported in Table 9 for the
baseline specification with a third-order polynomial.
   As for the wage policy at 10,000, we introduce two checks: we flexibly control for
a (spline) third-order polynomial that also includes the 10,000 threshold, or we simply
drop municipalities below 10,000 to focus on a sample without confounding policies. Both
robustness checks confirm the baseline results.
   Finally, to further assess the validity of our identification strategy, in Table 11 we
perform placebo tests by estimating the treatment effect at fake thresholds, where there
should be no effect. In particular, mirroring the balance tests in Tables 5 and 6, we esti-
mate whether there is any discontinuity in our corruption measures at the fake thresholds
represented by the midpoints between the true FPM thresholds. With only one exception
at the 10% level, the effects are never statistically different from zero.
   On the whole, the quasi-experimental evidence confirms the theoretical prediction of
a political resource curse in terms of increased corruption. As mentioned above, the
corruption episodes documented in the audits are not strictly related to the FPM transfers.
Hence, these estimates document a general deterioration in the quality of the policy-
making environment induced by the additional revenues triggered by the thresholds.
   Note that, to gain observations, the specifications in Tables 8-10 never include regres-
sors referring to the quality of the opponents. Hence, strictly speaking, these estimates


                                              34
correspond to a test of Proposition 5, what in Section 2 we called the “general equilib-
rium” effect of budget size on rents, namely the sum of the moral hazard effect (holding
constant the quality of the opponents) and the interaction effect (when the quality of the
opponent is allowed to change with budget size)—see equation (27). The estimates remain
almost unchanged if we also control for the quality of the opponents, suggesting that the
moral hazard effect is responsible for most if not all of the estimated effect of budget size
on corruption. Nevertheless, this might reflect data limitations. When we merge the two
samples (with the audited municipalities and with the municipalities where we have data
on the features of the opponents), we are left with only 229 observations. Moreover, in
this small sample, the characteristics of opponents are balanced around the thresholds,
suggesting that there might not be enough variation to disentangle the moral hazard ef-
fect from the interaction effect. The overall impact of transfers on corruption, however,
remains statistically significant also in this small sample with 229 observations.
   As a final remark, recall that FPM transfers are only a fraction of the overall federal and
state transfers received by municipal governments. Under our assumptions we consistently
estimate the effect of FPM transfers on corruption. But to also estimate the effect of a
windfall of revenues on corruption (as by Propositions 1 and 5) we need an additional
hypothesis: namely, that other (discretionary) federal or state transfers remain unchanged
at each population threshold. In particular, if federal or state policymakers offset the
changes in FPM transfers by cutting other sources of municipal revenues at the relevant
population thresholds, then we estimate a lower bound on the effect of τ on corruption.
However, the assumption of no crowding-out seems to be met in our data, as discussed for
Table 7 above.

5.2.2   Transfers and political selection

Next, we study the effect of federal transfers on the quality of political opponents (Propo-
sition 4) and on the incumbent’s reelection (Proposition 6). As explained in Section 3.3, to
stay close to our model’s predictions, we first restrict the sample to municipalities where
the first-term mayor decides to run for reelection, because only there we have a clear mea-
sure of the quality of the pool of opponents. This sample is larger than that on corruption,
because it also includes municipalities that were not audited.


                                             35
       Table 12 refers to the first-stage and reduced-form regressions, while Table 13 reports
the IV estimates. According to both tables, larger (actual or theoretical) federal transfers
lead to a deterioration in the observed average quality of the opponents and to an increase
in the probability that the incumbent is reelected. According to the IV estimates in
Table 13, an increase in FPM transfers equal to one standard deviation (12.631 hundred
thousand reais in this large sample on political selection) translates into a 26% reduction
in the fraction of opponents with a college degree, a 8% reduction in their average years of
schooling, and a 26% increase in the incumbent’s probability of reelection. Analogously, a
10% increase in actual transfers induces a 7% drop in college, 2% in years of schooling, and
7% increase in the reelection probability.25 The overall impact on high-skilled occupation is
not statistically significant, but there is evidence of a negative effect at some thresholds.26
       The overall results on education are mostly driven by the first threshold, although in
the other thresholds the estimated coefficients have the expected sign, contributing to the
significance of the overall effect, where accuracy is improved. As mentioned above, at a
population of 10,000 the legislative cap on the salary of city councillors sharply increases.
One might be concerned that this institutional variation close to the first FPM threshold
might be responsible for our finding. The wage policy, however, involves councillors and
not mayors, whose quality we measure here. And general equilibrium effects from the
selection of councillors to the selection of mayors are implausible, because the wage policy
was only introduced in 2000. Furthermore, Ferraz and Finan (2009b) show that around
10,000 there is a discontinuity in the characteristics of councillors, which may be due
to either the wage cap or the FPM policy studied here. This discontinuity, however, is
equivalent to an increase in the fraction of high (rather than low) quality politicians in
the city council, the opposite of what we find for mayors. Nevertheless, below we report
  25
      As the current FPM revenue-sharing mechanism has been in place since 1981, one could be afraid of a
general-equilibrium effect of transfers on politicians’ education through the channel of citizens’ education.
Note that, the effect of transfers on schooling levels being positive (Litschig, 2008a), this would result in
our estimates to be a lower bound of the direct effect of transfers on politicians’ education. Furthermore,
our estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of the municipal literacy rate as an additional control in
all specifications (results available upon request).
   26
      As for corruption, using a treatment dummy rather than theoretical transfers, exactly as we have
done for the balance tests in Tables 5 and 6, yields similar results with respect to the RDD estimations.
In particular, for the pooled thresholds 1–7, we obtain the following estimates (standard errors). Years
of schooling: -0.069 (0.032). College: -0.490 (0.228). High-skilled occupation: -0.030 (0.023). Reelection:
0.057 (0.039). Results for the other thresholds are available upon request.



                                                     36
additional robustness exercises that address this issue.
   Figure 7 provides a graphical representation of the discontinuities in the political vari-
ables induced by the FPM policy (the intention-to-treat effects). Again, we pool the seven
thresholds together to gain sample size. The two education variables show a clear ten-
dency to grow both before and after the normalized threshold, but the discontinuity at
zero is both clearly visible in the scatterplots and statistically significant as the jump in
the (split) third-order polynomials.
   In Table 14, we implement a series of robustness checks to evaluate the sensitivity of our
results with respect to the functional form of G(Pi ), or to the presence of the confounding
policy on the wage of city councillors at 10,000, as we did for the corruption results in
Table 10. The results are strongly robust to any specification of the functional form of
the control function in population size. As for the wage policy at 10,000, the results are
robust to the inclusion of this additional threshold in a (spline) third-order polynomial,
but we lose the significance of most estimates when we drop municipalities below 10,000.
   In Table 15, we include some additional robustness checks specific to the political
selection results. There, we replicate our baseline IV estimations in different samples.
First, in panel A, we measure only the features of the opponent with the highest number
of votes (in this case, restricting again to municipalities where the incumbent reruns).
Second, in panels B and C, we check whether our results are driven by the (non-random)
sample restriction to municipalities where the incumbents decide to stand for reelection.
In particular, when the incumbent does not rerun, we look at the average quality of all new
candidates (panel B) or at the average quality of the new candidates who do not belong to
the incumbent’s political party (panel C). All of these robustness checks are consistent with
the baseline estimates, and the larger sample size even increases the statistical significance
of the results at some thresholds.
   In Table 16, exactly as we have done for corruption, we implement placebo tests at fake
thresholds (i.e., the midpoints between the true FPM thresholds) for the political selection
variables. The estimated effects are never statistically different from zero, supporting once
again the validity of the identification strategy.
   Finally, note that our results on political selection seem to be mostly driven by the
first three thresholds. Although this could simply be due to sample noise, it is tempting


                                              37
to speculate that the political arena changes along with local characteristics. In partic-
ular, the average presence of a local radio—which Ferraz and Finan (2009a) show to be
associated with greater political accountability—is 0.13 around the first three thresholds
versus 0.31 around the others. Therefore, the effects we find could partly interact with
the degree of political accountability.27

5.2.3      Corruption and the quality of opponents

Besides the predictions tested above, our theoretical model has implications on the inter-
play between corruption and political selection: a political opposition of worse quality is
predicted to increase corruption (Proposition 2), and to strengthen the positive impact
of transfers on corruption (Proposition 3). Unfortunately, Brazilian institutions do not
deliver a clean source of exogenous variation to test these propositions, but we can still
control whether they are consistent with existing correlations in our sample. However, an
additional difficulty arises from the fact that, as already noted, when we merge the small
(corruption) sample and the large (political selection) sample, the remaining sample size
is quite small (229 observations).
       With these limitations in mind, Tables 17 and 18 investigate the correlations. In
both tables, corruption is the dependent variable (measured in different ways). Table
17 reports the estimated coefficients of different indicators of the quality of the political
opposition, estimated by Probit (marginal effects) or by OLS. No clear correlation between
corruption of the incumbent mayor and the quality of the pool of opponents arises from
this exercise, contradicting Proposition 2. Table 18 is instead motivated by Proposition 3.
There, we report the effects of both FPM transfers and their interactions with different
measures of the opponents’ quality. Actual and interacted transfers are instrumented
with theoretical transfers and their respective interaction with opponents’ quality. The
coefficient of interest is the interaction effect, which the theory predicts to be negative.
Although in the larger sample that includes all thresholds there is no clear pattern, when
the sample is restricted to the first three thresholds of more comparable municipalities,
  27
    Including the presence of a radio station as a control variable in all the RDD estimations for the
corruption and political selection variables does not affect the results (available upon request), as this
variable is balanced around each threshold. Note that the political party affiliation of the mayor is also
balanced around each threshold, therefore excluding additional partisan effect.



                                                   38
the estimated interaction coefficients always have the (predicted) negative sign, and are
generally statistically significant. Thus here the evidence is not inconsistent with the
prediction that the adverse effect of fiscal windfalls is more pronounced if the political
opposition is weak.


6     Conclusion
Could a windfall of resources deteriorate the functioning of government institutions? And
if so, how does this happen? These are important questions, because lagging regions or
countries often receive additional funds from higher levels of government or from interna-
tional organizations, to make up for their under-development. Since a common cause of
economic backwardness is precisely the poor functioning of government institutions, the
risk that these additional resources could be counterproductive cannot be neglected.
    Here we have focused on two mechanisms that are of fundamental importance in a
variety of situations: the effects of additional resources on political corruption and on
the incentives to participate in politics. At the margin, higher exogenous revenues induce
more corruption, because incumbents have more rooms to grab rents without disappointing
voters. Moreover, if the benefit of corrupt activities is more valuable to those with worse
outside options, individuals of lower quality are attracted into politics. The interaction
between these two effects gives rise to a complementarity: precisely because his opponents
are now of lower quality, an incumbent can afford to grab even more rents while at the
same time increasing his probability of reelection.
    In light of these (theoretical) results, we have investigated a specific Brazilian insti-
tution that provides an ideal quasi-experimental setting. We found considerable support
for the implications of the theory. In particular, a 10% increase in the federal transfers to
municipal governments raises local corruption by 17% (broad definition, possibly including
bad administration) or by 24% (narrow definition, with only severe violation episodes).
Moreover, this fiscal windfall increases the incumbent’s mayor probability of reelection by
7%, and shrinks the fraction of his opponents with a college degree by 7%.
    These results are not inconsistent with higher transfers to municipalities increasing
the quantity and quality of public services provided to the local population. For instance,
Litschig (2008a), in the same quasi-experimental setting we use, finds that an exogenous

                                             39
increase in funds to Brazilian local governments raises spending on public education and
improves literacy rates. Nevertheless, our evidence suggests that these specific benefits are
accompanied by a general deterioration in the functioning of local government institutions.
   How general are these results, and in particular could they extend to other countries
and situations? Only additional research can answer this question. Certainly the high
frequency of abuses detected by the audits suggests that Brazilian municipalities are a
fragile institutional environment where political agency problems are widespread. It could
be that a windfall of resources would not have the same deleterious effects in societies
with a long tradition of good government and with abundant social capital. Nevertheless,
additional resources are often given precisely to regions or countries with weak institutions,
like in the case of Structural Funds to lagging regions in the European Union, or of foreign
aid to developing countries. As a result of these policies, these already weak institutions
could become even weaker.


References
 Angrist J.D., G.W. Imbens, and D.B. Rubin (1996): “Identification of Causal Effects
      using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91,
      pp. 444–472

 Angrist, J.D. and V. Lavy (1999): “Using Maimonides rule to estimate the effect of class
      size on scholastic achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp. 533–575

 Baumol, W. (1990): “Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive,”
      Journal of Political Economy, 98, pp. 893–921

 Besley, T. (2004): “Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of the European
      Economic Association, 2, pp. 193–215

 Besley, T. and T. Persson (2008): “The Incidence of Civil War: Theory and Evidence,”
      mimeo, London School of Economics

 Besley, T. and M. Smart (2007): “Fiscal Restraints and Voter Welfare,” Journal of Public
      Economics, 91, pp. 755–773


                                             40
Brollo, F. (2008): “Who Is Punishing Corrupt Politicians: Voters or the Central Gov-
    ernment? Evidence from the Brazilian Anti-Corruption Program,” IGIER working
    paper No.336

Carrillo, J.D. and T. Mariotti (2001): “Electoral Competition and Politicians Turnover,”
    European Economic Review, 45, pp. 1–25

Caselli, F. and J. Coleman (2006): “On the Theory of Ethnic Conflict,” mimeo, London
    School of Economics

Caselli, F. and G. Michaels (2009): “Do Oil Windfalls Improve Living Standards? Evi-
    dence from Brazil,” mimeo, London School of Economics

Caselli, F. and M. Morelli (2004): “Bad Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics, 88,
    pp. 759–782

Diermeier, D., M. Keane, and A. Merlo (2005): “A Political Economy Model of Congres-
    sional Careers,” American Economic Review, 95, pp. 347–373

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2008): “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s
    Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    123, pp. 703–745

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2009a): “Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence
    from the Audits of Local Governments,” NBER working paper No. 14937

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2009b): “Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary
    Incentives on Quality and Performance,” NBER working paper No. 14906

Gagliarducci, S. and T. Nannicini (2009): “Do Better Paid Politicians Perform Better?
    Disentangling Incentives from Selection,” IZA discussion paper No. 4400

Gagliarducci, S., T. Nannicini, and P. Naticchioni (2008): “Outside Income and Moral
    Hazard: The Elusive Quest for Good Politicians,” IZA discussion paper No. 3295

Galasso, V. and T. Nannicini (2009): “Competing on Good Politicians,” CEPR discussion
    paper No. 7363

                                          41
Garibaldi, P., F. Giavazzi, A. Ichino, and E. Rettore (2009): “College cost and time
    to complete a degree: Evidence from tuition discontinuities,” mimeo, University of
    Bologna

Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. Van der Klaauw (2001): “Identification and Estimation of
    Treatment Effects with Regression Discontinuity Design,” Econometrica, 69, pp.
    201–209

Imbens, G. and T. Lemieux (2008): “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
    Practice,” Journal of Econometrics, 142, pp. 615–635

La Ferrara, E., A. Chong, and S. Duryea (2008): “Soap operas and fertility: Evidence
    from Brazil,” mimeo, Bocconi University

Litschig, S. (2008a): “Intergovernmental Transfers and Elementary Education: Quasi-
    Experimental Evidence from Brazil,” mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Litschig, S. (2008b): “Rules vs. political discretion: evidence from constitutionally guar-
    anteed transfers to local governments in Brazil,” mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Litschig, S. and K. Morrison (2009): “Electoral Effects of Fiscal Transfers: Quasi-
    Experimental Evidence from Local Executive Elections in Brazil, 1982–1988,” mimeo,
    Cornell University

Mattozzi, A. and A. Merlo (2008): “Political Careers or Career Politicians,” Journal of
    Public Economics, 92, pp. 597–608

Messner, M. and M. Polborn (2004): “Paying Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics,
    88, pp. 2423–2445

Murphy, K., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1991): “The Allocation of Talent: Implications
    for Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, pp. 503–530

Persico, N., J.C. Rodriguez Pueblita, and D. Silverman (2009): “Factions and Political
    Competition,” mimeo, NYU




                                           42
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2000): Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy,
    MIT Press

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2003): The Economic Effects of Constitutions, MIT Press

Robinson, J. A., R. Torvik, and T. Verdier (2006): “Political Foundations of the Resource
    Curse,” Journal of Development Economics, 79, 447–468

Ross, M. L. (1999): “The Political Economy of the Resource Curse,” World Politics, 51,
    pp. 297–322

Ross, M. L. (2006): “A Closer Look at Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War,” Annual Review
    of Political Science, 9, pp. 265–300

Rosser, A. (2006): “The Political Economy of the Resource Curse: A Literature Survey,”
    IDS Working Paper No. 268, University of Sussex

Rossi, N. (2006): Mediterraneo del Nord. Un’altra idea del Mezzogiorno, Laterza, Bari

Tornell, A. and P.R. Lane (1999): “The Voracity Effect,” American Economic Review,
    89, pp. 22–46

Velasco, A. (1999): “A Model of Endogenous Fiscal Deficits and Delayed Fiscal Reforms,”
    in: J. M. Poterba and J. von Hagen, eds., Fiscal Institutions and Fiscal Performance,
    The University of Chicago Press for NBER

Vicente, P.C. (2009): “Does Oil Corrupt? Evidence from a Natural Experiment in West
    Africa,” Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming




                                           43
Appendix I: IBGE Population Estimates
IBGE uses a top-down approach to consistently estimate population figures for the lower
units partitioning the Brazilian territory. According to this methodology, IBGE first
produces a population estimate for a larger area in the year t, called Pt . Then, this large
                                                    PN
area is split in N smaller areas Pnt , where Pt =      n=1
                                                           Pnt , with n = 1, 2, ..., N. For
instance, assume that Pt is the population estimate for the entire Brazil, based on the
estimated birth rates, mortality rates, and net migration. Pnt is instead the population
estimate for a given state, and it is calculated in the following way:

                                       Pnt = an Pt + bn

where an = (Pnt1 −Pnt0 )/(Pt1 −Pt0 ); bn = Pnt0 −an Pnt0 ; t refers to the year of the estimate;
t0 refers to the 1991 Census; and t1 refers to the 2000 Census.
   Population estimates at the municipal level follow the same logic. Municipalities within
a given state are grouped by quartiles of both last Census population size and past pop-
ulation growth between Censuses; moreover, growing municipalities between the last two
Censuses are separated from shrinking municipalities. Each of these q = 1, 2, ..., Q cells
of municipalities is then assigned its share of the state population estimate, Pqnt , propor-
tional to the last cell-specific Census population. Finally, each municipality within every
cell is assigned its population estimate, Pmqnt , based on past Census information. The
specific formula for the municipal population estimates is therefore as follows:

                                  Pmqnt = amqn Pqnt + bmqn

where amqn = Pmqnt1 − Pmqnt0 /Pqnt1 − Pqnt0 ; bmqn = Pmqnt0 − amqn Pmqnt0 ; t refers to the
year of the estimate; t0 refers to the 1991 Census; and t1 refers to the 2000 Census.




                                              44
Appendix II: Examples of Violation Episodes
(1) Illegal procurement practices

   (a) Limited competition. In the municipality of Buritis (state of Rondônia), in a
bidding process regarding the purchase of food, the city invited three companies, two of
them from the municipality of Porto Velho, 210 kilometers far from Buritis. Auditors
contested this fact because in Buritis there are companies that could have participated
in the auction. More importantly, the company that won the bid for all 64 items (42,000
reais) was owned by the mayor’s wife. The mayor’s wife was also the accountant of another
company that was invited to participate in the auction.
   (b) Manipulation of the bid value. In the municipality of Itapira (state of São Paulo),
auditors found evidence of manipulation of the bid value for the acquisition of materials in
the construction of the water supply system. According to Law No. 8666/93, if the value
of the project is below a certain threshold, no bid process is required. Auditors found
evidence that the municipal administration had divided the project into three (fake) sub-
projects in order to avoid the bid procedure.

(2) Fraud

   In the municipality of Santa Terezinha (state of Bahia), auditors found evidence of a
simulated auction for the purchase of computer equipment worth about 10,000 reais. The
companies alleged to have participated in the procurement practice were: LL Equipmentos
Informática Ltda. (winner), MSGL Informática Ltda., Núcleo Comércio, and Servicos de
Informátiça Ltda. Although it is required that all bidders attend the opening of the tender
envelopes, the company MSGL Informática Ltda. never participated to the auction. The
director of the winning company (LL Equipmentos) declared to the auditors that: “(...)
I sold computer equipment worth 10,000 reais to the municipality of Santa Teresinha,
represented by the mayor’s husband, who showed me two different proposals by other
companies and asked me to under-bid them.”
   In the municipality of Salinas da Margarida (state of Bahia), there was evidence of
a simulated auction involving funds for education (FUNDEF): in three bidding processes
for a total amount of 142,600 reais, the alleged participants denied any involvement in the
auction. For example, the owners of the companies Plantek and J.S. Construções Gerais


                                             45
formally declared to the auditors that they had not been invited to this auction and that
their signatures had been falsified.

(3) Favoritism in the good receipt

   In the municipality of General Sampaio (state of Ceará), auditors found out that the
land on which a dam was built had been previously donated by the city to the owner, and
that this person also owned the surrounding areas, hampering free access to the dam.

(4) Over-invoicing

   In the municipality of São Fransciso do Conde (state of Bahia), the construction
company Mazda was hired without a bidding process to carry out the construction of a
road nine kilometers long. The road should have been budgeted at about 1 million reais,
but the invoices presented by the company proved that there had been a disbursement of
5 million reais. The municipal administration did not present any document justifying the
expenditure. Mazda, a company with no experience in road construction, sub-contracted
another company to perform the job only paying 1,800,000 reais.

(5) Diversion of funds

   The municipality of Buritis (state of Rondônia) received 50,000 reais from the federal
government to purchase a school bus for transporting students. Auditors found that the
vehicle was also used to transport professors from the urban area to schools in rural areas.
Furthermore, the school bus performed trips outside the municipality without justification.
   In the municipality of Cândido Mendes (state of Maranhão), 91% of the resources
that should have been spent for the salaries of professors were actually used to pay public
employees performing different duties.
   In the municipality of Belém (state of Paraı́ba), auditors found out that 160,000 reais
that should have been spent on basic health services (i.e., medical consultations, basic
dental care, vaccinations, educational activities, etc.) were used to pay meals for the staff
of the health program and to cover debt services of the municipality.

(6) Paid but not proven

   The municipality of Cerro Branco (state of Rio Grande do Sul) did not provide any
documentation to justify the expenditure of 29,100 reais for health services.



                                             46
Tables and Figures



                                           Table 1 – FPM Coefficients

                               Population                                       FPM
                                                                              Coefficient
                               Below 10,189                                      0.6
                               10,189–13,584                                     0.8
                               13,585–16,980                                      1
                               16,981–23,772                                     1.2
                               23,773–30,564                                     1.4
                               30,564–37,356                                     1.6
                               37,356–44,148                                     1.8
                               44,148–50,940                                      2
                               Above 50,940                                      2–4
                               Notes. FPM coefficient is the coefficient used in the FPM
                               revenue-sharing mechanism described in Section 3.1. The un-
                               derlined thresholds are those studied in our empirical exercise.




                           Table 2 – Actual and Theoretical FPM Transfers

                                     Small sample                                           Large sample
Population               Actual        Theoretical            Obs.              Actual        Theoretical           Obs.
                        transfers       transfers                              transfers       transfers
6,793–10,188              19.35            17.32               123               20.00           18.93              683
10,189–13,584             24.38            22.45               128               26.22           25.36              516
13,585–16,980             29.77            28.55                99               32.71           32.41              415
16,981–23,772             36.07            35.07               114               38.86           38.83              519
23,773–30,563             41.89            40.49                66               45.48           45.92              302
30,564–37,355             47.27            46.26                42               51.47           52.08              188
37,356–44,147             51.92            50.47                21               58.42           58.48              108
44,148–50,940             61.48            62.05                13               62.50           63.82               57
Total                     31.68            30.22               606               33.79           33.44             2,788
Notes. Population is the number of resident inhabitants. The other columns report the average values of actual and
theoretical FPM transfers (expressed in hundred thousand Brazilian reais at 2000 prices). Small sample refers to observations
for which corruption measures are available (random audit reports). Large sample refers to observations for which political
selection variables are available (i.e., where the incumbent runs for reelection). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                             47
                                       Table 3 – Corruption Measures

Population                 Broad              Narrow              No. of broad           No. of narrow            Obs.
                         corruption          corruption            corruption             corruption
                                                                    episodes               episodes
6,793–10,188                 0.72                 0.35                1.75                    0.56                 123
10,189–13,584                0.73                 0.50                2.05                    0.84                 128
13,585–16,980                0.72                 0.39                2.27                    0.64                  99
16,981–23,772                0.78                 0.53                2.13                    0.92                 114
23,773–30,563                0.67                 0.41                1.94                    0.82                  66
30,564–37,355                0.62                 0.31                1.83                    0.67                  42
37,356–44,147                0.62                 0.24                1.57                    0.33                  21
44,148–50,940                0.62                 0.46                1.85                    0.69                  13
Total                        0.71                 0.42                1.99                    0.73                 606
Notes. Population is the number of resident inhabitants. The other columns report the average values of the corruption
measures. The first and second measures are dummies; the third and fourth measures are the number of violation episodes.
See Section 3.2 for the definition of broad versus narrow corruption. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                   Table 4 – Opponents’ Characteristics and Election Outcome

Population                 College            Years of            High-skilled             Incumbent              Obs.
                                             schooling            occupation                reelection
6,793–10,188                 0.39              11.43                 0.53                      0.58                683
10,189–13,584                0.39              11.56                 0.56                      0.59                516
13,585–16,980                0.43              11.89                 0.60                      0.58                415
16,981–23,772                0.49              12.11                 0.58                      0.62                519
23,773–30,564                0.49              12.50                 0.59                      0.58                302
30,564–37,356                0.52              12.63                 0.58                      0.59                188
37,356–44,148                0.52              12.66                 0.63                      0.69                108
44,148–50,940                0.67              13.42                 0.60                      0.65                 57
Total                        0.44              11.93                 0.57                      0.59               2,788
Notes. Population is the number of resident inhabitants. The other columns report the average values of the characteristics
of the pool of opponents or the reelection of the incumbent. All variables are dummies, except Years of schooling. See
Section 3.3 for the definition of high-skilled occupation. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                           48
                     Table 5 – Balance Tests of Invariant Town Characteristics

                           Area        North        Northeast         Center        South        Southeast         Obs.
Thresholds 1–7             3.981        0.020         -0.059           -0.014        0.055         -0.003          2,788
                         (8.212)      (0.033)        (0.061)          (0.032)      (0.045)        (0.057)
Thresholds 1–3            -4.411        0.035         -0.080           -0.028        0.039         0.034           2,133
                         (3.610)      (0.034)        (0.068)          (0.037)      (0.050)        (0.062)
Threshold 1               -2.537       -0.005         -0.131           -0.011        0.130         0.017           1,199
                         (3.817)      (0.049)        (0.121)          (0.064)      (0.099)        (0.117)
Threshold 2                2.701       -0.007         -0.012           -0.038       -0.055         0.112            931
                         (6.885)      (0.073)        (0.127)          (0.079)      (0.096)        (0.118)
Threshold 3               -1.342        0.088         -0.178            0.018        0.070         0.001            934
                         (9.039)      (0.063)        (0.117)          (0.064)      (0.073)        (0.091)
Notes. Discontinuity of invariant town characteristics (area size in km2 and geographic location) at the FPM thresholds,
estimated as the jump of a (split) third-order polynomial around pooled thresholds (i.e., with population normalized as the
distance from the above or below threshold; symmetric intervals with no municipality in more than one interval) or around
individual thresholds. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level
in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                 Table 6 – Balance Tests of Pre-Treatment Town Characteristics

                         Employed           Refrigerator           Radio           Car         Water and           Obs.
                                                                                                 sewer
Thresholds 1–7              -0.170                0.559             0.460         0.031          -0.118            2,217
                           (0.700)              (0.717)           (0.594)       (0.307)         (0.685)
Thresholds 1–3              -0.714                0.969             0.835         0.079           0.423            1,644
                           (0.794)              (0.761)           (0.654)       (0.330)         (0.711)
Threshold 1                 -0.143               -0.068            0.133         -0.160           0.284             879
                           (1.058)              (0.591)           (0.419)       (0.224)         (0.641)
Threshold 2                  0.048               -0.730            -0.230        -0.058          -0.967             742
                           (0.927)              (0.562)           (0.451)       (0.250)         (0.652)
Threshold 3                  0.773                0.679             0.224         0.018           0.244             765
                           (0.862)              (0.420)           (0.328)       (0.159)         (0.501)
Notes. Discontinuity of pre-treatment town characteristics (from the 1980 Census) at the FPM thresholds, estimated as the
jump of a (split) third-order polynomial around pooled thresholds (i.e., with population normalized as the distance from
the above or below threshold; symmetric intervals with no municipality in more than one interval) or around individual
thresholds. All variables are per capita and measure average employment; refrigerator, radio, or car ownership; house access
to water and sewer. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in
parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                            49
               Table 7 – Budget Elasticities with respect to Theoretical Transfers

                          Total           Local           Total    Infrastructure Personnel Obs.
                        revenues          taxes        expenditure expenditure expenditure
Thresholds 1–7          0.527***       -0.700***        0.479***      0.708***    0.336***  2,788
                         (0.108)         (0.253)         (0.108)       (0.218)     (0.120)
Thresholds 1–3          0.627***        -0.711**        0.587***      1.017***    0.442***  2,133
                         (0.130)         (0.299)         (0.132)       (0.278)     (0.146)
Threshold 1             0.717***         -0.693*        0.637***      1.176***     0.391**  1,199
                         (0.184)         (0.421)         (0.186)       (0.445)     (0.195)
Threshold 2              0.511**       -1.321***         0.513**      1.233**       0.228    931
                         (0.227)         (0.479)         (0.238)       (0.573)     (0.245)
Threshold 3             0.866***         -1.072*        0.902***      1.589***      0.521    934
                         (0.285)         (0.648)         (0.275)       (0.515)     (0.318)
Notes. Elasticities of (self-reported) revenues and expenditure variables with respect to theoretical transfers, estimated as
the log-version of equation (30). All variables are expressed in Brazilian reais at 2000 prices. Mayoral terms 2001–2005
and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is
represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




         Table 8 – Reduced-Form Effects: FPM Transfers and Corruption Measures

                          FPM            Broad            Narrow          No. of broad         No. of narrow         Obs.
                        transfers      corruption        corruption        corruption           corruption
                                                                            episodes             episodes
Thresholds 1–7          0.553***        0.021***           0.018**             0.012             0.033**              606
                         (0.054)         (0.007)           (0.008)           (0.027)              (0.016)
Thresholds 1–3          0.599***        0.030***           0.022**             0.024              0.037*              464
                         (0.075)         (0.009)           (0.010)           (0.037)              (0.022)
Threshold 1             0.564***          0.013             -0.001            0.092                0.021              251
                         (0.118)         (0.019)           (0.018)           (0.057)              (0.037)
Threshold 2             0.707***        0.043***           0.030**           0.132*                0.056              227
                         (0.107)         (0.016)           (0.015)           (0.073)              (0.043)
Threshold 3             0.703***        0.032**            0.039**            -0.008              0.061*              213
                         (0.159)         (0.014)           (0.015)           (0.067)              (0.036)
Notes. Reduced-form effects of theoretical transfers on actual FPM transfers and corruption measures, estimated as in
equations (30)-(31). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in
parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                            50
                             Table 9 – IV Estimates: Corruption Measures

                            Broad              Narrow             No. of broad           No. of narrow            Obs.
                          corruption          corruption           corruption             corruption
                                                                    episodes               episodes
Thresholds 1–7             0.038***             0.032**                0.022               0.060**                606
                            (0.013)             (0.014)              (0.047)                (0.028)
Thresholds 1–3             0.050***             0.037**                0.039                0.062*                464
                            (0.016)             (0.017)              (0.060)                (0.036)
Threshold 1                  0.023               -0.001              0.163*                  0.036                251
                            (0.032)             (0.031)              (0.099)                (0.063)
Threshold 2                 0.061**             0.043**              0.187*                  0.079                227
                            (0.024)             (0.021)              (0.103)                (0.059)
Threshold 3                 0.044**             0.054**               -0.011                0.084*                213
                            (0.020)             (0.022)              (0.088)                (0.047)
Notes. Effects of FPM transfers (instrumented with theoretical transfers) on corruption measures, estimated as in equation
(33). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses.
Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                           51
                        Table 10 – Robustness Checks: Corruption Measures

                            Broad              Narrow         No. of broad    No. of narrow                       Obs.
                          corruption          corruption        corruption      corruption
                                                                 episodes         episodes
                                                             rd
                                                  Spline (3 -order) polynomial
Thresholds 1–7              0.039**            0.028*               0.032          0.057*                          606
                            (0.016)            (0.016)            (0.057)          (0.033)
Thresholds 1–3             0.049***            0.035*               0.056           0.052                          464
                            (0.018)            (0.018)            (0.066)          (0.037)
                                                       2nd -order polynomial
Thresholds 1–7             0.031***           0.033***              0.028         0.051**                          606
                            (0.012)            (0.012)            (0.039)          (0.024)
Thresholds 1–3             0.043***           0.037**               0.039          0.062*                          464
                            (0.015)            (0.016)            (0.055)          (0.034)
                                                  Spline (2nd -order) polynomial
Thresholds 1–7             0.041***           0.040***              0.022         0.072**                          606
                            (0.015)            (0.015)            (0.053)          (0.031)
Thresholds 1–3             0.048***           0.044**               0.036          0.065*                          464
                            (0.016)            (0.018)            (0.060)          (0.037)
                                                         th
                                                        4 -order polynomial
Thresholds 1–7             0.037***           0.028**               0.017          0.051*                          606
                            (0.013)            (0.014)            (0.049)          (0.029)
Thresholds 1–3             0.050***           0.038**               0.038          0.063*                          464
                            (0.016)            (0.017)            (0.060)          (0.035)
                                                   Spline (4th -order) polynomial
Thresholds 1–7              0.033**           0.031**               0.029         0.064**                          606
                            (0.015)            (0.015)            (0.049)          (0.028)
Thresholds 1–3             0.047***             0.026               0.054           0.042                          464
                            (0.018)            (0.019)            (0.066)          (0.038)
                                         Spline (3rd -order) polynomial including 10,000
Thresholds 1–7              0.039**            0.029*               0.022          0.053*                          606
                            (0.016)            (0.016)            (0.057)          (0.032)
Thresholds 1–3              0.024**            0.019*              -0.014           0.031                          464
                            (0.011)            (0.011)            (0.043)          (0.023)
                                          Spline (3rd -order) polynomial above 10,000
Thresholds 1–7             0.055***           0.040**               0.038          0.066*                          491
                            (0.020)            (0.019)            (0.066)          (0.039)
Thresholds 1–3             0.061***            0.039*               0.057           0.044                          349
                            (0.022)            (0.021)            (0.074)          (0.043)
Notes. Effects of FPM transfers (instrumented with theoretical transfers) on corruption measures, estimated as in equation
(33) adjusting the functional form of G(Pi ) as specified, or restricting the sample above 10,000 (wage threshold). Mayoral
terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at
the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

                                                           52
                              Table 11 – Placebo Tests: Corruption Measures

                              Broad               Narrow              No. of broad             No. of narrow             Obs.
                            corruption           corruption            corruption               corruption
                                                                        episodes                 episodes
Thresholds 1–7                  0.009                 0.095                0.254                    0.171                 543
                              (0.074)               (0.081)              (0.270)                  (0.165)
Thresholds 1–3                  0.019                 0.177                0.111                    0.189                 401
                              (0.103)               (0.116)              (0.387)                  (0.220)
Threshold 1                     0.049                 0.116               -0.051                    0.018                 241
                              (0.143)               (0.160)              (0.548)                  (0.312)
Threshold 2                    -0.132                -0.202               0.230                    -0.436                 226
                              (0.155)               (0.166)              (0.621)                  (0.322)
Threshold 3                    -0.134               0.301*                -0.180                    0.500                 198
                              (0.170)               (0.179)              (0.522)                  (0.357)
Notes. Discontinuity of corruption measures at fake thresholds (i.e., midpoints between the true FPM thresholds), estimated
as the jump of a (split) third-order polynomial around the (fake) pooled thresholds or around the (fake) individual thresholds.
Midpoints are: 1st ) 11,887; 2nd ) 15,283; 3rd ) 20,337; 4th) 27,169; 5th ) 33,961; 6th ) 40,753; and 7th ) 47,545 . Mayoral terms
2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at the
10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




    Table 12 – Reduced-Form Effects: FPM Transfers, Opponents’ Characteristics, and
                                   Election Outcome

                            FPM              College          Years of          High-skilled         Incumbent            Obs.
                          transfers                          schooling          occupation            reelection
Thresholds 1–7            0.732***          -0.007**         -0.059***             -0.002             0.009***           2,788
                           (0.025)           (0.003)          (0.019)             (0.003)              (0.003)
Thresholds 1–3            0.667***         -0.011***         -0.100***             -0.007              0.010**           2,133
                           (0.025)           (0.004)          (0.031)             (0.004)              (0.005)
Threshold 1               0.566***         -0.021***         -0.169***             -0.013              0.020**           1,199
                           (0.045)           (0.007)          (0.059)             (0.008)              (0.009)
Threshold 2               0.674***            -0.005           -0.091              0.004                0.005              931
                           (0.050)           (0.008)          (0.062)             (0.008)              (0.009)
Threshold 3               0.694***            -0.003           -0.057             -0.012*               0.012              934
                           (0.050)           (0.007)          (0.049)             (0.007)              (0.008)
Notes. Reduced-form effects of theoretical transfers on actual FPM transfers, characteristics of the pool of opponents, and
the incumbent mayor’s reelection probability, estimated as in equations (30)-(31). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.
Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *,
at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                               53
        Table 13 – IV Estimates: Opponents’ Characteristics and Election Outcome

                              College             Years of           High-skilled            Incumbent              Obs.
                                                 schooling           occupation               reelection
Thresholds 1–7               -0.009**            -0.080***              -0.002                0.012***             2,788
                              (0.004)             (0.026)              (0.004)                 (0.005)
Thresholds 1–3              -0.017***            -0.150***              -0.010                 0.015**             2,133
                              (0.006)             (0.046)              (0.006)                 (0.007)
Threshold 1                 -0.037***            -0.298***             -0.023*                 0.036**             1,199
                              (0.014)             (0.108)              (0.014)                 (0.016)
Threshold 2                    -0.008              -0.134               0.006                   0.007                931
                              (0.011)             (0.091)              (0.011)                 (0.014)
Threshold 3                    -0.004              -0.082              -0.018*                  0.017                934
                              (0.010)             (0.070)              (0.010)                 (0.012)
Notes. Effects of FPM transfers (instrumented with theoretical transfers) on the characteristics of the pool of opponents
and the incumbent mayor’s reelection probability, estimated as in equation (33). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.
Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *,
at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                            54
    Table 14 – Robustness Checks: Opponents’ Characteristics and Election Outcome

                               College           Years of          High-skilled   Incumbent                             Obs.
                                                schooling           occupation     reelection
                                                      Spline (3rd -order) polynomial
Thresholds 1–7                -0.011**          -0.088***              -0.003         0.009                            2,788
                               (0.004)            (0.030)             (0.004)        (0.005)
Thresholds 1–3               -0.020***          -0.161***             -0.012*        0.015*                            2,133
                               (0.007)            (0.051)             (0.007)        (0.008)
                                                           2nd -order polynomial
Thresholds 1–7                -0.008**          -0.069***              -0.001      0.012***                            2,788
                               (0.004)            (0.025)             (0.004)        (0.004)
Thresholds 1–3                -0.014**          -0.129***              -0.007      0.019***                            2,133
                               (0.006)            (0.040)             (0.005)        (0.006)
                                                                 nd
                                                      Spline (2 -order) polynomial
Thresholds 1–7                -0.010**          -0.082***              -0.003        0.009*                            2,788
                               (0.004)            (0.029)             (0.004)        (0.005)
Thresholds 1–3               -0.018***          -0.153***             -0.011*       0.016**                            2,133
                               (0.007)            (0.048)             (0.007)        (0.008)
                                                            th
                                                           4 -order polynomial
Thresholds 1–7               -0.010***          -0.083***              -0.002      0.012***                            2,788
                              (0.004)             (0.026)             (0.004)        (0.005)
Thresholds 1–3               -0.017***          -0.154***             -0.011*       0.016**                            2,133
                              (0.006)             (0.047)             (0.006)        (0.007)
                                                                 th
                                                      Spline (4 -order) polynomial
Thresholds 1–7                -0.009**           -0.079**              -0.006         0.009                            2,788
                               (0.005)            (0.032)             (0.005)        (0.006)
Thresholds 1–3               -0.020***          -0.160***             -0.013*       0.017**                            2,133
                               (0.008)            (0.054)             (0.007)        (0.009)
                                            Spline (3rd -order) polynomial including 10,000
Thresholds 1–7                -0.011**          -0.093***              -0.004         0.008                            2,788
                               (0.005)            (0.031)             (0.004)        (0.005)
Thresholds 1–3                -0.018**          -0.174***             -0.014*         0.012                            2,133
                               (0.007)            (0.054)             (0.007)        (0.009)
                                                        rd
                                              Spline (3 -order) polynomial above 10,000
Thresholds 1–7                  -0.004             -0.041              -0.001         0.008                            2,138
                               (0.005)            (0.036)             (0.005)        (0.007)
Thresholds 1–3                  -0.008            -0.115*              -0.008         0.013                            1,483
                               (0.009)            (0.067)             (0.009)        (0.011)
Notes. Effects of FPM transfers (instrumented with theoretical transfers) on the characteristics of the pool of opponents and
the incumbent mayor’s reelection probability, estimated as in equation (33) adjusting the functional form of G(Pi ) as specified,
or restricting the sample above 10,000 (wage threshold). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors
clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **,
and at the 1% level by ***.

                                                              55
Table 15 – IV Estimates: Politicians’ Characteristics in All Municipalities

                              College            Years of           High-skilled              Obs.
                                                schooling            occupation
                                                         Panel      A
 Thresholds 1–7              -0.011**           -0.087***               -0.001               2,788
                              (0.005)             (0.032)              (0.005)
 Thresholds 1–3              -0.015**           -0.151***               -0.010               2,133
                              (0.008)             (0.055)              (0.007)
 Threshold 1                 -0.037**           -0.430***               -0.016               1,199
                              (0.016)             (0.131)              (0.016)
 Threshold 2                   -0.015              -0.174                0.008                 931
                              (0.014)             (0.107)              (0.014)
 Threshold 3                   -0.002              -0.049             -0.025**                 934
                              (0.013)             (0.084)              (0.013)
                                                         Panel      B
 Thresholds 1–7                -0.004           -0.063***                0.003               5,452
                              (0.003)             (0.019)              (0.003)
 Thresholds 1–3              -0.010**           -0.109***                0.000               4,177
                              (0.004)             (0.030)              (0.004)
 Threshold 1                 -0.017**            -0.171**               -0.004               2,360
                              (0.009)             (0.067)              (0.009)
 Threshold 2                   -0.004             -0.113*                0.012               1,799
                              (0.008)             (0.058)              (0.008)
 Threshold 3                   -0.004             -0.079*               -0.002               1,817
                              (0.007)             (0.047)              (0.007)
                                                         Panel      C
 Thresholds 1–7                -0.004           -0.059***                0.002               5,281
                              (0.003)             (0.020)              (0.003)
 Thresholds 1–3              -0.010**           -0.107***               -0.002               4,027
                              (0.004)             (0.031)              (0.004)
 Threshold 1                  -0.016*            -0.181**               -0.007               2,267
                              (0.009)             (0.071)              (0.009)
 Threshold 2                   -0.006             -0.107*                0.009               1,745
                              (0.008)             (0.061)              (0.008)
 Threshold 3                   -0.004              -0.075               -0.004               1,760
                              (0.007)             (0.050)              (0.007)
 Notes. Same estimations as in Table 13 but with different samples. Panel A considers only the
 opponents (of the incumbent who runs for reelection) with the highest number of votes. Panel B
 considers all candidates in municipalities where the incumbent does not run for reelection and all
 opponents in municipalities where the incumbent reruns. Panel C considers all the opponents of
 the political party of the incumbent mayor (irrespective of whether the incumbent reruns or not).
 Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality
 level in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at
 the 1% level by ***.


                                                  56
        Table 16 – Placebo Tests: Opponents’ Characteristics and Election Outcome

                            College            Years of           High-skilled             Incumbent              Obs.
                                              schooling           occupation                reelection
Thresholds 1–7                 0.015             0.193                0.018                   -0.048             2,430
                             (0.033)           (0.232)              (0.033)                  (0.040)
Thresholds 1–3                 0.021             0.127                0.010                    0.004             1,775
                             (0.047)           (0.335)              (0.047)                  (0.057)
Threshold 1                    0.016             0.746               -0.007                   -0.011             1,066
                             (0.069)           (0.511)              (0.071)                  (0.082)
Threshold 2                   -0.017            -0.167               -0.008                   -0.062              953
                             (0.066)           (0.460)              (0.067)                  (0.082)
Threshold 3                    0.033            -0.018                0.108                    0.008              864
                             (0.069)           (0.503)              (0.069)                  (0.086)
Notes. Discontinuity of the political selection variables at fake thresholds (i.e., midpoints between the true FPM thresholds),
estimated as the jump of a (split) third-order polynomial around the (fake) pooled thresholds or around the (fake) individual
thresholds. Midpoints are: 1st ) 11,887; 2nd ) 15,283; 3rd ) 20,337; 4th ) 27,169; 5th) 33,961; 6th) 40,753; and 7th) 47,545
. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses.
Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                             57
                Table 17 – Opponents’ Characteristics and Corruption Measures

                                 Broad               Narrow          No. of broad                 No. of narrow
                               corruption           corruption        corruption                   corruption
                                                                       episodes                     episodes
                                                        Thresholds 1–7 (Obs. 229)
Years of schooling                -0.011               -0.016             0.011                         0.033
                                 (0.017)              (0.016)           (0.053)                       (0.029)
College                            0.141                0.135             0.164                        -0.072
                                 0.129)               (0.125)           (0.385)                       (0.263)
High-skilled                      -0.110               -0.072            -0.053                        -0.063
                                 (0.075)              (0.080)           (0.222)                       (0.138)
                                                        Thresholds 1–3 (Obs. 179)
Years of schooling                -0.028               -0.014            -0.006                         0.045
                                 (0.017)              (0.018)           (0.059)                       (0.032)
College                          0.216*                 0.106             0.017                        -0.249
                                 (0.130)              (0.146)           (0.423)                       (0.288)
High-skilled                    -0.204**               -0.082            -0.149                        -0.116
                                 (0.079)              (0.092)           (0.240)                       (0.149)
Notes. Probit (first and second corruption measures) and OLS (third and fourth corruption measures) estimations of the
correlation between corruption and opponents’ characteristics; marginal effects reported. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and
2005–2009. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is
represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                         58
    Table 18 – Opponents’ Characteristics and the Impact of Transfers on Corruption

                          Broad                 Narrow   No. of broad   No. of narrow
                        corruption             corruption corruption     corruption
                                                            episodes       episodes
                                       INTERACTION WITH COLLEGE:
                                              Thresholds 1–7 (Obs. 229)
Interaction                -0.002         -0.006              0.003          -0.009
                          (0.008)        (0.007)             (0.026)        (0.016)
FPM                       0.029*          0.030               0.021           0.058
                          (0.017)        (0.018)             (0.060)        (0.037)
                                              Thresholds 1–3 (Obs. 179)
Interaction               -0.021*       -0.025**           -0.095***       -0.064**
                          (0.011)        (0.011)             (0.033)        (0.025)
FPM                       0.051**          0.039               0.098       0.114**
                          (0.024)        (0.027)             (0.089)        (0.058)
                                  INTERACTION WITH YEARS OF SCHOOLING:
                                              Thresholds 1–7 (Obs. 229)
Interaction                 0.000         -0.000               0.000         -0.001
                          (0.001)        (0.001)             (0.003)        (0.002)
FPM                        0.024          0.032               0.018          0.065
                          (0.023)        (0.022)             (0.077)        (0.045)
                                              Thresholds 1–3 (Obs. 179)
Interaction                -0.002         -0.001            -0.011**         -0.004
                          (0.002)        (0.002)             (0.006)        (0.004)
FPM                       0.072*          0.049               0.198         0.148*
                          (0.039)        (0.036)             (0.128)        (0.081)
                               INTERACTION WITH HIGH-SKILLED OCCUPATION:
                                              Thresholds 1–7 (Obs. 229)
Interaction                 0.006         -0.004              -0.005         -0.006
                          (0.007)        (0.008)             (0.023)        (0.016)
FPM                        0.026          0.029               0.026          0.059
                          (0.017)        (0.018)             (0.056)        (0.036)
                                              Thresholds 1–3 (Obs. 179)
Interaction                -0.020       -0.027**            -0.079**      -0.077***
                          (0.012)        (0.011)             (0.033)        (0.025)
FPM                       0.057**        0.048*                0.116       0.139**
                          (0.025)        (0.027)             (0.091)        (0.059)
Notes. Effects of FPM transfers and their interaction with each opponents’ characteristic (instrumented with theoretical
transfers and their interaction with each opponents’ characteristic). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. Robust
standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the
5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.




                                                            59
                                                           Figure 1 – Actual and Theoretical FPM Transfers
                              80




                                                                                                                         80
      FPM Transfers




                                                                                                 FPM Transfers
                              60




                                                                                                                         60
                              40




                                                                                                                         40
                              20




                                                                                                                         20
                                   10189   13585   16981    23773   30565   37356   44148                                     10189   13585   16981   23773   30565   37356   44148

                                                              Population                                                                                Population
                              80




                                                                                                                         80
      Theoretical transfers




                                                                                                 Theoretical transfers
                              60




                                                                                                                         60
                              40




                                                                                                                         40
                              20




                                                                                                                         20




                                   10189   13585   16981    23773   30565   37356   44148                                     10189   13585   16981   23773   30565   37356   44148

                                                              Population                                                                                Population


Notes. Top panel: scatterplot of actual FPM transfers versus population size (left); scatterplot averaged over 100-inhabitant bins
plus running-mean smoothing performed separately in each interval between two consecutive thresholds (right). Bottom panel:
scatterplot of theoretical transfers versus population size (left); scatterplot averaged over 100-inhabitant bins plus running-mean
smoothing performed separately in each interval between two consecutive thresholds (right). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and
2005–2009.




                                                                                            60
                                                 Figure 2 – Actual and Theoretical FPM Transfers (per capita)




                                                                                                                              .003
      FPM Transfers per capita




                                                                                                                              .0025
                                 .003




                                                                                                      FPM Transfers
                                 .0025




                                                                                                                              .002
                                 .002
                                 .0015




                                                                                                                              .0015
                                         10189   13585   16981   23773   30565   37356   44148                                        10189   13585   16981   23773   30565   37356   44148

                                                                   Population                                                                                   Population




                                                                                                                              .003
                                 .003
      Theoretical transfers




                                                                                                      Theoretical transfers
                                                                                                                              .0025
                                 .0025




                                                                                                                              .002
                                 .002
                                 .0015




                                                                                                                              .0015




                                         10189   13585   16981   23773   30565   37356   44148                                        10189   13585   16981   23773   30565   37356   44148

                                                                   Population                                                                                   Population


Notes. Top panel: scatterplot of actual FPM transfers per capita versus population size (left); scatterplot averaged over
100-inhabitant bins plus running-mean smoothing performed separately in each interval between two consecutive thresholds
(right). Bottom panel: scatterplot of theoretical transfers per capita versus population size (left); scatterplot averaged over
100-inhabitant bins plus running-mean smoothing performed separately in each interval between two consecutive thresholds
(right). Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                                                                 61
                              Figure 3 – Population Distribution (<50,941)
                 400
                 300
     Frequency
                 200
                 100




                                    10189 13585 16981          23773        30565         37356        44148

                                                      Population size

                                                 bin=1,132                                bin=566
                                                 bin=283

Notes. Frequency of cities according to population size. Cities below 50,941 inhabitants only. The vertical lines identify the
first seven FPM revenue-sharing thresholds. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                            62
             Figure 4 – McCrary Density Tests: Pooled and Individual Thresholds


               Thresholds 1−7                          Thresholds 1−3                            Threshold 1




    −2000 −1000        0     1000     2000 −2000 −1000         0     1000     2000 −2000 −1000         0     1000     2000

                 Threshold 2                             Threshold 3                             Threshold 4




    −2000 −1000        0     1000     2000 −2000 −1000         0     1000     2000 −4000 −2000         0     2000     4000

                 Threshold 5                             Threshold 6                             Threshold 7




    −4000 −2000        0     2000     4000 −4000 −2000         0     2000     4000 −4000 −2000         0     2000     4000


Notes. Weighted kernel estimation of the log density (according to population size), performed separately on either side of each
pooled or individual FPM revenue-sharing threshold. Optimal binwidth and binsize as in McCrary (2008). Large sample with
political selection variables. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                            63
               Figure 5 – McCrary Density Tests: Pooled Threshold Year by Year


                  Year 2000                               Year 2001                               Year 2002




    −2000 −1000        0      1000   2000 −2000 −1000          0      1000   2000 −2000 −1000          0      1000   2000

                 Year 2004                                  Year 2005                              Year 2006




    −2000 −1000        0      1000   2000 −2000 −1000          0      1000   2000 −2000 −1000          0      1000   2000


Notes. Weighted kernel estimation of the log density (according to population size), performed separately on either side of the
pooled FPM revenue-sharing threshold (1–7) for each year in the sample period. Optimal binwidth and binsize as in McCrary
(2008). Large sample with political selection variables. Mayoral terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                            64
                                        Figure 6 – Intention-to-Treat Jumps: Corruption Measures




                                                                                           .7
                    .9




                                                                            .3 .4 .5 .6
                                                                            Narrow corruption
      Broad corruption
       .6   .7    .8.5




                                                                                           .2
                                −4000    −2000       0        2000   4000                              −4000   −2000       0        2000   4000
                                                 Population                                                            Population



                                                                            Episodes of narrow corruption
      Episodes of broad corruption
                                 3




                                                                                                1 1.2
                         2.5




                                                                             .2 .4 .6 .8
      1    1.5     2




                                −4000    −2000       0        2000   4000                              −4000   −2000       0        2000   4000
                                                 Population                                                            Population


Notes. The solid line is a split third-order polynomial in population size, fitted separately on each side of the pooled FPM
thresholds at zero (population size is normalized as the distance from the above or below threshold; symmetric intervals with
no municipality in more than one interval). The dashed lines are the 95% confidence interval of the polynomial. Scatter points
are averaged over 250-unit intervals. Small sample with corruption variables (530 obs.). Terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                                       65
Figure 7 – Intention-to-Treat Jumps: Opponents’ Characteristics and Election Outcome




                                                                                   13
                   .6
                   .55




                                                                         Years of schooling
                                                                         11.5 12 12.5
       College
      .45 .5       .4
                   .35




                                                                                   11
                              −4000   −2000       0        2000   4000                      −4000   −2000       0        2000   4000
                                              Population                                                    Population
                              .7




                                                                                   .7
      High−skilled occupation




                                                                         Incumbent reelection
                       .65




                                                                                        .65
                 .6




                                                                                 .6
         .55




                                                                           .55
                   .5




                                                                                   .5




                              −4000   −2000       0        2000   4000                      −4000   −2000       0        2000   4000
                                              Population                                                    Population


Notes. The solid line is a split third-order polynomial in population size, fitted separately on each side of the pooled FPM
thresholds at zero (population size is normalized as the distance from the above or below threshold; symmetric intervals with no
municipality in more than one interval). The dashed lines are the 95% confidence interval of the polynomial. Scatter points are
averaged over 250-unit intervals. Large sample with political selection variables (2,430 obs.). Terms 2001–2005 and 2005–2009.




                                                                    66
