                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BANKRUPTCY AND THE COLLATERAL CHANNEL

                                          Efraim Benmelech
                                          Nittai K. Bergman

                                         Working Paper 15708
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15708


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2010




We thank Paul Asquith, Douglas Baird, John Campbell, Lauren Cohen, Shawn Cole, Joshua Coval,
Sergei Davydenko, Oliver Hart, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Heather Tookes, Jeffrey Zwiebel, and
seminar participants at Harvard University and the 2008 Financial Research Association Meeting.
We also thank Robert Grundy and Phil Shewring from Airclaims Inc. Ricardo Enriquez and Apurv
Jain provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Bankruptcy and the Collateral Channel
Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman
NBER Working Paper No. 15708
January 2010
JEL No. E32,E44,G01,G12,G33,L93

                                              ABSTRACT

Do bankrupt firms impose negative externalities on their non-bankrupt competitors? We propose and
analyze a collateral channel in which a firm’s bankruptcy reduces collateral values of other industry
participants, thereby increasing the cost of external debt finance industry wide. To identify this collateral
channel, we use a novel dataset of secured debt tranches issued by U.S. airlines which includes a detailed
description of the underlying assets serving as collateral. Our estimates suggest that industry bankruptcies
have a sizeable impact on the cost of debt financing of other industry participants. We discuss how
the collateral channel may lead to contagion effects which amplify the business cycle during industry
downturns.


Efraim Benmelech
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu

Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-437
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu
Introduction

Do bankrupt ﬁrms aﬀect their solvent non-bankrupt competitors? While there is a large body of
research studying the consequences of bankruptcy reorganizations and liquidations for those ﬁrms
that actually ﬁle for court protection (e.g. Asquith et al. (1994), Hotchkiss (1995), and Strömberg
(2000)), little is known about the externalities that bankrupt ﬁrms impose on other ﬁrms operating
in the same industry. Any such externalities would be of particular concern, as they may give rise to
self reinforcing feedback loops that amplify the business cycle during industry downturns. Indeed,
the potential for contagion eﬀects has been of particular concern in the ongoing ﬁnancial panic of
2007-2009 where insolvent bank liquidations and asset sell oﬀs impose ‘ﬁre-sale’ externalities on the
economy at large (see e.g. Kashyap et al. (2008)).
   In this paper we identify one channel in which bankrupt ﬁrms, through their impact on collateral
values, impose negative externalities on non-bankrupt competitors. We use the term ‘collateral
channel’ to describe this eﬀect. According to the collateral channel, a ﬁrm’s bankruptcy reduces
collateral values of other industry participants, particularly when the market for assets is relatively
illiquid. Since collateral plays an important role in raising debt ﬁnance, this reduction in collateral
values will increase the cost and reduce the availability of external ﬁnance across the entire industry.
   Theory provides two interrelated reasons for the prediction that bankruptcy of industry par-
ticipants lowers collateral values of other industry participants. First, a ﬁrm’s bankruptcy and the
resultant increased likelihood of asset sales will place downward pressure on the value of similar
assets, particularly when there are frictions in this secondary market. For example, in an illiquid
market, bankruptcy induced sales of assets will create a disparity of supply over demand, causing
asset prices to decline, at least temporarily. In the context of real estate markets, whose collapse
was of crucial importance in instigating and magnifying the crisis, Campbell et al. (2009) provide
evidence of spillover eﬀects in which house foreclosures reduce the price of other houses located in
the same area.
   The second reason that bankruptcies will tend to reduce collateral values is their impact on the
demand for assets. When a ﬁrm is in ﬁnancial distress, its demand for industry assets will likely
diminish, as the ﬁrm does not have, and cannot easily raise, the funding which would be required
to purchase industry assets (Shleifer and Vishny, (1992), Kiyotaki and Moore, (1997)). Thus,
bankruptcies and ﬁnancial distress reduce demand for industry assets, again placing downward


                                                   1
pressure on the value of collateral. Reductions in demand for assets driven by bankruptcies and
ﬁnancial distress are currently evident in the diﬃculties the FDIC is encountering in selling failed
banks. These diﬃculties have arisen because traditional buyers of failed banks – namely, other
banks – are ﬁnancially weak.1
    Thus, both due to increased supply and reduced demand for industry assets, the collateral
channel implies that bankruptcies increase the likelihood of asset ﬁre sales, reducing collateral
values industry wide. This weakens the balance sheet of non-bankrupt ﬁrms, thereby raising their
cost of debt capital.
    Empirically, a number of important outcomes have been shown to be sensitive to the announce-
ment of bankruptcy of industry competitors. For example, Lang and Stulz (1992) show that when
a ﬁrm declares bankruptcy, on average, competitor ﬁrm stock prices react negatively. Likewise,
Hertzel and Oﬃcer (2008) and Jorion and Zhang (2007) examine the eﬀect of bankruptcy on com-
petitors’ loan yields and CDS spreads. However, identifying a causal link from the ﬁnancial distress
or bankruptcy ﬁlings of some players in an industry to their solvent non-bankrupt competitors is
diﬃcult since bankruptcy ﬁlings and ﬁnancial distress are potentially correlated with the state of
the industry. Financial distress and bankruptcy ﬁlings themselves thus convey industry speciﬁc
information, explaining, for example, negative industry wide stock price reactions and loan pricing
eﬀects. The question, therefore, remains: do bankrupt ﬁrms aﬀect their competitors in a causal
manner or do the observed adverse eﬀects merely reﬂect changes in the economic environment faced
by the industry at large?
    Using a novel dataset of secured debt tranches issued by U.S. airlines, we provide empirical
support for the collateral channel. Airlines in the U.S. issue tranches of secured debt known as
Equipment Trust Certiﬁcates (ETCs), Enhanced Equipment Trust Securities (EETCs), and Pass
Through Certiﬁcates (PTCs). We construct a sample of aircraft tranche issues and then obtain
the serial number of all aircraft that were pledged as collateral. For each of the debt tranches
in our sample we can identify precisely its underlying collateral. We then identify the ‘collateral
channel’ oﬀ of both the time-series variation of bankruptcy ﬁlings by airlines, and the cross-sectional
variation in the overlap between the aircraft types in the collateral of a speciﬁc debt tranche and
the aircraft types operated by bankrupt airlines. The richness of our data – which includes detailed
   1
     Indeed, to partially solve this problem, the FDIC is looking outside the traditional market, at private equity
funds, to infuse fresh capital into the banking system and purchase failed ﬁnancial institutions. See “New Rules
Restrict Bank Sales, New York Times, August 26th, 2009.


                                                        2
information on tranches’ underlying collateral and airlines’ ﬂeets – combined with the fairly large
number of airline bankruptcies in our sample period, allows us to identify strategic externalities
that are likely driven by a collateral channel rather than by an industry shock to the economic
environment.
   At heart, our identiﬁcation strategy relies on analyzing the diﬀerential impact of an airline’s
bankruptcy on the credit spread of tranches which are secured by aircraft of diﬀerent model types.
According to the collateral channel hypothesis, tranches whose underlying collateral are of model
types which have a large amount of overlap with the ﬂeet of the bankrupt airline, should exhibit
larger price declines than tranches whose collateral has only little overlap with the bankrupt airline’s
ﬂeet.
   For each tranche in our sample we construct two measures of bankruptcy induced collateral
shocks. The ﬁrst measure tracks the evolution over time of the number of airlines in bankruptcy
operating aircraft of the same model types as those serving as collateral for the tranche. Since
airlines tend to acquire aircraft of the same model types which they already operate, an increase in
the ﬁrst measure is associated with a reduction in the number of potential buyers of the underlying
tranche collateral. The second measure of collateral shocks tracks the number of aircraft operated
by bankrupt airlines of the same model type as those serving as tranche collateral. An increase in
this second measure is associated with a greater supply of aircraft on the market similar to those
serving as tranche collateral. Increases in either of these two measures, therefore, tend to decrease
the value of tranche collateral and hence increase credit spreads.
   Using both measures, we ﬁnd that bankruptcy-induced collateral shocks are indeed associated
with lower tranche spreads. For example, our univariate tests show that the mean spread of tranches
with no potential buyers in bankruptcy is 208 basis points, while the mean spread of tranches with
at least one potential buyer in bankruptcy is 339 basis points. Moreover, our regression analysis
shows that the results are robust to a battery of airline and tranche controls, as well as airline,
tranche and year ﬁxed-eﬀects.
   We continue by showing that the eﬀect of bankruptcy-induced collateral shocks on credit spreads
is higher for less-senior tranches and tranches with higher loan-to-value. Further, we ﬁnd that credit
spreads of less proﬁtable airlines display higher sensitivity to collateral shocks. Finally, using a host
of robustness tests and analysis we show that our results are not driven by underlying industry
conditions, or by other forms of potential contagion unrelated to the collateral channel.

                                                   3
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides the theoretical framework for the
analysis and explains our identiﬁcation methodology. Section 2 provides the institutional details on
the market for Equipment Trust Certiﬁcates and Enhanced Equipment Trust Certiﬁcates. Section
3 describes our data and the empirical measures. Section 4 presents the empirical analysis of the
relation between bankruptcy-induced collateral shocks and credit spreads. Section 5 concludes.


1.     Theory and Identification Strategy

Bankrupt ﬁrms may inﬂict indirect costs of ﬁnancial distress on their non-bankrupt competitors,
for example, by deterring customers and suppliers from dealing with ﬁrms in the same industry.
However, the fact that non-bankrupt ﬁrms within the industry exhibit contemporaneous negative
reactions might merely reﬂect a deteriorating economic environment. Lang and Stulz (1992) were
the ﬁrst to point to the empirical problem in identifying a causal contagious eﬀect of bankruptcy.
They write:

       An oft-repeated concern is that bankruptcy is contagious within an industry. The com-
       mon view is that one ﬁrm’s bankruptcy makes customers and suppliers wary of the other
       ﬁrms in the same industry irrespective of their economic health and hence makes them
       worse oﬀ. An alternative, more benign, view of contagion is that the bankruptcy an-
       nouncement reveals negative information about the components of cash ﬂows that are
       common to all ﬁrms in the industry and, consequently, decreases the market’s expec-
       tation of the proﬁtability of the industry’s ﬁrms. From an empirical perspective, it is
       diﬃcult to distinguish between these two views of contagion, but they have strongly dif-
       ferent implication for public policy. If contagion is only an information eﬀect, it has no
       social costs.

Several papers study intra-industry contagion eﬀects of bankruptcy. Bernanke (1983) ﬁnds con-
tagion eﬀects during the great depression, while Warner (1977) ﬁnds no contagion in the railroad
industry during the early 20th century. Lang and Stulz (1992) investigate the eﬀect of bankruptcy
announcements on equity values on the bankrupt ﬁrm’s competitors. They ﬁnd that bankruptcy
announcements decrease the value of competitors in highly levered industries, while the eﬀect is
positive in highly concentrated industries with low leverage, suggesting that in these industries
competitors beneﬁt from the ﬁnancial diﬃculties of bankrupt ﬁrms. Hertzel and Oﬃcer (2008)

                                                    4
ﬁnd that spreads on corporate loans are higher when the loan originates or is renegotiated during
times in which industry rivals ﬁle for bankruptcy. Similar to Lang and Stulz (1992), they ﬁnd
that contagion in loan spreads is mitigated in concentrated industries. Likewise, Jorion and Zhang
(2007) ﬁnd evidence that is consistent with the contagion eﬀect of bankruptcy using credit default
swaps data.2
       While making important contributions and advancing the knowledge about the empirical reg-
ularities in the data, none of these papers identify the direction of the causality from bankruptcy
to industry contagion. Is bankruptcy contagious or benign? Moreover, the evidence in these paper
does not pin down the mechanism through which bankruptcy aﬀect competitors.
       In this paper, we identify one channel, which we call the ‘collateral channel’, through which
bankrupt ﬁrms impose negative externalities on their non-bankrupt competitors. In this collateral
channel, a bankruptcy of an industry participant serves to lower the value of similar collateral
industry wide. This occurs for two reasons. First, a ﬁrm’s bankruptcy and the resultant increased
likelihood of the sale of all or a fraction of its assets will place downward pressure on the value
of similar assets, particularly when there are frictions in this secondary market.3 Second, when
a ﬁrm is in ﬁnancial distress its demand for industry assets will likely diminish since it does not
have, and can not easily raise, capital to purchase industry assets (Shleifer and Vishny (1992)).
Since collateral plays an important role in raising debt ﬁnancing, the reduction in collateral values
associated with a ﬁrm’s bankruptcy will increase the cost and reduce the availability of external debt
ﬁnance. The collateral channel therefore implies that bankruptcies impose a negative externality
on other industry participants through their impact on the value of collateral.
       To analyze this collateral channel we focus on a single industry – airlines – and employ a unique
identiﬁcation strategy. This strategy involves utilizing information on collateral characteristics,
collateral pricing, and the timing of airline bankruptcies in the following manner. Airlines in the
U.S. issue tranches of secured debt to ﬁnance their operations. The debt is secured by a pool of
aircraft serving as collateral. Using ﬁling prospectuses, we identify the model type of all aircraft
serving as collateral in each pool. For each tranche we obtain a time series of prices and obtain the
   2
     In related literature, Chevalier and Scharfstein (1995, 1996) and Phillips (1995) examine a contagion eﬀect from
ﬁrms in ﬁnancial distress to other industry participants through a product market pricing channel. They show that
liquidity constrained ﬁrms – as proxied by those that undertook leveraged buyouts – tended to increase their product
prices.
   3
     See e.g. Pulvino (1998, 1999) for evidence on asset ﬁre sales. Further support for ﬁre sales is provided by Acharya
et al. (2007) who show that recovery rates are lower when an industry is in distress.



                                                           5
dates and durations of all bankruptcy ﬁlings of airlines in the U.S. during the years 1994-2007.4
       At heart, our identiﬁcation strategy relies on analyzing the diﬀerential impact of an airline’s
bankruptcy on the price of tranches which are secured by aircraft of diﬀerent model types. The
collateral channel hypothesis predicts that tranches whose underlying collateral are of model types
which have a large degree of overlap with the ﬂeet of the bankrupt airline should exhibit larger
price declines than tranches whose collateral has little overlap with the bankrupt airline’s ﬂeet. As
explained above, an airline’s bankruptcy and the increased likelihood of the sale of part or all of
the airline’s ﬂeet will place downward pressure on the value of aircraft of the same model type.
Furthermore, as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992), since demand for a given aircraft model type stems
to a large extent from airlines who already operate that model type, an airline’s ﬁnancial distress
and bankruptcy will reduce demand for the types of aircraft it operates in its ﬂeet. For these two
reasons – both increased supply of aircraft in the used market and reduced demand for certain
aircraft – tranches secured by aircraft of model types exhibiting larger overlaps with the model
types of the bankrupt airline’s ﬂeet should experience larger price declines.
       By utilizing variation in the ﬂeets of airlines going bankrupt and their degree of overlap with
the type of aircraft serving as collateral for secured debt of other airlines, we can thus identify a
collateral channel through which one ﬁrm’s bankruptcy aﬀects other ﬁrms in the same industry.
Since we rely on the diﬀerential impact of bankruptcy on credit spreads of tranches secured by
aircraft of diﬀerent model types within an airline, this identiﬁcation strategy alleviates concerns
that the results are driven by an information channel eﬀect in which bankruptcies convey negative
information common to all ﬁrms in the industry. Moreover, we test our evidence for the collateral
channel against alternative contagion-based explanations. For example, we show that are results
are not driven by contagion through credit enhancers or through holders of tranche securities.
       In the next section we describe in further detail the debt instruments used by airlines to issue
secured debt and their development over time.


2.       Airline Equipment Trust Certificates

ETCs and EETCs are aircraft asset-backed securities (ABS) that have been used since the early
1990s to ﬁnance the acquisitions of new aircraft.5 Aircraft ABSs are subject to Section 1110
   4
    We do not observe transaction prices of aircraft.
   5
    Our discussion here draws heavily from Littlejohns and McGairl (1998), Morrell (2001), and Benmelech and
Bergman (2008a) who provide an extensive description of the market for airline equipment trust certiﬁcates and its


                                                        6
protection which provided relief from the automatic stay of assets in bankruptcy to creditors holding
a secured interest in aircraft, strengthening the creditor rights of the holders of these securities.
    In a traditional ETC, a trustee issues equipment trust certiﬁcates to investors and uses the
proceeds to buy the aircraft which is then leased to the airline. Lease payments are then used
to pay principal and interest on the certiﬁcates. The collateral of ETCs typically included only
one or two aircraft. For example, on August 24, 1990, American Airlines issued an Equipment
Trust Certiﬁcate (1990 Equipment Trust Certiﬁcates, Series P) maturing on March 4, 2014. The
certiﬁcates were issued to ﬁnance approximately 77% of the equipment cost of one Boeing 757-
223 (serial number 24583) passenger aircraft, including engines (Rolls-Royce RB211-535E4B). The
proceeds from the ETC issue were $35.5 million, with a serial interest rate of 10.36% and a credit
rating of A (S&P) and A1 (Moody’s).
    Increasing issuance costs led to the development of Pass-Through certiﬁcates which pooled a
number of ETCs into a single security which was then backed by a pool of aircraft rather than just
one. While Pass-Through certiﬁcates increased diversiﬁcation and reduced exposure to a single
aircraft, the airline industry downturn in the early 1990s led to downgrades of many ETCs and
PTCs to below investment grade and subsequently to a narrowed investor base.
    During the mid 1990s ETCs and PTCs were further modiﬁed into EETCs – Enhanced Equip-
ment Trust Certiﬁcates – which soon became the leading source of external ﬁnance of aircraft.
EETC securitization have three main advantages compared to traditional ETCs and PTCs. First,
EETCs have larger collateral pools with more than one aircraft type, making them more diversiﬁed.
Second, EETCs typically have several tranches with diﬀerent seniority. Third, a liquidity facility,
provided by a third party such as Morgan Stanley Capital Services, ensures the continued payment
of interest on the certiﬁcates for a predetermined period following a default, typically for a period of
up to 18 months. EETC securitization therefore enhances the creditworthiness of traditional ETCs
and PTCs by reducing the bankruptcy risk, tranching the cash ﬂows, and providing temporary
liquidity in the event of default.
    Because of the varying loan-to-values, credit ratings, and yields associated with diﬀerent tranches
of EETCs, they are purchased by both investment grade and high yield institutional investors.
These include insurance companies, pension funds, mutual funds, hedge funds and money man-
agers. While the market for EETCs is not as liquid as that for corporate bonds, it is more liquid
historical evolution.


                                                   7
than the market for bank loans.6
      Table 1 presents the characteristics and structures of three EETC issues in our sample. There
are several tranches in each of the EETCs in Table 1. For each tranche we report the issue size
(in $ million), yield, spreads (in basis points), ﬁnal maturity date, Moody’s and S&P tranche-
speciﬁc credit rating, cumulative loan-to-value, and collateral description. For example, in the
ﬁrst EETC in the table (Fedex 1998-1), the most senior tranche (1-A) has a credit rating of
Aa2/AAA, a cumulative loan-to-value ratio of 38.7%, and a credit spread of 125 basis points over
the corresponding treasury. The least senior tranche in the Fedex 1998-1 issue (1-C) has a lower
credit rating (Baa1/BBB+), a higher cumulative loan-to-value ratio (68.8%), and a credit spread
of 155 basis points. All three tranches of Fedex 1998-1 are secured by the same pool of assets – 5
McDonnell Douglas MD-11F and 8 Airbus A300F4-605R.


3.      Data and Summary Statistics
3.1.      Sample Construction

We use SDC platinum to identify all secured tranches, Equipment Trust Certiﬁcates, Pass-Through
Certiﬁcates, and Enhanced Equipment Trust Certiﬁcates issued by ﬁrms with four digit SIC codes
4512 (Scheduled Air Transportation), 4513 (Air Courier Services), and 4522 (Nonscheduled Air
Transport) between January 1990 and December 2005. This results in 235 debt tranches issued
in U.S. public markets. We collect data on tranche characteristics (i.e., issue size, seniority, ﬁnal
maturity, and whether the tranche is callable) from SDC platinum.
      We supplement the SDC data with information collected from tranche ﬁling prospectus obtained
in EDGAR Plus (R) and Compact Disclosure. For each tranche, we obtain the serial number of
all aircraft that were pledged as collateral from the ﬁling prospectus. We are able to ﬁnd full
information about the aircraft collateral securing the issues for 198 public tranches. We match each
aircraft serial number to the Ascend CASE airline database, which contains ownership information,
operating information and information on aircraft characteristics for every commercial aircraft in
the world.
      We obtain tranche transactions data from the Fixed-Income Securities Database (FISD) com-
piled by Mergent, which is considered to be the most comprehensive source of bond prices.7 The
  6
      See Mann (2009).
  7
      See Korteweg (2007) for a detailed description of the Mergent data.



                                                          8
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) requires insurance companies to ﬁle all
their trades in bonds with the NAIC. All transactions in our dataset, therefore, represent trades
where at least one party was an insurance company.
       Each observation of a transaction provides the ﬂat price at which the transaction was made.
We convert these prices into spreads by calculating the appropriate yield to maturity at the date
of transaction, and then subtracting the yield of the duration matched Treasury.8 For better
comparability across tranches, we exclude from our sample tranches which were issued as ﬂoating
rate debt.
       We match each tranche transaction to the relevant airline’s previous year’s characteristics (i.e.
size, market-to-book, proﬁtability, and leverage) using Compustat data. Finally, we use Thomson’s
SDC Platinum Restructuring database to identify airlines that are in Chapter 7 or Chapter 11
bankruptcy procedures. Our ﬁnal sample consists of 18,327 transactions in 127 individual tranches,
representing 12 airlines during the period 1/1/1994 to 12/31/2007.

3.2.      Tranche and Airline Characteristics

Panel A of Table 2 provides summary statistics for the 127 tranches in our sample. Summary statis-
tics are calculated over the entire sample and are therefore weighted by the number of transaction
observations per tranche. Throughout our analysis we use the tranche spread as our dependent
variable. As Panel A shows, the mean tranche spread is 290.2 basis points and the standard devi-
ation is 311 basis points. The mean tranche size in our sample is $274.4 million, with an average
term-to-maturity of 16.9 years. There are at most 4 diﬀerent layers of tranche seniority within
an issue (where seniority=1 for most senior tranches and 4 for most junior). Further, as Panel A
shows, 68% of the tranches in our sample are amortized, while 75% of the tranches in our sample
have a liquidity facility – a feature common in Enhanced Equipment Trust Certiﬁcates. Finally,
the average tranche loan-to-value ratio at time of issue is 0.54, ranging between 0.33 and 0.89.
       Panel B of Table 2 provides summary statistics for the issuing airlines. The size of the average
airline in our sample, measured as the book value of assets, is $14.2 billion. The average airline
market to book ratio is 1.26, while their average proﬁtability and leverage are 8.24% and 37%,
respectively.9
   8
     To calculate tranche yields, we distinguish between tranches that are amortized and those that have a balloon
payment at maturity. This data is collected by reading the prospectuses of each issue.
   9
     Appendix B provides description of construction and data sources for all variables used in the paper.



                                                        9
       As in Benmelech and Bergman (2008 and 2009) and Gavazza (2008), we measure the redeploy-
ability of aircraft by exploiting aircraft model heterogeneity.10 The redeployability measures are
based on the fact that airlines tend to operate a limited number of aircraft models, implying that
potential secondary market buyers of any given type of aircraft are likely to be airlines already op-
erating the same type of aircraft. Redeployability is, therefore, proxied by the number of potential
buyers and the ‘popularity’ of an aircraft model type.
       Using the Ascend CASE database, we construct two redeployability measures in the following
manner. For every aircraft type and sample-year we compute 1) the number of non-bankrupt
operators ﬂying that aircraft model type; and 2) the number of aircraft of that type used by
non-bankrupt operators. This process yields two redeployability measures for each aircraft-type
and each sample-year. To construct the redeployability measures for a portfolio of aircraft serving
as collateral for a particular tranche, we calculate the weighted average of each redeployability
measure across all aircraft in the collateral portfolio. For weights in this calculation, we use the
number of seats in an aircraft model type – a common proxy for aircraft size (and value). Panel
C of Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for our two redeployability measures. As can be seen,
the redeployability measure based on number of aircraft has an average value of 1,392.9 aircraft.
Furthermore, on average, there are 135.9 potential buyers for aircraft serving as collateral for
secured tranche issue.
       Finally, we add additional variables that capture the health of the airline industry. These
variables are jet fuel price, number of bankrupt airlines, number of non-bankrupt or healthy airlines,
The book value of bankrupt airlines divided by the book value of all airlines, as well as the book
value of non-bankrupt airlines divided by the book value of all airlines. Panel D report summary
statistics for each of these variables.

3.3.       Identifying Bankruptcy Shocks

We construct two measures of shocks to collateral driven by airlines entering bankruptcy. For each
aircraft type and calendar day in our sample we calculate (1) the number of airlines operating that
particular model type which are in bankruptcy, Bankrupt Buyers; and (2) the number of aircraft of
that particular type which are operated by airlines in bankruptcy, Bankrupt Aircraf t.11 Increases
  10
       Appendix A provides a detailed description of the construction of this redeployability measure.
  11
       We calculate these measures using beginning and end dates of airline bankruptcies in the U.S. from SDC Platinum.




                                                           10
in the ﬁrst measure capture reductions in demand for a given model type, as airlines tend to
purchase aircraft of model types that they already operate. Increases in the second measure are
associated with an increase in the supply of a given aircraft model type likely to be sold in the
market as bankrupt airlines liquidate part or all of their ﬂeets. Since changes in aircraft ownership
are relatively infrequent, ownership information of aircraft is updated at a yearly rather than daily
frequency. However, the two measures may change at a daily frequency due to airlines entering or
exiting bankruptcy. In Appendix A, ﬁgures A1 and A2 provide a timeline of airline bankruptcies
in the United States and the total number of aircraft operated by bankrupt US airlines over the
sample period.
   Figures 1 and 2 provide a graphic illustration of the two measures for the Boeing 737 and
Boeing 747 model types. For each model type, the ﬁgures thus show the evolution over time of the
number of operators in bankruptcy operating each of these models, as well as the number of aircraft
operated by bankrupt airlines. The ﬁgures clearly show the deterioration of industry conditions in
the latter part of the sample period. Further, while there are some commonalities in the trends
between the model types, there are also large diﬀerences between model types in both measures.
Thus, for example, while the number of bankrupt B747 aircraft increased during the ﬁrst part of
2004, the number of bankrupt B737 aircraft decreased during this period. This variation between
model types stems from bankruptcies of airlines operating diﬀerent ﬂeets composed of diﬀerent
model types. As discussed in section 1, it is this variation, and the diﬀerences in the types of
aircraft used as collateral, which enables identiﬁcation of the collateral channel.
   To construct the two bankruptcy measures for a portfolio of aircraft serving as collateral for
a particular tranche, we calculate the weighted average of the aircraft type measures across all
aircraft in the portfolio, using the number of seats in each aircraft as weights.
   Panel A of Table 3 provides summary statistics for the two measures, Panels B and C display
the evolution of the bankrupt buyers and bankrupt aircraft measures over time. As can be seen,
over the entire sample period, the average value of Bankrupt Buyers was 0.809 indicating that
the average aircraft in a tranche had 0.809 potential buyers that were in bankruptcy. Similarly,
the average value of Bankrupt Aircraf t was 43.86 aircraft indicating that their were 43.86 aircraft
operated by bankrupt airlines of the same model type as the average aircraft serving as collateral
in a debt tranche.



                                                 11
4.     Empirical Analysis
4.1.    Univariate Analysis

As an initial step, it is instructive to conduct the analysis using simple comparison-of-means tests.
Panel A of Table 4 displays average tranche credit spreads of both bankrupt and non-bankrupt
airlines. There are 1,011 transactions in 43 tranches of four bankrupt airlines. As would be
expected, credit spreads of tranches issued by airlines that are currently in bankruptcy are higher
than spreads of solvent airlines. The mean credit spread of a bankrupt airline is 531.7 basis points
compared to a mean tranche spread of 276.1 basis points for non-bankrupt airlines (t-statistic for
an equal means test=2.81).
     As a ﬁrst, simple test of the credit chanel, we focus only on airlines that are not in bankruptcy,
and split this sub-sample between airlines with ﬂeets that do not have any bankrupt potential
buyer, and airlines with at least one bankrupt potential buyer for their ﬂeet. As described in the
previous section, an airline is considered to be a potential buyer of a particular aircraft if in its
ﬂeet it operates aircraft of the same model type. Focusing only on non-bankrupt ﬁrms ensures that
credit spreads are not contaminated by the direct association of bankruptcy and credit spreads.
     Out of the 17,316 transactions in non-bankrupt airlines tranches there are 8,324 transactions
with no bankrupt potential collateral buyers, and 8,992 transactions with at least one bankrupt
potential collateral buyers. Panel B of Table 4 compares credit spreads of tranches that do not have
any bankrupt potential buyers, and tranches with at least some bankrupt potential buyers for their
pledged collateral. As can be seen in the table, the mean tranche credit spreads of a non-bankrupt
airline that has no bankrupt buyers is 208.0 basis points compared to a mean tranche spread of
339.0 basis points for non-bankrupt airlines with some bankrupt potential buyers (t-statistic for an
equal means test=7.48). Thus, consistent with a collateral channel, tranches of airlines secured by
collateral with potential buyers that are in bankruptcy have a lower value than tranches where all
potential buyers are not in bankruptcy.
     While still focusing only on non-bankrupt airlines, Panel C of Table 4 reﬁnes the analysis in
Panel B by conditioning the credit spread diﬀerential on tranche seniority levels. We conjecture that
the collateral eﬀect will be larger in more junior tranches due to their higher sensitivity to the value
of the underlying collateral. Panel C splits the sample to four levels of seniority (1=most senior
4=most junior), and compares the mean credit spread between tranches with no bankrupt potential


                                                   12
buyers and tranches with some bankrupt potential buyers for each of the seniority levels. The ﬁrst
four columns of the panel report credit spreads and number of observations in each category (in
parentheses), as well as t-tests for an equal means test across and within seniority levels.
   As Panel C of Table 4 demonstrates, the diﬀerence between credit spreads of tranches with and
without bankrupt potential buyers is the highest among the most junior tranches, and monotonically
decreases with tranche seniority. For the most senior tranches the spread diﬀerence is 95.0 basis
points, while the diﬀerences for seniority levels 2 and 3 (i.e mezzanine seniority) are 195.5 basis
points and 297.4 basis points, respectively. Finally, among the most junior tranches the spread
diﬀerential is much higher and equals 1112.9 basis points. All diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant
at the one percent level.
   In the last three columns of Panel C of Table 4 we use a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences approach.
In each of these columns we report the diﬀerence between the means of credit spreads of tranches
with diﬀerent seniority (1 vs. 2, 1 vs. 3, and 1 vs. 4) and the corresponding t-values for equal
means test. These diﬀerences in seniority-based credit spreads are reported separately for tranches
with bankrupt potential buyers for their underlying collateral and for tranches without bankrupt
potential buyers. As can be seen in the table, we ﬁnd that the seniority-diﬀerential in spreads is
much higher for tranches with some bankrupt potential buyers. As the last column of Panel C
demonstrates, among tranches with no bankrupt potential buyer, the spread diﬀerential between
most and least senior tranches is a statistically signiﬁcant 124.5 basis points. In contrast, moving
from most senior to most junior tranches with some bankrupt potential buyers is associated with
a spread increase of a statistically signiﬁcant 1142.5 basis points.

4.2.   Regression Analysis

We begin with a simple test of the collateral channel hypothesis by estimating diﬀerent variants of
the following baseline speciﬁcation:



          Spreadi,a,t = β1 × log(1 + Bankrupt Buyers)i,a,t + β2 × Bankruptcyi,a,t

                       + β3 × log(1 + Redeployability)i,a,t + Xi,a,tγ + bi δ + ca η + dy θ

                       + (Bankruptcyi,a,t × bi )κ + (Bankruptcyi,a,t × ca )ψ + i,a,t ,           (1)

where Spread is the tranche credit spread, subscripts indicate tranche (i ), airline (a), and trans-

                                                  13
action date (t); Bankrupt Buyers is the weighted average of the number of bankrupt operators
currently using the collateral pool; Bankruptcy is a dummy variable that equals one if the issuer of
the tranche is bankrupt on the date of the transaction; Redeployability is one of our two measures of
the redeployability of the collateral pool; Xi,a,t is a vector of tranche characteristics that includes an
amortization dummy, a dummy for tranches with liquidity facility, ranking of the tranche seniority,
tranche issue size, a dummy for tranches with a call provision, and the tranche term-to-maturity;
bi is a vector of tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects; ca is a vector of airline ﬁxed-eﬀects; dy is a vector of year
ﬁxed-eﬀects; Bankruptcyi,a,t × bi is a vector of interaction terms between tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects and
the Bankruptcy dummy; Bankruptcyi,a,t × ca is a vector of interaction terms between airline ﬁxed-
eﬀects and the Bankruptcy dummy; and i,a,t is the regression residual. We report the results from
estimating diﬀerent variants of regression 1 in Panel A of Table 5.12 Tables throughout the paper
report standard errors that are clustered at the tranche level (in parentheses).
    The ﬁrst column in Panel A Table 5 reports the coeﬃcients from estimating a simple version
of regression 1, without any of the ﬁxed-eﬀects or the interaction terms. As would be expected,
tranche spreads of airlines in bankruptcy are higher than those out of bankruptcy – the coeﬃcient
on the Bankruptcy dummy, β2 , equals 126.6 and is statistically signiﬁcant. Further, consistent
with Benmelech and Bergman (2009), we ﬁnd that more redeployable collateral, proxied by the
number of world-wide operators using the collateral pool, is associated with lower spreads. Finally,
after controlling for bankruptcy and redeployability, and consistent with a collateral channel, β1
is positive and signiﬁcant at the one percent level. Increases in the number of bankrupt potential
buyers for a given collateral pool – and hence commensurate reductions in demand for the assets in
that pool – are associated with larger tranche credit spreads. The economic eﬀect of the collateral
channel is sizeable – as Panel C shows moving from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile of
the number of bankrupt buyers results in a credit spread that is higher by 387.2 basis points.
    In the rest of the speciﬁcations reported in Panel A we add year and either tranche or airline
ﬁxed-eﬀects, and in some speciﬁcations include interactions between tranche or airline ﬁxed-eﬀects
and the bankruptcy dummy to soak up any direct eﬀect of bankruptcy on tranche spreads. As can be
seen, the coeﬃcient on the number of bankrupt buyers, β1 , is consistently positive and statistically
signiﬁcant at the one percent level. While the estimate of β1 is lower in these speciﬁcations, it
  12
     For brevity, we do not report the coeﬃcients of the tranche characteristics in this table. We investigate their
eﬀects in the next tables.



                                                        14
is still economically signiﬁcant: as Panel C shows, moving from the 25th percentile to the 75th
percentile of the number of bankrupt buyers in these speciﬁcations results in a credit spread that
is higher by between 147.1 and 238.2 basis points.
   Panel B of Table 5 repeats the analysis in Panel A using our second measure of shocks to
collateral values, Bankrupt Aircraft, that is based on the number of aircraft operated by bankrupt
airlines that overlap with the collateral channel. As can be seen, an increase in the number of
aircraft operated by bankrupt airlines is associated with higher credit spreads of tranches employing
similar aircraft model types as collateral. Although the magnitudes of the coeﬃcients are smaller
than those using the Bankrupt Buyers measure (see Panel C), the results are still statistically and
economically signiﬁcant.

4.3.   The Collateral Channel: Evidence from Prices of Non-Bankrupt Airlines
       Tranches

The analysis presented in Table 5 shows that bankrupt potential buyers of collateral lead to
higher credit spreads, controlling for bankruptcy status and for interaction terms between be-
ing in bankruptcy, and airline, and tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects. While these speciﬁcations are likely to
soak up non time-varying eﬀects related to the bankruptcy status of a tranche, we now move to
focusing only on non-bankrupt airlines. Thus, we reﬁne our analysis by focusing on tranches of non-
bankrupt airlines and examine how, while solvent, their credit spreads respond to the bankruptcy
of airlines operating ﬂeets comprised of model types that overlap with the tranche collateral pool.
We estimate diﬀerent variants of the following speciﬁcation:

   Spreadi,a,t     =       β1 × log(1 + Bankrupt Buyers)i,a,t + β2 × log(1 + Redeployability)i,a,t

                   +       Itτ + Xi,a,tγ + Za,y−1 ξ + Rt π + bi δ + ca η + dy θ + i,a,t

                 f or all Bankruptcyi,a,t = 0,                                                       (2)

where Spread is the tranche credit spread; subscripts indicate tranche (i ), airline (a), and transac-
tion date (t); Bankrupt Buyers is a weighted average of the number of bankrupt operators currently
using the collateral pool; Bankruptcy is a dummy variable that equals to one if the issuer of the
tranche is bankrupt on the date of the transaction; and Redeployability is one of our two mea-
sures of the redeployability of the collateral pool. It is a vector which includes two time-varying
variables that capture the health of the airline industry – the price of jet fuel and the number of


                                                    15
U.S. bankrupt airlines; Xi,a,t is a vector of tranche characteristics that includes an amortization
dummy, a dummy for tranches with a liquidity facility, the ranking of tranche seniority, tranche
issue size, a dummy for tranches with a call provision, and the tranche term-to-maturity; Za,y−1
is a vector of beginning-of-year airline characteristics that includes the airline size, market-to-book
ratio, proﬁtability, and leverage; Rt is a vector of interest rate controls that includes the 1-year
yield on U.S. Treasury, the term spread between the 7-year and 1-year Treasury, and the default
spread between Baa and Aaa rated bonds.13 bi is a vector of tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects, ca is a vector
of airline ﬁxed-eﬀects, dy is a vector of year ﬁxed-eﬀects, and i,a,t is the regression residual. We
report the results from estimating diﬀerent variants of regression 2 in Table 6. As before, we cluster
standard errors (reported in parentheses) at the tranche level.
       Column 1 of Table 6 presents the results of regression 2 using only year ﬁxed eﬀects. As can be
seen, the positive relation between the number of bankrupt operators and credit spreads continues
to be statistically signiﬁcant even after controlling for a host of tranche and ﬁrm level control
variables. Thus, consistent with the collateral channel, increases in the number of potential buyers
of collateral who are in bankruptcy are associated with increases in the spread of tranches backed
by this collateral.
       Turning to the control variables, we ﬁnd that as in Benmelech and Bergman (2009), the negative
eﬀect of redeployability is still signiﬁcant once tranche and airline level controls are added to the
regressions. While the coeﬃcient on fuel price is positive, it is not statistically signiﬁcant. However,
we ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant evidence that when more airlines are in bankruptcy, tranche spreads
tend to be higher.
       Examining the tranche level control variables, we ﬁnd that amortized tranches have lower
spreads, which is to be expected as their repayment schedule is more front loaded and hence their
credit risk is lower. Likewise, tranches that are enhanced by a liquidity facility have lower spreads,
and more senior tranches command lower spreads as well.14 We also ﬁnd that larger tranches are
associated with lower spreads, consistent with larger tranches being more liquid (see e.g. Bao, Pan,
and Wang (2008)). We do not ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant relation between spreads and having
a call provision. Finally, tranches with longer term-to-maturity have higher credit spreads.
  13
     All yield data is taken from the Economic Research Federal Reserve Bank of St.                   Louis website at
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/. For brevity, we do not report the coeﬃcients of the interest rates variables.
  14
     Recall that seniority variable is coded as a discrete variable between 1 and 4 with 1 being the most senior tranche,
explaining the negative coeﬃcient on the variable in the table.



                                                           16
       The airline level control variables in Column 1 show that, as would be expected, airlines that are
more proﬁtable or less leveraged have lower credit spreads. This eﬀect is economically signiﬁcant,
with a one standard deviation increase in proﬁtability reducing the tranche credit spread by 67.74
basis points, and a one standard deviation increase in leverage increasing the spread by 68.13 basis
points.15 Finally, we ﬁnd that airlines with high market to book ratios have lower higher credit
spreads.
       Column 2 of Table 6 repeats the analysis in Column 1 while adding airline ﬁxed eﬀects to
the speciﬁcation. As can be seen, the results remain qualitatively and quantitatively unchanged:
increases in the number of potential buyers that are in bankruptcy leads to an increase in the
tranche credit spread. Column 3 repeats the analysis but adds tranche level ﬁxed eﬀects to the
speciﬁcation and hence control for unobserved heterogeneity amongst tranches. Naturally, in the
tranche ﬁxed eﬀects speciﬁcation the tranche level controls are dropped as they do not vary over
time and hence are fully absorbed by the ﬁxed eﬀects. As can be seen in the table, we continue to
ﬁnd a positive relation between the number of buyers in bankruptcy and credit spreads.
       We also note that the coeﬃcients on the redeployability measures are still negative as in Ben-
melech and Bergman (2009), but no longer statistically signiﬁcant once we include tranche ﬁxed
eﬀects – a result recurrent throughout the analysis. To understand this note that, in the time series,
variation in redeployability and the bankruptcy measures is driven by airlines entering or exiting
bankruptcy; when a potential buyer airline enters bankruptcy, the number of bankrupt buyers in-
creases by one, while the redeployability measure decreases by one. However, the redeployability
measure also varies in the time series due to new airlines starting up and increasing the number of
potential buyers. The fact that with tranche ﬁxed eﬀects the number of bankrupt buyers variable
is signiﬁcant while the redeployability measure is not, suggests that in the time series, the impor-
tant variation that drives changes in spreads is not the addition of new airlines but rather airlines
entering or exiting bankruptcy.
       In columns 4 through 6 we repeat our analysis using our second measure of shocks to collateral
values, Bankrupt Aircraft, that is based on the number of aircraft that overlap with the tranche
collateral pool that are operated by bankrupt airlines. While our results are statistically weaker
  15
     Also, to the extent that there is some slack in the pricing of the debt – i.e. that the market for airline tranches
is not perfecetly competitive, but rather results in part from a negotiation between the airline and buyers of it debt
capital – this results is also consistent with lower bargaining power of the ‘weak’ issuing airlines who are willing to
place the debt at lower prices.



                                                          17
using this measure, they are consistent with the previous estimates when we control for airline or
tranche (in addition to year) ﬁxed eﬀects – the Bankrupt Aircraft measure is signiﬁcantly related
to higher tranche credit spreads. Consistent with the collateral channel, increases in the number
of aircraft operated by bankrupt airlines are associated with higher credit spreads of tranches
employing similar aircraft model types as collateral.

4.4.      Robustness: Controlling for Industry Conditions

One concern with our analysis is that we are capturing an adverse industry shock aﬀecting all
airlines in the industry. First, it should be noted that our identiﬁcation strategy relies on the
diﬀerential impact of an airline’s bankruptcy on the credit spreads of tranches which are secured
by diﬀerent aircraft model types, and as such an industry shock is unlikely to drive our ﬁndings.
Second, our results in Table 6 are robust to the inclusion of industry control variables such as fuel
price and the number of bankrupt airlines. Nevertheless, in order to further alleviate this concern
we use a battery of industry controls that include, in addition to jet fuel price and number of
bankrupt airlines, also the asset share of bankrupt airlines (deﬁned as the book value of the assets
of bankrupt airlines divided by the total book value of airlines in the U.S), and the relative number
of bankrupt airlines (number of bankrupt airlines divided by the total number of airlines). Likewise,
in diﬀerent speciﬁcations we also control for the complements of these variables: the number of
healthy airlines, as well as the asset share and the relative number of healthy airlines.
       Table 7 reports the results from estimating regression 2 with tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects and an aug-
mented vector of time-varying industry controls. For brevity, we report results with the bankrupt-
based industry variables using the number of bankrupt buyers, and the healthy-based industry
variables using the number of bankrupt aircraft.16 As can be seen, the number of bankrupt airlines
as well as the relative number of bankrupt airlines have the predicted positive sign and are statis-
tically signiﬁcant, while the asset share of bankrupt airlines is not signiﬁcant.17 Importantly, as
Table 7 demonstrates, our results are robust to the inclusion of all of the industry controls. In fact
the coeﬃcient β1 becomes even stronger when we add additional industry controls that potentially
soak up more of the time-series variation in tranche credit spreads.
  16
     Clearly, controlling for the asset share and relative number of healthy airlines is equivalent to using the complement
variables of the asset share and relative number of bankrupt airlines.
  17
     We add these controls one at a time as they are all highly collinear. In unreported results we include all industry
controls together and our results hold for both measures of the collateral channel. Since the industry controls are
highly collinear, their signiﬁcance disappears when they are added together due to multicollinearity.


                                                            18
       Another concern is that while we control for a battery of industry controls, it is still possible
that the negative information provided by the bankruptcy of an airline with a given ﬂeet is of
greater relevance for particular airlines. According to this view, the information channel may still
be operative since some airlines may have diﬀerent sensitivities to industry conditions than others.
We address this concern in Table 8. We add to the analysis in Table 6 a dummy variable for the
post 9/11/2001 period, in which average American airline proﬁtability fell drastically.18 We use the
post-9/11 dummy as an additional industry control and indeed ﬁnd that credit spreads are much
higher in the period following the 9/11 attacks.
       Moreover, we interact airline ﬁxed-eﬀects with the 9/11 dummy to control for airline hetero-
geneity in their response to this severe industry shock. As Table 8 shows, the coeﬃcient of β1 is
still statistically signiﬁcant and is again stronger than in our baseline regressions in Table 6.19 To
summarize, our analysis is robust to various industry controls even when we allow airlines to have
heterogenous response to industry conditions.

4.5.      Robustness: Reverse Causality

A more subtle concern is about the direction of causality. We argue that bankruptcies of potential
buyers lead to declines in asset values, increasing the cost of debt ﬁnancing of non-bankrupt airlines.
However, an alternative explanation is that an adverse shock to the productivity of some aircraft
results in the bankruptcy of airlines using them, as well as a decline in value and increased cost of
capital for other users of these aircraft.
       The reverse causality explanation is best exempliﬁed with the case of the Arospatiale-BAC
Concorde – the famous supersonic passenger airliner. While the Concorde was designed for su-
personic long-haul trips, such as between London and New York, it was used in the late 1970s
by Braniﬀ International Airways on shorter range subsonic ﬂights within the United States. The
ﬂights were usually less than 50% booked, leading Braniﬀ to terminate Concorde operations in May
1980. Braniﬀ ﬁled for bankruptcy in May 1982. To the extent that Braniﬀ’s bankruptcy reﬂected
a failed strategy associated with operating the Concorde, the reverse causality argument would
suggest that market priors about the viability of the Concorde aircraft would be updated, resulting
ultimately in higher costs of capital for other users of this aircraft.
  18
     Benmelech and Bergman (2008) report that the average proﬁtability of airlines in their sample was 13.31% in
the period 1994-2000, and only 4.77% in the period 2001-2005.
  19
     We obtain similar results using all other industry controls which we do not report for brevity.



                                                      19
      We deal with the reverse causality argument suggested by the Braniﬀ case empirically in Table
9. It is important to note, however, that while the Concorde is a specialized aircraft with limited
eﬃcient uses outside supersonic long-haul travel, all the aircraft used as collateral in our sample
are commonly used general-purpose aircraft. Our sample includes the most popular models of
Airbus (A300, A310, A319, A320, A321, A330), Boeing (B737, B747, B757, B767, and B777) and
MacDonald Douglas (MD11, MD80), as well as regional aircraft made by BAE and Embraer. None
of these models is specialized or esoteric, and none of the models experienced an idiosyncratic shock
during this time-period making it less desirable. Nevertheless, we address the reverse causality
concern empirically.
      We construct dummy variables for each of the diﬀerent aircraft models that take the value of
one if there is at least one aircraft of that model in the tranche collateral pool. We then rerun our
regressions with tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects as well as year×model ﬁxed-eﬀects, allowing diﬀerent aircraft
models to have a time-varying eﬀect on credit spreads. As the ﬁrst two columns of Table 9 show, our
results are even stronger using both the bankrupt buyers and bankrupt aircraft measures. We also
run the regression for tranches that employ only Airbus and Boeing aircraft as collateral (column 3)
or even only Boeing aircraft (column 4) – Airbus and Boeing are the leading aircraft manufacturers
in the world and their aircraft are both general-purpose and highly reliable. In our sample, there
are 105 tranches that use only Airbus and Boeing, and 69 tranches using only Boeing. In focusing
on these subsamples, we are identifying oﬀ of variation in the number of potential buyers of Airbus
and Boeing aircraft that are in bankruptcy. As Table 9 demonstrates, our results hold both for
Airbus and Boeing, as well as only for Boeing. Our results therefore hold also for general purpose,
popular aircraft for which it is unlikely that new information about productivity is being revealed.
      For additional robustness, we further control for the aircrafts’ main usage in our analysis.
The main diﬀerence between aircraft in our collateral pool is whether they are short-haul narrow-
bodied (e.g. A319, A320, A321, B737, B757, etc.) or long-haul wide-bodied (A300, A310, A330,
B747. B767, B777).20 We construct a dummy variable that equals one for wide-bodied aircraft and
interact it with month-year ﬁxed-eﬀects (i.e. every month-year combination in our data corresponds
to a particular dummy variable). As the last two columns of Table 9 show, our results still hold.
Again, it is therefore unlikely that our results are driven by new information about the productivity
associated with the main usage of the aircraft models used as collateral.
 20
      A narrow-body aircraft is one with a single passenger aisle, while a wide-body aircraft has two such aisles.


                                                           20
4.6.      Robustness: Liquidity Facility and Credit Enhancement

As described in Section 2, 75% of the tranches in our sample are Enhanced Equipment Trust
Certiﬁcates (EETCs) which include a liquidity facility that enhances their credit worthiness. The
credit enhancer, which is typically a ﬁnancial institution, commits to pay interest payments in case
of default for a prespeciﬁed amount of time, usually 18 months. The standard reason given for such
an enhancement is to enable a more orderly sale of aircraft, providing ‘breathing room’ to prevent
ﬁre sales. For example, in an EETC issued by Continental Airlines in 2002 (2002-1) the primary
liquidity facility is provided by Landesbank Hessen-Thüringen Girozentrale, supplemented by a
liquidity facility from Merrill Lynch Capital Services Inc. Likewise, in EETC Series 2000-3 issued
by U.S Airways in 2000, the liquidity facility was provided by Morgan Stanley Capital Services,
while the 1998-1 Series EETC issued by U.S. Airways had its liquidity facility provided by the
Chicago Branch of ABN ARMO Bank N.V.
       Since the liquidity facility credit enhancements are provided by third parties and not the airline
itself, they do not expose the tranche to further airline liquidity risk. Still, our results could be
explained by a contagion eﬀect through the quality of credit enhancers if, for some reason, tranches
backed by aircraft of similar type were enhanced by the same institutions or by institutions with
stronger links.21 We control for the provision of a liquidity facility in our analysis above and our
results are always robust. Nevertheless, to deal with the concern of contagion through liquidity
enhancers, we rerun our regressions separately for tranches without a liquidity facility.
       As Table 10 demonstrates, our results continue to hold for both measures of redeployability,
even amongst those tranches with no liquidity enhancement, and hence without the possibility of
contagion through credit enhancers. The results hold when we include airline or tranche ﬁxed-
eﬀects, in addition to year ﬁxed-eﬀects. Indeed, we ﬁnd that β1 , the coeﬃcient on our Bankrupt
Buyers and Bankrupt Aircraft measures, is larger for tranches without liquidity enhancements. Put
diﬀerently, spreads of tranches without a liquidity enhancement are more sensitive to bankruptcy
shocks. This is to be expected: since in default there is no liquidity enhancement, ﬁre sales are
more likely, and hence having more potential buyers in ﬁnancial distress (i.e. Bankrupt Buyers is
high) is more costly. Similarly, attempting to sell collateral when similar assets are already ﬂooding
the market (i.e. Bankrupt Aircraft is high) is costly as well.
  21
   As a related example, during the peak of the ﬁnancial crisis in 2008, concerns about Ambac and MBIA led to
downgrades of CDO tranches insured by these companies.


                                                     21
   Additionally, we ﬁnd that credit spreads of tranches without a liquidity facility are more sensitive
to airline proﬁtability and leverage as compared to tranches with such a liquidity facility. Again,
this is to be expected, since the higher probability of ﬁre sales in default associated with the lack of
a liquidity facility implies that airline ﬁnancial condition becomes more important in determining
spreads.

4.7.   Robustness: Accounting for Contagion through Security Holders

Another potential contagion eﬀect arises through holders of ETC and EETC securities. Since the
Mergent Fixed-Income Securities Database (FISD) used in our analysis contains transactions un-
dertaken by insurance companies, it is possible that when airlines enter ﬁnancial distress, insurance
companies operating subject to prudent investment regulations or guidelines sell their holdings of
tranches issued by the distressed airlines. In this case, the contagion operates through ﬁre-sales of
risky-airline securities and not necessarily though an underlying collateral channel.
   We address the concern of contagion through holders of securities in a number of ways. First,
for each observation in our dataset we have information on whether the reported transaction was
a purchase or a sale by the reporting insurance company. We conjecture that contagion through
holders of securities should be reﬂected mainly in sell-side transactions in which a binding balance
sheet or investment policy constraint triggered by equity losses forces an insurance company to
rebalance its portfolio by selling part of its holdings of corporate debt. We therefore subdivide our
sample based on whether a transaction represents a sale or a purchase of a tranche by an insurance
company and rerun our regressions in each subsample separately. As Table 11 shows, we ﬁnd that
both of our measures, Bankrupt Buyer (columns 1-4) and Bankrupt Aircraft (columns 5-8), are
statistically signiﬁcant and positively related to credit spreads in both subsamples. Indeed, we ﬁnd
that the coeﬃcient on the bankruptcy measures are twice as large in the ‘buy’ sample as compared
to the ‘sell’ sample, in contrast to the contagion by holders of securities hypothesis.
   As an additional method of dealing with the alternative hypothesis of contagion through security
holders, we employ data on tranche credit rating at the time of the transaction. We conjecture that
contagion due to regulation or investment policy constraints should be concentrated in downgrades
of corporate bonds from investment to non-investment grade. We therefore match each tranche
transaction to its Moody’s credit rating at the time of transaction using Moody’s Default Risk Ser-
vice (DRS) Database. We then subdivide our sample based on the rating of the tranche at the time


                                                  22
of the transaction, running our regressions on the subsample of transactions of investment grade
tranches (i.e. the top 10 credit rating notches: Aaa through Baa3), the subsample of transactions
of tranches rated Aaa-Aa3 (the top 4 notches), and the subsample of transactions of tranches rated
Aaa (the top notch). Although examining subsamples separately naturally reduces the sample size
in each individual regression, and considerably so for the third subsample in which we only examine
Aaa tranches, as Table 12 shows, we ﬁnd that our results continue to hold for both Buy and Sell
transactions in all three subsamples: investment grade (columns 1-2); Aaa-Aa3 (columns 3-4), and
Aaa (columns 5-6). Thus, our results hold for both purchases and sales of tranches that are very
highly rated, alleviating concerns about contagion through rating-based regulation ﬁre-sales.22
       As an additional robustness check, we have also excluded the last two years of our sample from
our regressions to ensure that any unusual circumstances related to forced sales during the current
ﬁnancial crisis are not driving our results. Our results (columns 7-8 of Table 12) continue to hold
using this slice as well.23 Hence, our results are not driven by the sell-oﬀ of asset-backed securities
of 2007-2008.
       Moreover, in an attempt to control for the identities of the insurance companies transacting in
tranches, we split the sample into transactions made by Life Insurance ﬁrms and those made by
Property & Casualty ﬁrms.24 There are 4,780 transactions made by Property & Casualty ﬁrms and
11,297 transactions by Life Insurance ﬁrms. As Table C1 in Appendix C demonstrates, our results
are almost identical across insurance companies types. Using both measures of redeployability, we
obtain very similar statistically signiﬁcant relations between either the number of bankrupt buyers
or the number of bankrupt aircraft and tranche credit spreads. Our results, therefore, do not appear
to be driven by institutional details speciﬁc to a particular type of insurance company.
       Finally, in 3,205 transactions in our data we were able to identify the vendor (broker or dealer)
selling or buying the security from the insurance company. There are 45 individual vendors (typi-
cally, investment banks, commercial banks, or brokers) in this subsample. Using this subsample, the
last four columns of Table 6 report regression results from estimating the eﬀect of both Bankrupt
Buyers (columns 5-6) and Bankrupt Aircraft (columns 7-8) on credit spreads, controlling for ei-
ther airline+year or tranche+year ﬁxed eﬀects as well as vendor ﬁxed eﬀects. As Table C1 shows,
  22
     While our results hold using both measures of redeployability, for brevity we only report results using the Bankrupt
Buyers measure.
  23
     Our results hold whether we use the 1994-2005 or the 1994-2006 periods. While the year 2007 arguably marks
the beginning of the crisis, we exclude trades during the year 2006 as well out of an abundance of caution.
  24
     The FISD data does not provide us the identity of the insurance companies – only their type.


                                                           23
our results hold in this cut of the data as well. Consistent with the collateral channel, both the
Bankrupt Buyers and Bankrupt Aircraft are both positively related to tranche credit spreads, even
when controlling for vendor ﬁxed eﬀects.
       In summary, our results are not likely to be driven by ﬁre-sales, rating-based investment rules
and regulations, insurance company type or the identity of the vendor. We conclude that contagion
through investors does not seem to explain the strong relation between bankruptcy shocks and credit
spreads.

4.8.      The Collateral Channel, Tranche Seniority and LTV

We continue our analysis in Table 13 by examining the eﬀects of tranche seniority and Loan-to-
Value (LTV) ratios in the collateral channel. We hypothesize that the negative relation between the
measure of the number of bankrupt buyers or number of bankrupt aircraft and credit spreads should
be concentrated in more junior tranches, or equivalently in tranches with high LTV, since these
are the ones which, upon default, would be more exposed to drops in the value of the underlying
collateralized assets. As a ﬁrst test of this hypothesis, Column 1 of Table 13 presents the results of
regression 2 while adding an interaction variable between the measure of the number of bankrupt
buyers, Bankrupt Buyers, and the seniority of each tranche.25 The regression includes either airline-
or tranche- (as well as year-) ﬁxed-eﬀects and standard errors are clustered at the tranche level.
       As can be seen in column 1 of Table 13, we ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient on the interaction term
between Bankrupt Buyers and tranche seniority is positive and statistically signiﬁcant. As hy-
pothesized, we thus ﬁnd that increases in the number of bankrupt potential buyers increases the
spread of junior tranches more than that of senior tranches. The diﬀerential eﬀect of moving from
zero to one bankrupt buyer in most senior as compared to most junior tranches is 106.01 basis
points.26 We repeat the analysis in column 2 controlling for tranche ﬁxed eﬀects and obtain similar
results.27 Furthermore, we stratify the data between senior tranches (seniority levels 1 and 2) and
junior tranches (seniority levels 3 and 4) and estimate regression 2 separately for senior and junior
tranches. As the coeﬃcients on the Bankrupt Buyers measure in columns 3 and 4 indicate, junior
tranches are much more sensitive to the number of bankrupt buyers, consistent with the interaction
  25
      We obtain similar results using Bankrupt Aircraft which we do not report fro brevity.
  26
      To see this, we calculate the joint eﬀect of seniority and number of bankrupt buyers on credit spreads using the
total diﬀerential of both the level of Bankrupt Buyers as well as the interaction with seniority. Thus, this diﬀerential
is −163.798 × 0.301 + (171.992 × 0.301 × 4) − (171.992 × 0.301 × 1) = 106.01
   27
      Clearly, the variable seniority is being absorbed by the tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects in this speciﬁcation.


                                                          24
results.
       In the last four columns of Table 13 we repeat the analysis but categorize tranches based on loan-
to-value ratios (LTVs) rather than seniority. LTVs are obtained from the tranche ﬁling prospectus,
and reﬂect cumulative loan-to-value ratios as of the time of issue.28 Speciﬁcally, these are deﬁned
as the ratio between the sum of the principal amount of that tranche and all tranches senior to it,
divided by an appraisal of the value of the assets serving as collateral.
       We begin with speciﬁcations in which LTV is interacted with Bankrupt Buyers (columns 5
and 6) and ﬁnd results that are consistent with the seniority interactions – credit spreads are
more sensitive to the Bankrupt Buyer measure amongst tranches with high LTVs. Increasing the
Bankrupt Buyer measure from zero to one for tranches at the 25th percentile of LTV (0.41) reduces
tranche credit spreads by 10.7 basis points. In contrast, the same increase for tranches at the 75th
percentile of LTV (0.66) causes tranche spreads to decrease by 44.15 basis points. In the last two
columns of Table 13 we stratify the sample into tranches with LTVs below 0.5 (column 7) and
those with LTVs at or above 0.5 (column 8).29 As columns 7 and 8 demonstrate, credit spreads
of tranches with LTVs higher than 0.5 are more sensitive to the number of bankrupt buyers than
those with LTV lower than 0.5. Indeed, the coeﬃcient on Bankrupt Buyers more than doubles in
high as compared to low LTV subsamples.
       We investigate the transmission of the collateral channel further in Table 14 by studying the
joint impact of airline ﬁnancial health and the number of bankrupt buyers on tranche spreads. We
hypothesize that the positive relation between the number of potential buyers in bankruptcy and
tranche credit spreads should be larger for airlines with low proﬁtability. Less proﬁtable airlines
are more likely to be in ﬁnancial distress, making the value of their tranches more sensitive to the
liquidation value of their collateral. Further, as in the previous section, we expect that the eﬀect
should be more pronounced amongst more junior, high LTV tranches. We therefore introduce an
interaction variable between proﬁtability and Bankrupt Buyers into the speciﬁcation of regression
2. Similar to the analysis in Table 13, we run the analysis separately for senior and junior tranches
(columns 1 and 2) as well as for tranches with LTVs below and above 0.5 (columns 3 and 4).30 Each
  28
     We are unable to obtain dynamic LTVs along the economic life of the tranche as we do not have a time series of
aircraft value estimates.
  29
     We choose 0.5 as the breakpoint to ease interpretation - as Table 2 shows, 0.5 is only slightly higher than the
median LTV (0.49).
  30
     In essence, these regressions thus test the triple interaction between our measure of the number of bankrupt
buyers, airline proﬁtability and either tranche seniority or LTV.



                                                        25
regression includes tranche and airline ﬁxed eﬀects with standard errors clustered at the tranche
level.
       As can be seen in Table 14, the coeﬃcient on the interaction term between Bankrupt Buyers
and proﬁtability is more negative for junior tranches and for tranches with high LTV ratios. In
particular, for junior tranches, the impact of proﬁtability on the importance of Bankrupt Buyers
in determining tranche spreads is approximately ten times larger than the same eﬀect for senior
tranches. Having one potential bankrupt buyer and moving from the 25 to the 75 percentiles of
airline proﬁtability is associated with a decrease of 89.45 basis points in credit spreads of senior
tranches, compared to 265.64 basis points for junior tranches.31 Likewise, while the interaction term
between Bankrupt Buyers and proﬁtability is small and not statistically signiﬁcant for tranches
with low LTVs, the eﬀect is much higher and statistically signiﬁcant for tranches with high LTV.
       As a ﬁnal robustness check, we investigate further the role of the probability of airline bankruptcy.
While we ﬁnd support for the conjecture that the collateral channel is stronger when proﬁtability is
lower, our analysis thus far does not account for situations in which an airline’s current proﬁtability
is low, but its balance sheet is still strong making the airline’s default unlikely. To allow for this, we
construct a more complete measure of airline health by estimating the probability that an airline
will ﬁle for Chapter-11 in a given year. We then use airlines’ predicted probability of bankruptcy
as a more comprehensive measure of the airline’s ﬁnancial health.
       Similar to Shumway (2001), we regress the probability of a bankruptcy on lagged values of
size, leverage, market-to-book, proﬁtability, the short-term debt to assets ratio, and both year and
airline ﬁxed-eﬀects. Our estimated linear probability model (standard errors clustered by airline
are reported in parentheses) is:

       P r(Bankruptcy = 1)a,t = 0.037 ∗ Sizea,t−1 + 0.009 ∗ Leveragea,t−1 + 0.124 ∗ M toBa,t−1

                                      (0.040)              (0.323)                    (0.100)

                                  − 0.787 ∗ P rof itabilitya,t−1 + 0.747 ∗ ST Debta,t−1

                                      (0.365),                       (0.238)

                                  + ca η + dy θ + a,t ,                                                    (3)

Subscripts indicate airline (a) and transaction date (t), ca is a vector of airline ﬁxed-eﬀects, dy is
  31
     To see the former, note that (−754.646 × (0.131 − 0.036) − 620.859 × 0.301 × (0.131 − 0.036)) = −89.45. The
latter eﬀect is calculated in an analogous manner.


                                                      26
a vector of year ﬁxed-eﬀects, and a,t is the regression residual.
    As can be seen, the two signiﬁcant determinants of bankruptcy are proﬁtability and the ratio of
short-term debt to assets. We next calculate imputed bankruptcy probabilities, P r(Bankruptcy),
for each airline-year based on airline characteristics. The last four columns of Table 14 report
the coeﬃcients from estimating regressions with interactions between Bankrupt Buyers and this
P r(Bankruptcy) measure. As before, we split the sample between junior and senior tranches,
and high versus low LTV tranches. Given that P r(Bankruptcy) is a linear combination of airline
characteristics, we do not include airline-level variables in these regressions.
    While the estimates based on seniority level are not statistically signiﬁcant, we ﬁnd that using
LTV to stratify our sample (Columns 7 and 8) yields results consistent with the proﬁtability
interaction regressions. We ﬁnd that for tranches with high loan to value ratios, i.e. those more
exposed to default, the eﬀect of Bankrupt Buyers on credit spreads increases when the probability
of airline bankruptcy is higher. For example, for tranches with LTV>0.5 the incremental eﬀect of
one additional bankrupt buyer, evaluated at the 75th percentile of bankruptcy probability (0.22)
is 44.9 basis points. In contrast, for tranches with low loan to value (LTV<0.5), the eﬀect of
Bankrupt Buyers on credit spreads is low even when the probability of default is high, consistent
with the protection that the underlying collateral provides for these relatively senior tranches. For
example, evaluated at the 75th percentile of bankruptcy probability, the incremental eﬀect of an
additional bankrupt buyer is only 18.3 basis points.32
    To summarize, our results are consistent with the notion that the eﬀect of the collateral channel
is larger for more junior and more highly leveraged securities of weaker ﬁrms. Even if the airline
defaults on its tranche obligations, the most senior claimants will be least exposed to ﬂuctuations
in the value of the underlying collateral and hence do not require particularly strong demand for
the assets serving as collateral. In contrast, for tranches of lower seniority, proﬁtability plays a
much larger role in determining the relation between potential demand for collateral, as proxied
by Bankrupt Buyers, and tranche spread. For these more junior tranches, when the ﬁnancial
health of the ﬁrm deteriorates and hence default probabilities go up, being able to ﬁnd a buyer for
the underlying collateral is of crucial importance. Put diﬀerently, when proﬁtability is low, junior
secured creditors are very much harmed when a large number of potential buyers are experiencing
  32
     In calculating these ﬁgures we use the total diﬀerential taking into account both the level and the interaction
term.



                                                        27
ﬁnancial diﬃculty and are in bankruptcy.
     Finally, we analyze the interaction between the Bankrupt Buyers measure and tranche rede-
ployability. Following Shleifer and Vishny (1992), we hypothesize that if assets are more redeploy-
able, potential buyers entering ﬁnancial distress should have a smaller impact on collateral values
and credit spreads. Therefore, the positive relation between Bankrupt Buyers and tranche credit
spreads should be lower for tranches with more redeployable collateral.
     We regress tranche credit spreads on the Bankrupt Buyers measure, our measure of tranche re-
deployability that is based on the number of aircraft, and an interaction between Bankrupt Buyers
and tranche redeployability. As independent variables we also include our regular set of tranche
and airline controls, employing both year and either airline and tranche ﬁxed eﬀects. As can
be seen in Table 15, we ﬁnd that consistent with our hypothesis, the interaction term between
Bankrupt Buyers and the tranche aircraft redeployability measure is negative and signiﬁcant.
While increases in Bankrupt Buyers lead to increased spreads, this eﬀect is weaker in more rede-
ployable tranches. For example, for tranches in the 25th percentile of redeployability, increasing
having one bankrupt buyer increases spreads by 76.6 basis points, while in contrast the same eﬀect
in tranches at the 75th percentile of redeployability is only 20.3 basis points.


5.     Conclusion

Our analysis shows that bankrupt ﬁrms impose negative externalities on their non-bankrupt com-
petitors through a collateral channel mechanism in which industry bankruptcies lead to reductions
in collateral values of other industry participants. This, in turn, increases the cost of external debt
ﬁnance across the industry. While our analysis focuses on one particular industry, the collateral
channel has broader, economy-wide implications. Indeed, the collateral channel should be viewed
as a particular form of ﬁnancial accelerator in which frictions in raising external ﬁnance amplify and
propagate industry downturns. Following a negative shock, a fraction of ﬁrms enter bankruptcy
and sell part of their assets. As a result, collateral values drop industry wide, increasing the cost
of external ﬁnance, magnifying the shock further. Recent events in the ongoing ﬁnancial crisis
of 2007-2009 suggest that bankruptcy induced contagion through collateral shocks are of crucial
importance in magnifying shocks to the economy at large. If such bankruptcy-induced externalities
are suﬃciently large, the collateral channel may ultimately result in downward spirals – bankrupt-



                                                  28
cies lead to declines in collateral values and capital availability industry-wide, thereby inducing
even more bankruptcies.




                                                29
Appendix A. Constructing Redeployability and Bankruptcy Mea-
sures
In this appendix we provide more detail regarding the construction of the redeployability variables
and the bankruptcy variables used in the analysis.
    As in Benmelech and Bergman (2008 and 2009) and Gavazza (2008), we measure the redeploy-
ability of aircrafts by exploiting aircraft model heterogeneity. In order to reduce costs associated
with operating diﬀerent aircraft types, airlines tend to operate a limited number of aircraft models.
Potential secondary market buyers of any given type of aircraft, therefore, are likely to be airlines
already operating the same type of aircraft. Thus, redeployability is proxied by the number of
potential buyers and the ‘popularity’ of an aircraft model type.
    Using the Ascend CASE database, we construct two redeployability measures in the following
manner. We ﬁrst construct annual redeployability measures for each aircraft type. For every
aircraft type and sample-year we compute 1) the number of non-bankrupt operators ﬂying that
aircraft model type; and 2) the number of aircraft of that type used by non-bankrupt operators.
This process yields two redeployability measures for each aircraft-type and each sample-year. To
construct the redeployability measures for a portfolio of aircraft serving as collateral for a particular
tranche, we aggregate the aircraft-type redeployability measures across all aircraft in the portfolio.
Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the redeployability of the collateral-portfolio to be the weighted average of
the redeployability index corresponding to each of the aircraft in the portfolio. The two measures
are given by:
                                                       S
                                                       
                                      aircraf t                                     aircraf t
                       Redeployabilityi,t          =         ωi,t,s (Redeployabilitys,t      )
                                                        s


                                                       S
                                                       
                                     operators                                      operators
                      Redeployabilityi,t           =         ωi,t,s (Redeployabilitys,t      )
                                                        s

where i is a tranche, t is sample year, s denotes an aircraft type, and ωi,t,s is deﬁned as
                                                         S
                                                         
                        ωi,t,s = numberi,t,s × seatss             numberi,t,s × seatss
                                                              s

We use the number of seats in an aircraft model as a proxy for its size (and value) in our weighted
average calculations.

We construct two measures of shocks to collateral driven by airlines entering bankruptcy. For each
aircraft type and calendar day in our sample we calculate (1) the number of airlines operating that
particular model type which are in bankruptcy; and (2) the number of aircraft of that particular type
which are operated by airlines in bankruptcy.33 Since changes in aircraft ownership are relatively
infrequent, ownership information of aircraft is updated at a yearly rather than daily frequency.
However, the two measures may change at a daily frequency due to airlines entering or exiting
bankruptcy.
 33
      We calculate these measures using beginning and end dates of airline bankruptcies from SDC Platinum.



                                                        30
    As for the redeployability measures described above, to construct the bankruptcy measures for
a portfolio of aircraft serving as collateral for a particular tranche, we aggregate the aircraft-type
measures across all aircraft in the portfolio. To do so, we calculate the weighted average of the
bankrupt buyer measure corresponding to each of the aircraft in the portfolio. Speciﬁcally, we
calculate:
                                                S
                                                
                      BankruptBuyersi,t =             ωi,t,s (BankruptBuyerss,t )
                                                 s


                                                S
                                                
                    BankruptAircraf ti,t =            ωi,t,s (BankruptAircraf ts,t )
                                                 s

where i is a tranche, t is a sample date, s denotes an aircraft type, and ωi,t,s is a seat-based
weighting scheme deﬁned as above. Thus, for each tranche collateral pool, this process produces
two measures of bankruptcy induced collateral shocks for each trading day.
    Figure A1 provides a timeline of airline bankruptcies in the United States over the sample period.
The ﬁgure displays the timeline of the bankruptcies (on the horizontal axis) against the number
of aircraft operated by the airline on the date the airline ﬁled for bankruptcy. Fifteen airlines
went bankrupt over the sample period, with three of them – TWA, Hawaiian, and US Airways –
going through bankruptcy twice. The average (median) duration of an airline bankruptcy in our
sample is 1.51 (1.35) years. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the recession that began in March 2001
and the subsequent September 11th, 2001 attacks mark a period of increased bankruptcy activity.
Furthermore, several of the airlines that went bankrupt in the post 9/11 periods were very large
(e.g. United, Delta, Northwest, and US Airways) and involved a large number of aircraft operated
by bankrupt airlines.
    Finally, Figure A2 presents the total number of aircraft operated by bankrupt US airlines over
the sample period. The ﬁgure shows how following the recession that started September 11th 2001
the number of aircraft of bankrupt airlines increases dramatically to a maximum of 1,706 aircraft
in 2005 when ATA, Delta, Northwest, United, and US Airways were all in chapter-11. This number
decreases as United exists from bankruptcy in February 2006, and falls further in 2007 as both
Northwest and Delta exit bankruptcy in 2007.




                                                 31
700            Eastern
               America West
                                                                                                                               United
               Hawaiian
               Florida West
600            TWA
               Pan Am
               Tower                                                                                                                                  Delta
               Kitty Hawk
500            US Airways
               United
                                                                                                                                                    Northwest
               Atlas
               ATA
400            Delta
               Northwest                                                                                   US Airways
               Mesaba

300                                                                                                                                 US Airways
      Eastern

                                                                                             TWA
200             TWA



         America West                                                                                                                                Mesaba
100
                                                                                                                                          ATA
                                                                                        Kitty Hawk
      Hawaiian                                                                                                     Hawaiian         Atlas
                       Florida West                                          Tower
-
    Jan-94   Sep-94 May-95 Feb-96   Oct-96   Jun-97   Feb-98   Nov-98   Jul-99   Mar-00 Nov-00   Jul-01   Apr-02   Dec-02 Aug-03 Apr-04   Dec-04   Sep-05 May-06




             Figure A1:        Timeline of airline bankruptcies in the U.S. 1994-2006. Airline bankruptcy dates are obtained from SDC
       Platinum.




                                                                                  32
                                                                                                 Total Number of Aircraft in Bankruptcy

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

  0
       1/1/1994
                  7/1/1994
                             1/1/1995
                                        7/1/1995
                                                   1/1/1996
                                                                7/1/1996
                                                                           1/1/1997
                                                                                      7/1/1997
                                                                                                 1/1/1998
                                                                                                            7/1/1998
                                                                                                                       1/1/1999
                                                                                                                                  7/1/1999
                                                                                                                                             1/1/2000
                                                                                                                                                        7/1/2000
                                                                                                                                                                   1/1/2001
                                                                                                                                                                              7/1/2001
                                                                                                                                                                                         1/1/2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                    7/1/2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/1/2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7/1/2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/1/2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7/1/2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/1/2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7/1/2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/1/2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7/1/2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/1/2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7/1/2007
                  Figure A2:                                  Total number of aircraft operated by bankrupt airlines in the U.S. 1994-2007. Airline bankruptcy dates
   are obtained from SDC Platinum. Fleet data is obtained from the Ascend CASE database.




                                                                                                                                                         33
Appendix B: Variable description and construction
For reference, the following is a list of variables used in the paper, their sources, and a brief de-
scription of how each variable is constructed.


  1. Amortizing: Takes the value of 1 if the tranche is amortized (Source: SDC and Issue Prospec-
     tus from EDGARPlus(R)).

  2. Bankrupt Assets/Total Assets: The aggregate book asset value of airlines with current ﬁlings
     under Chapter-11 divided by the aggregate book asset value of all airlines in the U.S. (Source:
     SDC and Bureau of Transportation Statistics).

  3. Bankruptcy dummy: Takes the value of 1 if the airline has ﬁled for bankruptcy protection
     during a particular year, and 0 otherwise. (Source: SDC).

  4. Call Provision: Takes the value of 1 if the tranche is callable. (Source: SDC).

  5. Fuel Price: The barrel price of Kerosene jet fuel in $dollars. (Source: the Energy Information
     Administration website).

  6. Healthy Assets/Total Assets: The aggregate book asset value of non-bankrupt airlines divided
     by the aggregate book asset value of all airlines in the U.S. (Source: SDC and Bureau of
     Transportation Statistics).

  7. Leverage: The ﬁrm’s total current liabilities+long-term debt [Compustat Annual Items 9+34+84]
     all divided by book value of assets [Compustat Annual Item 6]. (Source: Compustat).

  8. Liquidity Facility: Takes the value of 1 if the tranche has a liquidity facility enhancement.
     (Source: Issue Prospectus from EDGARPlus(R)).

  9. LTV : The tranche initial cumulative loan-to-value (Source: Issue Prospectus from EDGARPlus(R)).

 10. Market-to-book : The airline’s market value of equity [Compustat Annual Items 24*25] + book
     value of assets [Compustat Annual Item 6] minus the book value of equity [Compustat Annual
     Item 60] all over book value of assets [Compustat Annual Item 6]. (Source: Compustat).

 11. Number Bankrupt: The number of airlines with current ﬁlings under Chapter-11 . (Source:
     SDC).

 12. Number Bankrupt/Total : The number of airlines with current ﬁlings under Chapter-11 di-
     vided by the total number of airlines in the U.S. (Source: SDC and Bureau of Transportation
     Statistics).

 13. Number Healthy: The number of non-bankrupt airlines. (Source: SDC).

 14. Number Healthy/Total : The number of non-bankrupt airlines divided by the total number of
     airlines in the U.S. (Source: SDC and Bureau of Transportation Statistics).

 15. Post 9/11 dummy: Takes the value of 1 for transaction dates after September-11, 2001.

 16. Proﬁtability: Earnings [Compustat Annual Item 13] over total assets [Compustat Annual
     Item 6]. (Source: Compustat).

                                                 34
17. Seniority: Takes the value of 1 (senior) 2, 3, and 4 (junior). (Source: SDC and Issue Prospec-
    tus from EDGARPlus(R)).

18. Size: The logarithm of the airline’s total book assets (Source: Compustat).

19. Spread : The tranche credit spread (in basis points) over a maturity-matched Treasury.
    (Source: Mergent).

20. Term-to-Maturity: The tranche term-to-maturity (in years). (SDC and Mergent).

21. Tranche Size: The logarithm of the tranche issue size (in millions). (SDC).




                                               35
Appendix C. Additional Robustness Tests
                                              Table C1
                  Bankruptcy and Collateral: Controlling for Buyers and Sellers Eﬀects
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. Columns 1-4 split the sample into
transactions made by Life Insurance ﬁrms and Property & Casualty ﬁrms. Columns 5-8 include vendor ﬁxed-eﬀects when this information
is available. All regressions include an intercept, yield curve and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread)
(not reported). Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B. a, b
and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent            Tranche        Tranche         Tranche         Tranche        Tranche        Tranche        Tranche        Tranche
Variable=            Spread         Spread          Spread          Spread         Spread         Spread         Spread         Spread

                                                                   Insurance Company Type

                       Life       Property &          Life         Property &         All            All            All            All
                                   Casualty                         Casualty

Bankrupt             64.308 b       70.635 b                                      117.002 a      132.696 a
Buyers               (29.855)       (35.199)                                       (26.576)       (26.436)
Redeployability       -24.288       126.973                                       -55.104 a        34.563
(operators)          (45.639)      (147.948)                                       (17.688)       (70.770)
Bankrupt                                            11.681 b        16.761 b                                      27.483 a      35.635 a
Aircraft                                             (5.665)          (8.560)                                      (7.563)       (6.420)
Redeployability                                    -103.125 c        142.723                                     -44.896 a       -22.862
(aircraft)                                          (59.012)        (146.438)                                     (14.725)      (61.606)
Fuel Price             -2.678        -3.643          11.350            3.791         15.559        26.080          12.096        22.714
                     (37.308)       (36.199)        (36.962)         (40.958)       (31.096)      (31.218)        (30.874)      (30.316)
Industry             11.974 b        11.948         14.148 b          13.666        14.773 b        7.475        16.949 b         8.562
Bankruptcy            (5.854)       (8.560)‘         (5.569)          (8.797)        (7.143)       (6.691)         (7.443)       (6.760)
Amortizing                                                                         -81.603 a                     -83.122 a
                                                                                    (19.624)                      (19.965)
Liquidity                                                                          -48.380 b                     -48.391 a
facility                                                                            (21.522)                      (21.250)
Seniority                                                                           54.520 a                      53.967 a
                                                                                    (12.704)                      (12.864)
Tranche size                                                                       -24.698 c                     -25.654 c
                                                                                    (13.686)                      (13.524)
Call provision                                                                        -2.145                        -3.338
                                                                                    (19.905)                      (19.640)
Term-to-                                                                             6.279 a                       6.464 a
maturity                                                                             (2.091)                       (2.122)
Airline size           -62.555     239.292 b         -99.056        233.267 b     -167.674 a      -106.798      -153.443 a     -122.438 c
                      (68.533)     (102.731)        (73.144)        (100.531)       (56.602)      (76.184)        (56.222)       (74.078)
Market-to-          182.051 a      198.587 a       175.113 a        215.834 a        42.761        60.399         48.4114         61.902
Book                  (40.943)      (50.977)        (39.482)         (51.683)       (40.516)      (50.512)        (44.297)       (53.709)
Proﬁtability        -964.045 a    -1080.114 a     -1010.071 a      -1125.129 a    -836.814 a    -1015.691 a     -855.656 a    -1055.192 a
                     (242.686)     (377.630)       (242.862)        (362.531)     (232.109 )     (317.440)       (228.368)      (298.504)
Leverage            526.587 a      453.477 a       538.220 a        503.149 a      294.690 c     341.623 b       289.991 c      334.793 c
                     (170.395)     (118.046)       (165.950)        (127.332)      (154.183)     (171.582)       (163.154)      (181.100)
Fixed-Eﬀects        Tranche+       Tranche+        Tranche+         Tranche+       Airline+      Tranche+        Airline+      Tranche+
                        Year          Year            Year             Year          Year+         Year+           Year+          Year+
                                                                                     Vendor        Vendor          Vendor         Vendor
# of Tranches           125            114            125             114               118          118              118           118
# of Airlines            9              8              9               9                 9            9                9             9
# of Vendors                                                                            45           45               45            45
Adjusted R2            0.40           0.51            0.40            0.51             0.51         0.62             0.51          0.62
Observations          11,297          4,780          11,297           4,780            3,205        3,205            3,205         3,205

                                                              36
References
Acharya, Viral, Sreedhar Bharath, and Anand Srinivasan, “Does Industry-wide Distress Aﬀect
Defaulted Firms? Evidence from Creditor Recoveries,” Journal of Financial Economics 85 (2007),
787-821.
Asquith, Paul, Robert Gertner, and David S. Scharfstein, “Anatomy of Financial Distress: An
Examination of Junk-Bond Issuers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics (1994), 625-658.
Bao, Jack, Jun Pan, and Jian Wang, “Liquidity of Corporate Bonds,” Working paper, MIT Sloan
(2008).
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K., Bergman, “Collateral Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics
91 (2009) 339-360.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K., Bergman, “Liquidation Values and the Credibility of Finan-
cial Contract Renegotiation: Evidence from U.S. Airlines ,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123
(2008), 1635-1677.
Benmelech, Efraim, Mark J., Garmaise, and Tobias J., Moskowitz, “Do Liquidation Values Aﬀect
Financial Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Loan Contracts and Zoning Regulation” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120 (2005), 1121-1154.
Bernanke, Ben “Nonmonetary Eﬀects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
Depression,” American Economic Review 73 (1983) 257-276.
Campbell John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak, “Forced Sales and House Prices,” Working
paper, Harvard University (2009).
Campbell John Y., and Glen B., Taksler, “Volatility and Corporate Bond Yields,” Journal of
Finance 58 (2003), 2321-2349.
Chevalier J., and D., Scharfstein, “Liquidity Constraints and the Cyclical Behavior of Markups,”
American Economic Review 85 (1995), 390-396.
Chevalier J., and D., Scharfstein, “Capital Market Imperfections and Countercyclical Markups:
Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review 85 (1996), 703-725.
Gavazza, Alessandro, “Asset Liquidity and Financial Contracts: Evidence from Aircraft Leases,”
Working paper, Yale University (2008).
Hertzel, Michael G., and Micah S. Oﬃcer, “Industry Contagion in Loan Spreads,” Working paper,
Arizona State University and University of Southern California, 2008.
Hong, G., and Arthur Warga, “An Empirical Study of Bond Market Transactions,” Financial
Analysts Journal 56 (2000), 32-46.
Hotchkiss, Edith, “Post-Bankruptcy Performance and Management Turnover,” Journal of Finance
50 (1995), 3-22.
Jorion, Philippe, and Gaiyan Zhang, “Good and Bad Credit Contagion: Evidence from Credit
Default Swaps,” Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming (2007).
Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Rethinking Capital Regulation,”
Working paper, Harvard University and University of Chicago, 2008.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105 (1997),
211-248.


                                              37
Korteweg, Arthur, “The Cost of Financial Distress across Industries,” Working paper, Stanford
University, 2007.
Larry H. P. Lang, and Rene M., Stulz, “Contagion and Competitive Intra-industry Eﬀects of
Bankruptcy Announcements,” Journal of Financial Economics 32 (1992), 45-60.
Mann, Elizabeth D., “Aviation Finance: An Overview,” The Journal of Structured Finance Spring
(2009), 109-117.
Phillips, Gordon, “Increased Debt and Industry Product Market: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal
of Financial Economics 37 (1995), 189-238.
Pulvino, Todd C., “Do Fire-Sales Exist? An Empirical Investigation of Commercial Aircraft Trans-
actions,” Journal of Finance 53 (1998), 939-78.
Pulvino, Todd C., “Eﬀects of Bankruptcy Court Protection on Asset Sales,” Journal of Financial
Economics 52 (1999), 151-86.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
librium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47 (1992), 143-66.
Strömberg, P., “Conﬂicts of Interests and Market Illiquidity in Bankruptcy Auctions: Theory and
Tests,” Journal of Finance 55 (2000), 2641-92.
Shumway, Tyler, “Forecasting Bankruptcy More Accurately: A Simple Hazard Model,” Journal of
Business (2001), 101-124.
Warner, Jerold B., “Bankruptcy, Absolute Priority, and the Pricing of Risky Debt Claims,” Journal
of Financial Economics 4 (1977), 239-276.




                                               38
                                                                                      Bankrupt Buyers
6



5



4


                                                                                                                                                                          B737
3
                                                                                                                                                                          B747


2



1



0
    1/1/1994


                    1/1/1995


                               1/1/1996


                                          1/1/1997


                                                     1/1/1998


                                                                1/1/1999


                                                                           1/1/2000


                                                                                        1/1/2001


                                                                                                        1/1/2002


                                                                                                                   1/1/2003


                                                                                                                              1/1/2004


                                                                                                                                         1/1/2005


                                                                                                                                                    1/1/2006


                                                                                                                                                               1/1/2007




               Figure 1:            Total number of Bankrupt Potential Buyers for Boeing 737 and Boeing 747. An airline is considered to be a
               potential buyer of a particular aircraft if in its ﬂeet it operates aircraft of the same model type. Fleet data is obtained from the
               Ascend CASE database. Airline bankruptcy dates are obtained from SDC Platinum.




                                                                                                   39
                                                                                 Bankrupt Aircraft
350


300


250


200
                                                                                                                                                                       B737
150
                                                                                                                                                                       B747


100


50


 0
      1/1/1994


                   1/1/1995


                              1/1/1996


                                         1/1/1997


                                                    1/1/1998


                                                               1/1/1999


                                                                          1/1/2000


                                                                                     1/1/2001


                                                                                                     1/1/2002


                                                                                                                1/1/2003


                                                                                                                           1/1/2004


                                                                                                                                      1/1/2005


                                                                                                                                                 1/1/2006


                                                                                                                                                            1/1/2007




             Figure 2:        Total number of Boeing 737 and Boeing 747 aircraft operated by bankrupt airlines in the United States. Fleet
             data is obtained from the Ascend CASE database. Airline bankruptcy dates are obtained from SDC Platinum.




                                                                                                40
                                                      Table 1:
                                                     EETC Structures
This table displays the characteristics of three EETC issues by FedEx, Northwest Airlines, and Delta Airlines. Variable deﬁnitions
are provided in Appendix B.



                                      Yield        Credit
                             Issue   at issue      Spread                      Moody’s      S&P
EETC             Tranche      size     (%)      (basis points)    Maturity      rating     rating     LTV     Collateral

Fedex 1998-1       1-A      458.1     6.720           125          1/2022        Aa2        AAA      0.387    5 MD-11F
                                                                                                              8 A300F4-605R

Fedex 1998-1       1-B      178.6     6.845           138          1/2019         A1        AA-      0.532    5 MD-11F
                                                                                                              8 A300F4-605R

Fedex 1998-1       1-C      196.8     7.020           155          1/2016        Baa1      BBB+      0.688    5 MD-11F
                                                                                                              8 A300F4-605R



NWA 1999-3          G       150.2     7.935           170          6/2019        Aaa        AAA      0.441    14 BAE Avro RJ85

NWA 1999-3          B        58.6     9.485           325          6/2015        Baa2       BBB      0.614    14 BAE Avro RJ85

NWA 1999-3          C        30.5     9.152           300          6/2010        Baa3      BBB-      0.691    14 BAE Avro RJ85



Delta 2002-1       G-1      586.9     6.718           153          1/2023        Aaa        AAA      0.519    17 B737-832
                                                                                                              1 B757-232
                                                                                                              8 B767-332ER
                                                                                                              6 B767-432ER

Delta 2002-1        C       168.7     7.779           325          1/2012        Baa2        A-      0.611    17 B737-832
                                                                                                              1 B757-232
                                                                                                              8 B767-332ER
                                                                                                              6 B767-432ER




                                                            41
                                                      Table 2:
                                                    Summary Statistics
This table provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the empirical analysis. Panel A displays tranche characteristics.
Panel B provides airlines characteristics. Panel C provides tranche redeployability characteristics, and Panel D presents industry-
level controls. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B.



                                           Panel A: Tranche Characteristics
                                                 25th                 75th                    Standard
                                       Mean    Percentile Median    Percentile                Deviation        Min           Max

Spread                                 290.2         153.6          229.4         330.8          311           16.9         4,206.6
Tranche size ($m)                      274.4         127.0          207.1         385.8         181.2           3.5          828.8
Term to Maturity                        16.9          14.5           18.1         20.2           4.5            1.7           24.3
Seniority                                1.3          1.00           1.00         1.00          0.61           1.00           4.00
Call Provision                          0.16          0.00           0.00         0.00          0.37           0.00           1.00
Amortized                               0.68          0.00           1.00         1.00          0.47           0.00           1.00
Liquidity facility                      0.75          0.00           1.00         1.00          0.43           0.00           1.00
Loan-to-Value                           0.54          0.41           0.49         0.66          0.16           0.33           0.89

                                            Panel B: Airlines Characteristics
                                                  25th                  75th                  Standard
                                       Mean    Percentile   Median    Percentile              Deviation        Min           Max

Size ($m)                             14,151.5      9,201.0        10,877.0     20,404.0       6.972.4        1,134.9      32,841.0
Market-to-Book                          1.26          1.03           1.18         1.43          0.29           0.76          2.51
Proﬁtability                           8.24%        3.55%          10.39%       13.13%         6.76%         -12.10%       23.70%
Leverage                                0.37          0.18           0.40         0.52          0.17           0.03         0.658

                                          Panel C: Redeployability Measures
                                                 25th                 75th                    Standard
                                       Mean    Percentile Median    Percentile                Deviation        Min           Max

Redeployability                       1,392.9        424.7         1,046.2       2,345.4       1,016.0         72.0          4,264
(# of aircraft)
Redeployability                        135.9          48.8           87.0         223.5          99.9           7.0          431.0
(# of operators)

                                          Panel D: Airline Industry Variables
                                                 25th                  75th                   Standard
                                       Mean    Percentile   Median   Percentile               Deviation        Min           Max

Jet Fuel Price                         107.8          70.9           84.4         146.6         55.1            29.6         280.5
Bankrupt Airlines                        5.1          4.0            6.0           6.0           2.2             0.0          8.0
Healthy Airlines                        62.0          58.0           62.0         65.0           4.1             51            73
Bankrupt Assets/Total Assets           0.075         0.060          0.083         0.095         0.033          0.000         0.119
Healthy Assets/Total Assets            0.925         0.905          0.917         0.940         0.033          0.881         1.000




                                                              42
                                             Table 3:
                             Bankrupt Buyers and Bankrupt Aircraft Measures
This table provides descriptive statistics for the bankrupt buyers and bankrupt aircraft measures used in the empirical analysis. Panel
A displays statistics for the entire sample, while Panel B and Panel C provide the statistics for diﬀerent sample periods for each of the
measures. Details on the construction of the Bankrupt Buyers and Bankrupt Aircraft measures are provided in Appendix B.



                Panel A: Bankrupt Buyers and Number of Aircraft in Bankruptcy
                                25th               75th      Standard
                      Mean    Percentile Median  Percentile Deviation    Min                                   Max

Bankrupt buyers          0.809          0.0          0.269          1.571         1.027          0.0           5.0

Bankrupt aircraft       43.860          0.0          2.628         86.177        63.275          0.0          311.0



                                   Panel B: Bankrupt Buyers over Time
                                      25th                75th     Standard
Year                     Mean       Percentile Median   Percentile Deviation                     Min           Max        Observations

1994-2000                0.013          0.0           0.0            0.0          0.077          0.0           1.0            4,814
2001                     0.324          0.0          0.244          0.528         0.348          0.0           1.0            3,421
2002                     0.578          0.0          0.396           1.0          0.648          0.0           3.0            3,056
2003                     1.411         0.608         1.725          2.161         0.872          0.0           3.0            2,937
2004                     1.604         0.533         1.732          2.299         1.171          0.0           4.0            2,497
2005                     2.058         0.105         2.167          3.336         1.483          0.0           5.0            1,826
2006                     1.023          0.0          1.309          1.732         0.864          0.0           4.0            2,834
2007                     0.372          0.0           0.0           0.619         0.514          0.0           2.0            1,003

                                  Panel C: Bankrupt Aircraft over Time
                                     25th                 75th      Standard
Year                     Mean      Percentile Median    Percentile Deviation                     Min           Max        Observations

1994-2000                0.227           0.0          0.0             0.0        1.859           0.0            57            4,814
2001                     3.042           0.0         1.461           5.751       3.817           0.0            17            3,421
2002                     23.832          0.0         2.388          52.851       39.208          0.0           274            3,056
2003                     93.286        31.529       111.585        128.242       61.598          0.0           273            2,937
2004                     91.445          13.0       96.509         118.132       70.884          0.0           282            2,497
2005                    110.021         3.206       117.976        182.282       83.939          0.0           311            1,826
2006                     63.323          0.0         73.0           93.846       54.236          0.0           264            2,834
2007                     14.885          0.0          0.0            8.947       34.126          0.0           181            1,003




                                                              43
                                    Table 4:
      Bankruptcy, Bankrupt Buyers and Tranche Credit Spreads Univariate Analysis
This table provides univariate analysis of tranche credit spreads: Panel A segments credit spreads of tranches of non-bankrupt
and bankrupt airlines, Panel B focuses on non-bankrupt airlines and compares tranche credit spreads of tranches with a positive
bankrupt buyer measure and those with a bankrupt buyers measure equal to zero, while Panel C stratiﬁes the analysis in Panel B
by tranche seniority, and reports means and t-statistics for t-tests on equal means using standard errors that are clustered at the
tranche level.



     Panel A: Tranche Credit Spreads of Bankrupt and Non-Bankrupt Airlines: Summary Statistics
                                  10th       25th               75th     Standard   Observations
                       Mean     Percentile Percentile Median  Percentile Deviation

Bankrupt airlines             531.7         135.1         188.4         317.4         592.4         649.9             1,011

Non bankrupt airlines         276.1          94.2         152.6         226.1         322.7         273.3            17,316

Diﬀerence                     255.6
T-test for equal means        (2.81)

              Panel B: Tranche Credit Spreads of Non-Bankrupt Airlines: Summary Statistics
                                    10th       25th                 75th    Standard    Observations
                          Mean    Percentile Percentile Median   Percentile Deviation

Bankrupt buyers>0             339.0         135.9         197.7         271.7         363.4         336.1             8,992

No bankrupt buyers            208.0          75.4         129.4         177.1         253.3         156.3             8,324

Diﬀerence                     131.0
T-test for equal means        (7.48)

      Panel C: Tranche Credit Spreads of Non-Bankrupt Airlines and Seniority: Means and T-tests
                       Senior                         Junior    Diﬀ (2-1)  Diﬀ (3-1)    Diﬀ (4-1)
                         1          2         3         4        (T-test)   (T-test)     (T-test)

Bankrupt buyers>0             302.5         419.2         474.9        1444.9         116.7        172.47            1142.5
(Observations)               (6,755)       (1,613)        (590)         (34)          (3.79)       (2.81)            (7.54)

No bankrupt buyers            207.5         223.7         177.5         332.0          16.3         30.03             124.5
(Observations)               (6,481)       (1,187)        (625)         (31)          (0.51)        (1.86)            (4.77)

Diﬀerence                      95.0         195.5         297.4        1112.9
T-test for equal means        (5.70)        (4.08)        (5.15)       (6.79)




                                                            44
                                                 Table 5:
                                          Bankruptcy and Collateral
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. Panel A uses the
Bankrupt Buyers measure while Panel B uses the Bankrupt Aircraf t measure. For each speciﬁcation, Panel C of the table
provides estimates of the magnitude of the economic eﬀect of either a one standard deviation move or a 25th to 75th percentile
movement in the Bankrupt Buyers and Bankrupt Aircraf t measures on tranche credit spread. All regressions include an
intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread), and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not
reported). Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B.
a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                              Panel A: Bankrupt Buyers
Dependent                    Tranche         Tranche     Tranche    Tranche                  Tranche            Tranche
Variable=                    Spread          Spread      Spread     Spread                   Spread             Spread

Bankrupt Buyers             246.491 a       151.619 a       106.162 a        93.614 a       119.030 a          118.937 a
                             (28.700)        (31.387)        (27.299)        (27.124)        (28.302)           (27.505)
Bankruptcy                  126.600 c       168.670 b       144.448 b         21.485        184.451 a          565.409 a
                             (76.610)        (67.129)        (65.772)        (30.607)        (70.037)           (28.287)
Redeployability             -71.718 a       -50.960 a       -97.386 a       -80.352 b         -5.850             20.889
(operators)                  (14.019)        (13.592)        (27.094)        (26.466)        (58.415)           (56.732)
Adjusted R2                    0.16            0.22            0.27            0.28            0.38               0.48

                                             Panel B: Bankrupt Aircraft
Dependent                    Tranche         Tranche    Tranche     Tranche                  Tranche            Tranche
Variable=                    Spread          Spread      Spread      Spread                  Spread             Spread

Bankrupt aircraft            53.790 a        26.479 a        20.706 a       20.323 a         25.522 a          26.574 a
                             (10.796)         (7.765)         (6.117)         (6.124)         (5.994)            (5.683)
Bankruptcy                   116.066        172.344 b       133.336 b          9.531        182.755 b          566.077 a
                             (80.416)        (68.805)        (66.294)        (29.499)        (70.569)           (26.773)
Redeployability             -46.139 a       -21.955 b       -83.065 a       -73.395 a         -60.464            -27.262
(aircraft)                   (10.796)        (11.323)        (21.943)        (21.183)        (62.818)           (61.984)
Adjusted R2                    0.15             0.21            0.27           0.28             0.37               0.48

Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                           No             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes
Airline                        No              No              Yes             Yes              No                 No
Airline×Bankruptcy             No              No               No             Yes              No                 No
Tranche                        No              No               No              No             Yes                Yes
Tranche×Bankruptcy             No              No               No              No              No                Yes
# of Tranches                 127             127              127             127             127                127
# of Airlines                  12              12               12              12              12                 12
Observations                 18,327          18,327           18,327          18,327          18,327             18,327

                   Panel C: Magnitude of the Collateral Channel (in basis points)
                                          Bankrupt Buyers
    one σ change        253.15     155.71        109.03      96.14        122.24                                 122.15
    25%-75% change      387.24     238.19        166.78     147.07        187.00                                 186.85
                                          Bankrupt Aircraft
    one σ change        114.45      56.34         44.06      43.24         54.30                                  56.54
    25%-75% change      240.33     118.31         92.51      90.80        114.03                                 118.73




                                                            45
                                        Table 6:
            Bankruptcy and Collateral: Credit Spreads of Non-Bankrupt Airlines
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. All regressions include
an intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread), and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not
reported). Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B.
a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent                 Tranche          Tranche          Tranche          Tranche          Tranche            Tranche
Variable=                 Spread           Spread           Spread           Spread           Spread             Spread

Bankrupt Buyers           67.340 a        56.389 b         64.666 b
                          (29.409)         (28.274)        (27.984)
Redeployability          -36.463 b        -79.354 a         32.604
(operators)               (16.436)         (22.800)        (79.046)
Bankrupt Aircraft                                                               9.230         11.681 c           13.678 b
                                                                               (7.035)         (6.645)            (5.686)
Redeployability                                                              -22.541 c       -68.859 a            -20.251
(aircraft)                                                                    (13.980)        (17.178)           (82.924)
Fuel Price                  30.945           30.922         18.396             42.151          35.107             30.562
                           (36.120)        (37.415)        (32.972)           (36.609)        (37.588)           (33.405)
Number Bankrupt            12.076 b        13.975 b        12.034 b           15.519 a        16.383 a           14.042 b
                            (5.857)         (5.908)         (5.565)            (5.713)         (5.722)            (5.476)
Amortizing               -146.340 a      -149.022 a                         -145.937 a      -148.185 a
                           (29.991)        (29.355)                           (30.153)        (29.385)
Liquidity facility       -123.517 a      -115.703 a                         -123.579 a      -112.787 a
                           (39.479)        (41.827)                           (39.518)        (41.478)
Seniority                  57.867 b        75.399 a                          55.261 b         74.632 a
                           (24.171)        (25.042)                           (23.917)        (24.579)
Tranche size              -52.249 a       -36.730 c                          -54.385 a       -38.217 c
                           (17.691)        (20.679)                           (17.202)        (19.989)
Call provision               8.966           13.016                            10.611          13.270
                           (26.172)        (25.728)                           (26.129)        (25.763)
Term-to-maturity            7.815 a         9.761 a                            7.648 a         9.637 a
                            (2.753)         (3.034)                            (2.757)         (3.024)
Airline size                39.289          -18.290          29.882            41.329           -5.994             15.310
                           (29.077)        (54.104)         (69.825)          (28.935)        (55.018)            (72.974)
Market-to-Book           107.908 b       170.989 a         180.563 a        102.698 b       155.842 a            181.503 a
                           (41.224)        (37.813)         (37.770)          (41.353)        (37.859)            (37.465)
Proﬁtability            -1003.526 a      -886.778 a       -967.063 a       -1073.334 a      -848.450 a          -1008.489 a
                          (192.222)       (201.308)        (242.314)         (186.180)       (205.402)           (240.932)
Leverage                 400.752 a       470.405 a         521.011 a         405.773 a      472.754 a            545.577 a
                           (97.933)       (136.970)        (132.325)          (95.483)       (135.697)           (132.010)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                       Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
Airline                     No              Yes               No                No              Yes                 No
Tranche                     No               No              Yes                No               No                Yes
# of Tranches              126              126              126               126              126                126
# of Airlines               12               12               12                12               12                 12
Adjusted R2                0.28             0.30             0.41              0.28             0.30               0.41
Observations              16,877           16,877           16,877            16,877           16,877             16,877




                                                            46
                                             Table 7:
                             The Collateral Channel and Industry Conditions
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. All regressions include an
intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread), and tranche and year ﬁxed-eﬀects
(not reported). Tranche controls are not included in the explanatory variables as they are absorbed by the tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects.
Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B. a and b denote
statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% levels, respectively.


Dependent                            Tranche         Tranche         Tranche        Tranche         Tranche           Tranche
Variable=                            Spread          Spread          Spread         Spread          Spread            Spread

Bankrupt Buyers                      64.666 b        64.656 b       73.134 b
                                     (27.984)        (27.920)       (29.550)
Redeployability                       32.604          32.269         25.878
(operators)                          (79.047)        (79.015)       (80.208)
Bankrupt Aircraft                                                                   13.678 b        13.676 b         14.972 b
                                                                                     (5.868)         (5.679)          (6.023)
Redeployability                                                                      -20.251         -20.722          -22.148
(aircraft)                                                                          (82.924)        (82.891)         (84.435)
Fuel Price                            18.396          18.005         17.955          30.562          30.103           31.082
                                     (32.972)        (32.900)       (32.040)        (33.407)        (33.336)         (32.553)
Number Bankrupt                      12.034 b
                                      (5.565)
Number Bankrupt/Total                               831.199 b
                                                    (376.357)
Bankrupt Assets/Total Assets                                          7.404
                                                                    (110.016)
Number Healthy                                                                      -14.042 b
                                                                                     (5.476)
Healthy/Total                                                                                      -969.258 b
                                                                                                    (371.263)
Healthy Assets/Total Assets                                                                                            -7.937
                                                                                                                     (100.998)
Airline size                           29.882          30.117         39.117          5.310           5.580            15.343
                                      (69.824)        (69.745)       (69.717)       (72.974)        (72.910)          (72.074)
Market-to-Book                      180.563 a       180.651 a       176.786 a      181.503 a       181.561 a         175.090 a
                                      (37.770)        (37.761)       (37.573)       (37.465)        (37.453)          (37.233)
Proﬁtability                        -964.063 a      -965.595 a     -942.286 a     -1008.489 a     -1010.179 a       -981.395 a
                                     (242.314)       (242.353)      (241.644)      (240.932)       (240.968)         (239.619)
Leverage                            521.011 a       520.949 a        503.475       545.577 a       545.414 a         529.795 a
                                     (132.326)       (132.214)      (133.508)      (132.010)       (131.928)         (133.248)
Fixed-Eﬀects                        Tranche+        Tranche+       Tranche+        Tranche+        Tranche+         Tranche+
                                        Year            Year           Year           Year            Year              Year
# of Tranches                           126             126            126             126             126              126
# of Airlines                            12              12             12             12              12                12
Adjusted R2                             0.42            0.41           0.41           0.41            0.41              0.41
Observations                           16,877          16,877         16,877         16,877          16,877            16,877




                                                           47
                                              Table 8:
                               Industry Conditions and Airline Heterogeneity
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. All regressions include an
intercept, yield curve and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread), and tranche, year and airline×(9/11
dummy) ﬁxed-eﬀects (not reported). Tranche controls are not included in the explanatory variables as they are absorbed by the
tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix
B. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent                        Tranche          Tranche           Tranche          Tranche           Tranche           Tranche
Variable=                        Spread           Spread            Spread           Spread            Spread            Spread

Bankrupt Buyers                 72.657 b          72.561 b          72.657 b
                                (33.558)          (33.482)          (33.558)
Redeployability                  22.985            22.849            22.985
(operators)                     (84.544)          (84.503)          (84.544)
Bankrupt Aircraft                                                                    12.578 b          12.583 b         12.578 b
                                                                                      (6.169)           (6.181)          (6.169)
Redeployability                                                                        7.331             7.005            7.331
(aircraft)                                                                           (85.379)          (85.384)         (85.379)

Fuel Price                       16.725            16.527            16.725           27.562            27.284            27.562
                                (33.233)          (33.157)          (33.233)         (33.159)          (33.088)          (33.159)

Post 9/11/2001                  449.652 a        448.698 a         449.652 a         464.231 a        463.264 a         464.231 a
                                (114.656)        (114.634)         (114.656)         (120.763)        (120.790)         (120.763)

Number Bankrupt                   6.724                                                8.826
                                 (5.975)                                              (5.844)

Number Bankrupt/Total                             481.291                                              620.949
                                                 (405.066)                                            (397.386)

Number Healthy                                                       -6.724                                              -8.826 c
                                                                    (5.975)                                               (5.844)

Controls                        Airline+         Airline+           Airline+         Airline+         Airline+          Airline+
                                Trance+          Trance+            Trance+          Trance+          Trance+           Trance+
Fixed-Eﬀects                   Tranche+         Tranche+           Tranche+          Tranche+         Tranche+         Tranche+
                                 Year+            Year+              Year+            Year+            Year+             Year+
                              (Airline FE×     (Airline FE×       (Airline FE×     (Airline FE×     (Airline FE×      (Airline FE×
                               Post 9/11)       Post 9/11)         Post 9/11)       Post 9/11)       Post 9/11)        Post 9/11)
# of Tranches                      126              126                126              126              126               126
# of Airlines                       12               12                 12               12               12                12
Adjusted R2                        0.43             0.43               0.43             0.42             0.42              0.42
Observations                     16,877           16,877             16,877           16,877           16,877            16,877




                                                             48
                                               Table 9:
                                  The Collateral Channel and Tranche Fleet
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. All regressions include
an intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread), and tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects (not
reported). Columns 1 and 2 also include aircraft model×year ﬁxed eﬀects. Column 3 and 4 focus on aircraft manufactured by either
Airbus and Boeing (column 3) or Boeing only (column 4). The last two columns of the table also includes a dummy variable for
wide-body aircraft interacted with month-year ﬁxed eﬀects. Tranche controls are not included in the explanatory variables as they
are absorbed by the tranche ﬁxed-eﬀects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are
provided in Appendix B. a, and b denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, and 5% levels, respectively.


                                                            Airbus and Boeing      Boeing only
Dependent                 Tranche           Tranche              Tranche            Tranche           Tranche           Tranche
Variable=                 Spread            Spread               Spread              Spread           Spread            Spread

Bankrupt Buyers          164.072 a                               103.499 a          112.696 a        123.376 a
                          (40.917)                                (36.759)           (41.124)         (42.468)
Redeployability            15.783                                  -38.579            77.172           17.332
(operators)              (103.268)                                 (81.353           (97.071)         (69.988)
Bankrupt Aircraft                           30.028 a                                                  26.121 a
                                             (8.772)                                                   (8.764)
Redeployability                              41.212                                                    -27.966
(aircraft)                                 (101.099)                                                  (70.416)
Fuel Price                 15.128            30.548                61.196             -18.773          35.010           49.094
                          (35.081)          (34.520)              (40.156)           (39.344)         (71.103)         (70.261)
Number Bankrupt             -2.907            3.506                 7.948              0.946           -22.516          -16.864
                           (5.681)           (5.384)               (7.833)            (7.012)         (13.744)         (12.319)
Airline size               83.260            30.844                122.048            -28.924          -80.478          -86.821
                         (179.591)         (179.205)              (94.711)          (116.073)         (96.941)        (102.811)
Market-to-Book             47.254            14.459              146.193 a          217.955 b        106.684 b        113.051 b
                         (164.964)         (164.320)              (46.055)           (91.490)         (43.154)         (43.827)
Proﬁtability            -1369.364 a       -1521.139 b           -2149.84 a         -1846.818 b      -1259.009 a      -1285.796 a
                         (619.761)         (642.168)             (417.980)          (703.254)        (303.186)        (303.611)
Leverage                  252.650           268.310               -187.420           -214.891        478.857 a        514.745 a
                         (467.657)         (477.368)             (185.463)          (418.264)        (145.710)        (140.212)
Fixed-Eﬀects             Tranche+          Tranche+             Tranche+            Tranche+         Tranche+         Tranche+
                       Year×Aircraft     Year×Aircraft              Year               Year        Month-Year×      Month-Year×
                           Model             Model                                                   Widebody         Widebody
# of Tranches                126               126                 105                  69               126              126
# of Airlines                 12                12                   8                  7                 12               12
Adjusted R2                  0.47              0.47                0.40                0.43              0.51             0.51
Observations               16,877            16,877               14,204              9,368            16,877           16,877




                                                           49
                                                 Table 10:
                                     Bankruptcy, Collateral and Liquidity Facility
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. Regressions are estimated
separately for tranches with and without a liquidity facility. All regressions include an intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls
(Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread), and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not reported). Columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 include airline ﬁxed-eﬀects,
and columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 include tranche-ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable
deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent                Tranche        Tranche        Tranche         Tranche        Tranche         Tranche        Tranche         Tranche
Variable=                Spread         Spread         Spread          Spread         Spread          Spread         Spread          Spread

Liquidity                  Yes             No             Yes             No             Yes             No             Yes             No

Bankrupt                67.777 a       135.395 b        82.764 a      166.967 a
Buyers                   (25.533)       (63.067)        (25.449)       (61.483)
Redeployability         -97.229 a      -69.606 b        150.033       -79.775 c
(operators)              (35.489)       (30.878)       (114.787)       (44.012)
Bankrupt                                                                               12.400 c       29.277 b        21.709 a      30.093 b
Aircraft                                                                                (6.875)        (14.685)        (6.276)       (14.871)
Redeployability                                                                       -90.211 a       -57.361 a       132.924       -88.878 c
(aircraft)                                                                             (32.425)        (21.335)      (111.723)       (51.387)
Fuel Price                18.400           -3.231       -13.723         33.086          21.004           1.290          -3.439        54.592
                         (29.715)        (92.084)      (25.737)        (88.143)        (30.214)        (92.483)       (26.115)       (89.226)
Bankrupt Aircraft          8.506          18.317         0.572          18.254        12.841 b           18.611         2.700         21.738
                          (5.303)        (18.516)       (4.023)        (19.001)         (5.083)        (19.150)        (3.650)       (19.725)
Amortizing             -169.183 a        -524.282                                    -167.178 a         -45.903
                         (37.972)        (50.119)                                      (37.807)        (49.841)
Seniority               51.341 b          17.430                                      51.116 b           14.781
                         (25.268)        (14.521)                                      (25.145)        (13.167)
Tranche size            -58.547 a           8.589                                     -56.845 a          5.172
                         (19.315)        (39.959)                                      (18.867)        (38.313)
Call provision            13.497          80.722                                        13.248         132.850
                         (27.165)       (101.094)                                      (26.737)        (99.730)
Term-to-                   7.673         16.247 a                                        7.240         17.490 a
maturity                  (4.647)         (5.677)                                       (4.616)         (5.522)
Airline size            105.648 c      -571.781 a      279.037 a      -645.399 a       94.487 c      -557.362 a      265.443 a      -646.690 a
                         (55.535)       (148.925)       (77.233)       (141.341)       (55.924)       (141.116)       (78.573)       (139.232)
Market-to-             102.137 b        233.445 a      156.539 a       243.953 a       92.499 c      225.804 a       180.131 a      226.486 a
Book                     (48.156)        (52.513)       (48.921)        (51.984)       (49.099)        (54.061)       (55.328)        (53.230)
Proﬁtability           -736.675 a     -1419.003 a     -758.271 a     -1281.584 b     -707.494 a     -1457.341 a     -724.380 b     -1344.972 a
                        (226.233)       (477.808)      (285.640)       (477.655)      (223.452)       (481.730)      (283.973)       (491.560)
Leverage               231.231 b       873.821 b      300.723 b       922.223 b      280.112 b       875.744 b       366.212 a      933.772 b
                        (108.597)       (391.267)      (115.008)       (402.482)      (118.055)       (384.146)      (128.752)        395.724
Fixed-Eﬀects            Airline+        Airline+      Tranche+        Tranche+        Airline+        Airline+      Tranche+        Tranche+
                           Year             Year          Year            Year           Year             Year          Year            Year
# of Tranches               74               52            74               52             74              52           106              52
# of Airlines                8                8             8                8             8               8             8                8
Adjusted R2                0.34             0.39          0.48             0.43           0.34            0.39          0.47            0.43
Observations              11,922            4,955        11,922           4,955         11,922           4,955         11,922          4,955




                                                              50
                                            Table 11:
                            Bankruptcy and Collateral: Buy vs. Sell Transactions
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. Regressions are estimated
separately for Buy vs. Sell transactions. All regressions include an intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-
spread and Default-spread), and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not reported). Columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 include airline ﬁxed-eﬀects, and columns 3, 4,
7, and 8 include tranche-ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided
in Appendix B. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent               Tranche       Tranche        Tranche       Tranche        Tranche        Tranche       Tranche         Tranche
Variable=               Spread        Spread         Spread        Spread         Spread         Spread        Spread          Spread

Transaction type:         Buy            Sell          Buy            Sell          Buy            Sell          Buy              Sell

Bankrupt               110.444 a      60.383 b      144.433 a      59.143 b
Buyers                  (30.642)       (30.503)      (25.856)      (29.387)
Redeployability        -81.692 a      -82.999 a        6.833        42.143
(operators)             (20.979)       (26.885)      (47.072)      (95.116)
Bankrupt                                                                           19.297 b       11.105       32.537 a       12.460 b
Aircraft                                                                            (7.833)       (7.384)       (5.450)         (5.835)
Redeployability                                                                   -61.481 a     -71.082 a       -25.457          2.767
(aircraft)                                                                         (19.136)      (18.949)      (46.323)       (105.003)
Fuel Price               23.362         40.727        30.476        28.395          23.577        43.507        31.527          42.280
                        (34.318)       (53.327)      (30.007)      (43.316)        (35.036)      (53.404)      (30.564)        (43.049)
Industry                18.502 b        10.975         8.826       10.765 c        22.749 a      13.603 c       11.387        13.041 b
Bankruptcy               (7.831)        (7.469)       (7.684)       (6.429)         (8.331)       (7.243)       (8.013)         (6.134)
Amortizing             -69.682 a     -216.750 a                                   -68.845 a    -216.360 a
                        (23.002)       (41.982)                                    (23.034)      (41.990)
Liquidity              -63.234 a     -130.696 b                                   -60.732 a    -127.394 b
facility                (24.062)       (53.901)                                    (23.606)      (53.860)
Seniority               56.103 a       88.491 a                                    54.267 a     89.020 b
                        (15.309)       (32.788)                                    (15.091)      (32.446)
Tranche size           -30.322 b        -42.569                                   -32.621 b     -43.071 c
                        (14.868)       (25.895)                                    (14.328)      (25.228)
Call provision            -3.922        27.100                                       -1.954       27.414
                        (23.143)       (30.860)                                    (22.811)      (30.823)
Term-to-                   3.694       14.194 a                                       3.767      14.317 a
maturity                 (2.541)        (3.834)                                     (2.619)       (3.737)
Airline size          -182.706 a         8.121        -108.010       48.105      -169.864 a        8.968      -124.258 c         26.609
                        (50.800)       (60.782)       (67.256)      (71.252)       (52.520)      (61.561)       (64.999)        (72.391)
Market-to-               27.051       195.413 a        66.158      204.087 a        21.832      185.797 a        58.886        206.652 a
Book                    (40.389)       (44.798)       (45.517)      (42.082)       (45.511)      (44.591)       (46.334)        (41.357)
Proﬁtability          -867.058 a     -883.864 a     -894.242 a    -945.221 a     -898.133 a    -844.964 a     -934.818 a      -973.882 a
                       (218.800)      (241.481)      (292.371)     (259.099)      (220.394)     (246.806)      (281.143)       (254.734)
Leverage              389.907 b       503.097 b     518.619 a      532.689 a     419.167 b      519.958 a     568.598 a        558.007 a
                       (161.977)      (146.750)      (154.216)     (136.532)      (167.753)     (144.601)      (160.831)       (134.779)
Fixed-Eﬀects           Airline+       Airline+      Tranche+      Tranche+        Airline+      Airline+      Tranche+        Tranche+
                           Year          Year           Year          Year            Year         Year           Year            Year
# of Tranches               122           125            122          125              122          125            122            125
# of Airlines                9             9              9             9               9            9              9               9
Adjusted R2                0.41           0.29          0.53          0.44            0.40          0.29          0.52            0.44
Observations               4,543        12,334          4,543        12,334           4,543       12,334          4,543          12,334



                                                             51
                                               Table 12:
                                    Bankruptcy Collateral and Investment Grade
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. Regressions are estimated separately
for Buy vs. Sell transactions. All regressions include an intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and
Default-spread), as well as airline and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not reported). The ﬁrst two columns compare buy vs. sell transactions of tranches
with Moody’s investment grade credit ratings. Columns 3 and 4 compare buy vs. sell transactions of tranches with Moody’s ratings that
are between Aaa and Aa3. Columns 5 and 6 compare buy vs. sell transactions of tranches with Aaa Moody’s credit rating. The last two
columns compare buy vs. sell transactions of tranches with Moody’s investment grade credit ratings for the 1994-2005 period, excluding
the years 2006 and 2007. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix
B. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent               Tranche        Tranche         Tranche       Tranche        Tranche        Tranche         Tranche         Tranche
Variable=               Spread         Spread          Spread        Spread         Spread         Spread          Spread          Spread

Transaction type:         Buy             Sell           Buy           Sell           Buy             Sell           Buy             Sell

Rating:               Investment      Investment      Aaa-Aa3       Aaa-Aa3           Aaa             Aaa         Investment Investment
                        Grade           Grade                                                                        Grade       Grade
                                                                                                                       Sample Period
                                                                                                                   1994-2005   1994-2005

Bankrupt                48.801 a       28.436 a        43.177 a      12.188 a      31.962 a        39.931 a        64.910 a       32.211 a
Buyers                  (16.680)       (10.831)        (11.165)       (3.979)       (7.533)        (12.343)        (13.259)       (10.393)

Redeployability         -0.222 b        -0.442 a       -0.579 b      -0.278 a       -0.507 a       -0.482 b        -0.269 b        -0.545 a
(operators)              (0.111)         (0.156)        (0.284)       (0.093)        (0.107)        (0.194)         (0.107)         (0.‘46)

Fuel Price                36.150          6.791        156.707        13.314       -86.534 c         41.391           6.416           4.472
                         (34.020)       (31.589)       (96.294)      (21.353)      (47.505)        (60.800)         (21.428)       (37.453)
Industry                   3.029          -6.618        -25.724        3.739         -9.492         -19.736           6.262          -1.925
Bankruptcy                (5.262)        (5.264)       (16.225)       (4.279)       (7.247)        (17.619)          (4.932)        (5.575)
Amortizing              -60.338 a     -117.907 a     -334.867 b      225.178                                       -71.500 a     -121.490 a
                         (21.925)       (31.827)      (148.341)     (134.912)                                       (19.818)       (31.718)
Liquidity               -35.768 c      -28.082 b                                                                   -49.237 a      -46.239 c
facility                 (18.637)       (23.238)                                                                    (17.273)       (23.818)
Seniority                28.724 b       18.541 a        72.287        -24.276                                       33.440 a       27.793 c
                         (11.972)       (13.576)       (91.376)      (45.892)                                       (12.108)       (14.565)
Tranche size              -19.156      -26.360 c       43.698 c     -79.007 b                                        -15.443        -19.493
                         (12.685)       (15.353)       (24.614)      (32.571)                                       (12.787)       (15.161)
Call provision          -46.212 c        -30.865      -24.609 a        -4.278                                        -42.646        -30.022
                         (26.038)       (28.396)        (4.359)       (5.010)                                       (25.834)       (27.365)
Term-to-                   2.630         7.817 a      32.431 b      -19.504 c                                       4.395 b         7.733 a
maturity                  (2.599)        (2.568)       (14.141)      (11.111)                                        (2.034)        (2.663)
Airline size              -34.097         75.192       -458.837      106.547        -232.743       -516.561 a         15.698     122.178 b
                         (67.988)       (48.534)      (329.577)      (69.108)      (251.141)        (97.509)        (50.102)       (48.699)
Market-to-                13.758        80.397 a       -146.136      85.104 a       -124.277       -181.185 b         14.335     50.870 b a
Book                     (32.354)       (20.457)      (139.575)      (18.108)      (135.766)        (78.374)        (36.162)        (22.563
Proﬁtability           -436.356 a       163.745         809.942       99.093      -1776.354 a     -1191.614 a     -480.859 a        58.557
                        (157.622)      (214.282)     (1010.792)     (209.242)      (241.397)        (58.610)       (143.742)      (210.623)
Leverage                 158.462        131.025         504.531        1.292       612.351 a        58.698 b          80.305        98.440
                        (166.102)       (85.686)      (430.307)     (106.396)       (35.894)        (22.308)       (151.204)       (86.284)

Fixed-Eﬀects            Airline+       Airline+       Airline+       Airline+      Airline+        Airline+        Airline+       Airline+
                         Year           Year           Year           Year          Year            Year            Year           Year
# of Tranches              93             96             17 52          17             5               4              93             95
# of Airlines               8              9              7              6             4               3               8              9
Adjusted R2               0.34           0.33           0.64           0.86          0.96            0.79            0.38           0.32
Observations             2,374          7,196           591            966            74             259            2,285          6,101
                                             Table 13:
                              Bankruptcy, Collateral, Tranche Seniority and LTV
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. Regressions are estimated
separately for senior and junior tranches (columns 3 and 4), and for tranches with loan-to-value lower than 0.5 (column 7) and higher
than 0.5 (column 8). All regressions include an intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-
spread), and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not reported). Columns 1 and 5 include airline ﬁxed-eﬀects, and columns 2, 3, 6, 7 and 8 include
tranche-ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B.
a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent              Tranche         Tranche        Tranche        Tranche       Tranche       Tranche        Tranche        Tranche
Variable=              Spread          Spread         Spread         Spread        Spread        Spread         Spread         Spread

                                                         Seniority level                                           Loan-to-Value
                                                       Senior       Junior                                       < 0.5       ≥ 0.5

Bankrupt              -163.798 a      -139.771 b      41.566 c      429.922 b     -334.580 a    -271.665 b      49.282 a      116.535 b
Buyers                  (51.636)        (55.375)      (24.483)      (164.482)      (103.743)     (110.191)      (16.484)       (48.112)
×Seniority             171.992 a       154.430 a
                        (37.852)        (41.392)
Redeployability        -79.995 a         35.396        44.476        -330.419     -81.905 a       23.951        80.757 a       66.882
(operators)             (22.011)        (77.052)      (82.336)      (210.222)      (23.534)      (82.602)        (27.06)      (123.474)

Bankrupt Buyers                                                                   729.163 a      628.430 a
×LTV                                                                              (228.682)      (240.669)

Fuel Price              34.189          19.815         24.803        -140.540        35.070       28.017         32.596         -11.179
                       (36.318)        (32.921)       (33.465)      (179.532)       (36.559)     (31.504)       (24.357)       (58.422)
Industry               11.646 b        10.359 c       11.502 c        30.160        14.282 a     11.658 b         0.226        16.025 b
Bankruptcy              (5.839)         (5.531)        (5.806)       (32.122)        (5.360)      (5.206)        (3.677)        (8.072)
Amortizing            -135.727 a                                                  -140.008 a
                       (26.262)                                                     (26.464)
Liquidity             -103.482 a                                                    -117.690
facility               (30.017)                                                     (78.778)
Seniority               14.127                                                     55.155 b
                       (14.281)                                                     (24.483)
LTV                                                                                 -175.823
                                                                                   (198.648)
Tranche size             -24.237                                                     –28.370
                        (17.534)                                                    (19.199)
Call provision           12.040                                                       6.223
                        (22.920)                                                    (23.968)
Term-to-                10.729 a                                                     5.887 c
maturity                 (2.968)                                                     (3.049)
Airline size             22.731         55.280          11.546      488.523 c        -80.246       -12.202      191.157 a       -67.034
                        (52.601)       (66.318)        (69.019)     (277.255)       (57.500)      (75.626)       (44.730)     (119.146)
Market-to-             171.933 a      179.021 a      160.287 a     1116.765 c      181.290 a    189.618 a         46.052      237.571 a
Book                    (36.531)       (35.856)        (34.732)     (618.322)       (41.091)      (38.043)       (43.905)      (47.302)
Proﬁtability          -1011.954 a    -1066.630 a     -916.369 a     -1404.840     -800.409 a    -891.149 a     -614.626 a    -1822.178 a
                       (184.776)      (220.806)       (230.722)     (996.173)      (183.056)     (226.702)      (189.368)     (473.238)
Leverage               417.267 a      476.445 a      474.647 a      2183.932       477.450 a    500.080 a         32.809      502.249 c
                       (128.517)      (127.056)       (130.849)    (1491.463)      (137.739)     (111.453)      (113.266)     (293.031)
Fixed-Eﬀects           Airline+       Tranche+       Tranche+      Tranche+        Airline+     Tranche+       Tranche+       Tranche+
                          Year           Year            Year         Year            Year           Year          Year          Year
# of Tranches              126           126             106            20             116           116            38             78
# of Airlines               12            12               9 53         5                9            9              7              9
Adjusted R2                0.33          0.43            0.41          0.49            0.34          0.45          0.57           0.45
Observations             16,877         16,877          15,649        1,228          16,174         16,174         8,285         7,889
                                            Table 14:
                          The Collateral Channel and Airline’s Financial Strength
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions. Regressions are estimated
separately based on seniority (columns 1 vs. 2, and columns 5 vs. 8), and loan-to-value (columns 3 vs. 4, and columns 7 vs. 8). All
regressions include an intercept, yield curve, and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread and Default-spread), as well as tranche
and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not reported). Standard errors are calculated by clustering at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided
in Appendix B. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent                Tranche        Tranche        Tranche        Tranche        Tranche        Tranche       Tranche        Tranche
Variable=                Spread         Spread         Spread         Spread         Spread         Spread        Spread         Spread

                             Seniority level               Loan-to-Value                Seniority level              Loan-to-Value
                          Senior        Junior           < 0.5       ≥ 0.5            Senior       Junior           < 0.5      ≥ 0.5

Bankrupt                84.618 b        873.766 a      49.684 c      312.007 a        62.537       450.407 b      93.076 a      45.452 b
Buyers                  (40.390)        (240.505)      (25.142)       (86.494)       (39.957)      (168.984)      (21.073)       (80.668)
Redeployability          53.370        -355.682 b      80.796 a        86.712         52.873        -172.991       48.316         78.510
(operators)             (81.042)        (169.308)      (26.496)      (115.963)       (66.243)      (143.143)      (31.294)      (108.399)

Bankrupt Buyers         -620.859 c    -6782.759 a       -8.591      -2159.232 a
×Proﬁtability           (341.277)      (2005.524)      (36.351)      (577.889)

Bankrupt Buyers                                                                       57.179        -71.805      -147.238 b     472.031 c
×Pr(Bankruptcy)                                                                     (137.833))     (662.581)      (63.333)      (280.010

Fuel Price               19.618         -172.159        32.543         -13.641        -18.047       -196.045       14.168         -56.953
                        (33.372)       (186.495)       (23.992)       (56.464)       (29.475)      (133.623)      (24.511)       (51.225)
Industry                12.384 b         42.083          0.266        16.940 b         -0.548        17.797         -3.927         8.017
Bankruptcy               (5.807)        (32.475)        (4.223)        (8.117)        (5.547)       (21.531)       (4.074)        (9.102)
Pr(Bankruptcy)                                                                        30.450         408.291       53.253         37.183
                                                                                     (54.969)      (476.970)      (36.658)      (139.682)
Airline size              50.254       705.267 a      191.194 a       123.501
                         (76.971)      (247.669)        (44.997)     (128.668)
Market-to-             144.177 a      1109.505 b         46.201      184.908 a
Book                     (34.441)       497.782)        (46.534)      (40.491)
Proﬁtability           -754.646 a       571.176       -611.588 a    -1428.775 a
                        (218.162)     (1660.159)       (169.520)     (420.363)
Leverage               426.302 a       1882.593          33.434       187.569
                        (134.184)     (1337.861)       (122.091)     (301.548)
Fixed-Eﬀects           Tranche+       Tranche+        Tranche+       Tranche+       Tranche+       Tranche+      Tranche+       Tranche+
                           Year           Year            Year          Year          Year           Year          Year           Year
# of Tranches              106             20              38            78            106             20            38            78
# of Airlines                9              5               7             9             9              5              7             9
Adjusted R2                0.41           0.51            0.57          0.46          0.38            0.46          0.55          0.42
Observations              15,649         1,228            8,285         7,889        15,649          1,228         8,285          7,889




                                                             54
                                 Table 15:
             The Collateral Channel and Aircraft Redeployability
The table presents coeﬃcient estimates and standard errors in parentheses for credit spread regressions.
All regressions include an intercept, yield curve and default spread controls (Short-rate, Term-spread
and Default-spread), and year ﬁxed-eﬀects (not reported). Standard errors are calculated by clustering
at the tranche level. Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix B. a, b and c denote statistical
signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Dependent                        Tranche                  Tranche                     Tranche
Variable=                        Spread                   Spread                      Spread

Bankrupt Buyers                 829.870 b                697.815 b                   916.790 b
                                (300.870)                (359.758)                   (380.413)

Redeployability                   -19.824                 -61.135 a                    34.037
(aircraft)                       (13.466)                  (16.615)                   (77.556)

Bankrupt Buyers                 -100.569 b                -84.491 c                 -109.411 b
×Redeployability                 (48.917)                  (46.480)                  (49.846)
(aircraft)

Fuel Price                         30.360                   32.934                     18.680
                                  (38.163)                 (37.939)                   (31.790)
Industry Bankruptcy               10.421 c                 12.643 b                     8.181
                                   (5.828)                  (5.741)                    (5.235)
Amortizing                      -147.202 a               -149.039 a
                                  (29.970)                 (29.551)
Liquidity                       -118.465 a               -107.718 b
facility                          (38.635)                 (42.332)
Seniority                         59.895 a                 74.919 a
                                  (24.086)                 (25.117)
Tranche size                     -51.281 a                -38.277 c
                                  (17.167)                 (20.117)
Call provision                      9.867                   11.277
                                  (26.641)                 (25.919)
Term-to-maturity                   7.632 a                  9.257 a
                                   (2.766)                  (2.950)
Airline size                       20.492                   10.056                      60.729
                                  (26.864)                 (54.486)                    (70.868)
Market-to-Book                    72.609 c                142.563 a                  158.362 a
                                  (40.445)                 (36.358)                    (36.002)
Proﬁtability                    -825.178 a               -759.749 a                  -835.000 a
                                 (177.675)                (183.694)                   (214.498)
Leverage                        371.033 a                 469.315 a                  532.243 a
                                 (104.170)                (139.444)                   (131.639)
Year                               Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Airline                             No                      Yes                          No
Tranche                             No                       No                         Yes
# of Tranches                      126                      126                         126
# of Airlines                       12                       12                          12
Adjusted R2                        0.29                     0.30                        0.42
Observations                      16,877                   16,877                      16,877


                                                  55
