NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO PRINCIPALS FIRE THE WORST TEACHERS?
Brian A. Jacob
Working Paper 15715
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15715

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

Generous financial support was provided by the William T. Grant Foundation. Thanks to Nancy Slavin,
Raquel Saucedo, Art Kim, Joshua Garcia, Lauren McClellan, Amy Nowell, Dan Bugler, Ascencion
Juarez and Angela Alonzo at the Chicago Public Schools, and to Tim Daly and Andy Sokatch at The
New Teacher Project. Thanks to Elias Walsh, Mimi Engel, Sharon Traiberman and Stephanie Rennane
for excellent research assistance. Thanks to Kerwin Charles, John Dinardo Lars Lefgren and seminar
participants at the University of Michigan for helpful comments and suggestions. Any errors are my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Brian A. Jacob. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Do Principals Fire the Worst Teachers?
Brian A. Jacob
NBER Working Paper No. 15715
February 2010
JEL No. I21,I28,J2,J3,J45,J63,J70
ABSTRACT
This paper takes advantage of a unique policy change to examine how principals make decisions regarding
teacher dismissal. In 2004, the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) and Chicago Teachers Union (CTU)
signed a new collective bargaining agreement that gave principals the flexibility to dismiss probationary
teachers for any reason and without the documentation and hearing process that is typically required
for such dismissals. With the cooperation of the CPS, I matched information on all teachers that were
eligible for dismissal with records indicating which teachers were dismissed. With this data, I estimate
the relative weight that school administrators place on a variety of teacher characteristics. I find evidence
that principals do consider teacher absences and value-added measures, along with several demographic
characteristics, in determining which teachers to dismiss.
Brian A. Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu

I. Introduction
Efforts to improve teacher quality traditionally have focused on the supply side of the
teacher labor market. Many studies have documented that both wages and working conditions
play important roles in teacher mobility (Dolton & van der Klaauw 1999; Hanushek et al. 2005;
Scafidi, Stinebrickner, & Sjoquist 2003; Stinebrickner 1998, 2002; Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, &
Wyckoff 2005), and recent evidence suggests that targeted salary bonuses can induce individuals
to teach in high-need areas (Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor 2005). Similarly, dozens of studies
have explored the relative effectiveness of teachers with traditional versus alternative (or no)
certification (see, for example, Loeb et al. 2007; Kane, Rockoff and Staiger 2006).
In contrast, there has been remarkably little research on the demand side of the teacher
labor market. For example, few studies have examined how principals hire or fire teachers, or
how changes in personnel policies might influence teacher quality. One reason is the common
but mistaken perception that disadvantaged school districts are in a state of perpetual shortage of
certified teachers in all areas.1
Neglect of the demand side of the teacher labor market is particularly unfortunate since
policies focusing on teacher hiring, promotion and dismissal may be important levers for
improving the quality of public schools. For example, there is evidence that principals do not
hire the “best” teachers (Ballou, 1996; Ballou & Podgursky, 1997; Pflaum & Abramson, 1990),
and the teacher effectiveness literature has found surprisingly little relationship between many
commonly used proxies for teacher quality and student outcomes (see, for example, Hanushek
1997). If principals had greater autonomy with regard to hiring and promotion decisions, there
1

While there are often shortages in certain subjects and grade levels, even some of the most disadvantaged districts
in the country have an ample supply of teachers for most positions. For example, the Chicago Public Schools
regularly receives 10 applications for each position. In 2005, an alternative certification program, NYC Teaching
Fellows, received over 17,500 applications for 2,000 spots in New York CityPersonal communication with Andy
Sokatch of the New Teacher Project.

2

is some evidence that they would be able to distinguish between the most and least effective
teachers in their buildings (Jacob and Lefgren 2008).
This void is not unique to education research. There is a vast economics literature on
employee compensation, for example, but relatively few empirical studies that examine the
factors that employers consider when hiring or dismissing workers. The one notable exception
involves discrimination, where there is a large body of work devoted to determining whether,
and under what circumstances, employers discriminate against women and racial minorities.
Interestingly, this research has not provided strong evidence that employers generally consider
factors related to productivity in hiring or dismissing employees.
This paper takes advantage of a unique policy change to examine how principals make
decisions regarding teacher dismissal. In 2004, the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) and Chicago
Teachers Union (CTU) signed a new collective bargaining agreement that gave principals the
flexibility to dismiss probationary teachers for any reason and without the documentation and
hearing process that is typically required for dismissals in other districts. With the cooperation
of the CPS, I matched information on all teachers who were eligible for dismissal with records
indicating which teachers were dismissed. By comparing the characteristics of dismissed versus
non-dismissed probationary teachers within the same school and year, I estimate the relative
weight that school administrators place on a variety of teacher characteristics, including proxies
for teacher productivity.
Several factors make the new CPS policy ideal for addressing this question. First, the
present analysis relies on actual personnel decisions as opposed to administrator self-reports.
Second, unlike past teacher mobility studies, the present analysis is able to distinguish between

3

voluntary and involuntary separations. Third, the availability of data such as teacher absence
rates and student achievement allows one to create excellent measures of teacher productivity.
I find evidence that principals do consider teacher productivity in determining which
teachers to dismiss. Principals are significantly more likely to dismiss teachers who are
frequently absent and who have received worse evaluations in the past. Elementary teachers
who were dismissed had significantly lower value-added with regard to student achievement in
prior years compared with their peers who were not dismissed. In addition, principals were
significantly less likely to dismiss teachers with stronger educational qualifications as measured
by things such as the competitiveness of their undergraduate college, whether they ever failed the
teacher certification exam and whether they had a Masters degree. Finally, dismissed teachers
who were subsequently re-hired by a different school are substantially more likely to be
dismissed again relative to first-year teachers in the school.
These results provide suggestive evidence that reforms along the lines of the Chicago
policy might improve student achievement. In a related paper, I find evidence that the
introduction of the Chicago policy reduced teacher absenteeism and may have led to higher
achievement in elementary schools (Jacob 2010). At the same time, this analysis reveals that
many principals – including those in some of the worst performing schools in the district – did
not dismiss any teachers despite how easy it was under the new policy. This result is consistent
with the fact that existing teacher contracts in many large urban school districts actually provide
considerably more flexibility than is commonly believed and yet administrators rarely take
advantage of such flexibility (Ballou 2000, Hess and Loup 2008, Price 2009). The apparent
reluctance of many Chicago principals to utilize the additional flexibility granted under the new

4

contract may indicate that issues such as teacher supply and/or social norms governing
employment relations are more important factors than policymakers have realized.
I also find evidence that several teacher demographic characteristics are associated with
the probability of dismissal. Principals are more likely to dismiss male teachers, even after
controlling for other demographics, prior absences, formal evaluations and teacher value-added.
Older teachers are more likely to be dismissed, particularly those working in buildings with
younger principals.
While these results raise some concerns, it would be incorrect to conclude on the basis of
this evidence alone that principals in Chicago were acting in a discriminatory manner. As
described in more detail below, the analysis reported here cannot control for any direct measures
of teacher qualities that principals could legitimately consider in making a dismissal decision
(e.g., energy, enthusiasm, ability to relate to children, familiarity with the best instructional
practices). To the extent that these qualities are correlated with characteristics like age or
gender, the results presented below may not reflect discriminatory behavior. Moreover, the
sample selection introduced by non-random hiring may lead to biased estimates of the
relationship between dismissal and any easily observable, pre-determined teacher characteristic
such as age or gender. If, for example, male teachers were less productive on average than
female teachers (or even if the principal believed this to be the case), then the marginal male
teacher who was hired must be more attractive on some other, likely unobservable, dimension
relative the marginal female teacher hired. Nonetheless, these results suggest that additional
research into the decision-making process of principals may be warranted.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature,
and Section 3 provides background on teacher dismissals in the Chicago Public Schools.

5

Sections 4 and 5 describe the data and methodology, respectively. Section 6 presents the results,
and Section 7 concludes.

2. Prior Literature
This section reviews the existing literature in two areas closely related to the current
analysis. I first discuss the economics literature on job displacement across a variety of
occupations. I then discuss work that focuses specifically on the labor market for teachers,
emphasizing work on teacher hiring and dismissal.

2.1

Job Displacement
The economics literature on job displacement – including both terminations as well as

layoffs – has focused on several issues, including the determinants of displacement, changes in
the incidence of displacement over time, and in the consequences of job displacement on future
earnings and employment. Studies that discuss the determinants of displacement focus primarily
on factors such as age, education, industry and occupation. For example, a number of studies
have found that younger and less educated workers are more likely to be displaced than their
peers (Kletzer 1998).
While many studies mention the determinants of job displacement, few studies attempt to
carefully explore employer preferences for worker characteristics. One important exception is
the literature on employer discrimination. Prior research has documented racial differences in
job displacement, with Black and Hispanic workers more likely to be laid off than Whites. In
studies that have been able to control for measures of worker quality or actual performance, these
race differentials are generally reduced but still significant. Blau and Kahn (1981) used data

6

from the National Longitudinal Study in 1970 and 1971 to study differential in layoff rates
between Blacks and Whites. After controlling for demographic, educational and socioeconomic
differences, the authors found that Black males (females) were 29 (45) percent more likely to be
laid off than their White counterparts. Using three years of personnel data from a U.S. financial
firm and controlling for the performance ratings given to all employees, Elvira and Zatzick
(2002) found that African-Americans were 3 to 10 percent more likely to be laid off than the
average employee, and that Hispanic employees were found to be laid off more than the average
employee in 7 of 10 business units. In a case study of the U.S. Postal Service in a Northeastern
city, Zwerling and Silver (1992) found that Blacks were more than twice as likely to be fired
compared to white employees. This was found to be significant at even after controlling for
personal characteristics such as age, gender, job specification, drug-test results and civil service
test scores. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Wilson (2005) found that AfricanAmericans were 33 percent more likely to experience job dismissal, even after controlling for
education, socioeconomic status and job credentials.
The evidence on whether employers consider employee productivity when determining
layoffs is less definitive. Elvira and Zatzick (2002) found that employee performance ratings
were negatively associated with layoffs, but it is not clear that this really measures productivity.
Zwerling and Silver (1992) found that civil service exam scores were not associated with
involuntary termination among postal workers, and Wilson (2005) found no relationship between
employee absenteeism and job dismissal. Brown (1990) examined employee retention in the
context of the military. He found that soldiers with a high school diploma and higher AFQT
scores were more likely to be eligible for re-enlistment – that is, they were less likely to be “laid
off” by the military.

7

There is evidence that employers prioritize other skills that are generally unobservable to
the econometrician. For example, there is evidence that employers value soft-skills (Murnane
and Levy 1996). In a survey to 63 employers in Los Angeles and Detroit, Moss and Tilly (1995)
found a growing concern among employers of Black employee’s “soft skills,” skills like
customer interaction and motivation. Holzer and Ihlanfeldt (1998) found evidence that some
labor market discrimination may be driven, in part, by discrimination on the part of consumers.
Specifically, using data from a survey of 800 employers in four major metropolitan areas
(Atlanta, Detroit, Boston and Los Angeles), they found that a twenty-percentage point increase in
the fraction of customers who are Black increased the probability that the last person hired by the
firm was black by 7 to 14 percentage points. A similarly significant result was found for
Hispanics, but the magnitude was lower, an increase in the probability hiring Hispanic
employees of 2 to 11 percentage points.

2.2

Teacher Hiring
Although research on teacher hiring is limited, there are several important studies in this

area. In a comprehensive review article, Harris et al. (2006) conclude that principals prefer
teachers who are enthusiastic and have strong communication skills. Some principals also prefer
teachers with particular teaching skills or knowledge of specific pedagogy. They also note,
however, that both characteristics considered and methodologies used varied considerably across
studies, making it difficult to draw conclusions. In their own study of principal preferences,
Harris and his colleagues interviewed 30 principals from a Florida school district. Based on an
analysis of open-ended responses, they found that principals most often reported strong teaching
skills, caring, knowledge of subject, ability to work with others, experience, enthusiasm and

8

communication skills as the most important characteristics in applicants for teaching positions.
Harris et al. (2006) also note that while a number of principals mentioned intelligence as an
important characteristic, principals almost always noted that intelligence only mattered if it was
coupled with other important characteristics such as enthusiasm. Further, in qualitative
interviews principals often noted that they considered how a potential candidate would
complement their existing faculty.
Two recent studies explore teacher hiring practices through statewide surveys of
administrators, one in New York (Balter and Duncombe 2005a, 2005b, 2005c) and the other in
Pennsylvania (Strauss, Bowes, Marks and Plesko 2000). They report that district officials
emphasize the importance of a candidate’s undergraduate major, prior teaching experience,
subject matter knowledge and references but do not focus on factors such as the caliber of the
candidate’s academic institution in the hiring process.

3. Teacher Dismissals in Chicago
As in many public school districts, teacher layoffs and dismissals in the Chicago Public
Schools are highly regulated. In situations where teacher positions must be eliminated due to
enrollment changes or a budget shortfall, the collective bargaining agreement outlines a
procedure by which the least experienced teachers are let go first. This is typically known as a
reduction-in-force (RIF).
In the past, it has been extremely difficult for principals to dismiss teachers outside the
auspices of a RIF. Like most other districts, the collective bargaining agreement in Chicago
provides considerable protection for tenured teachers that make it very time-consuming and
difficult for principals to dismiss these teachers for cause. Unlike many smaller, suburban

9

districts in Illinois, however, the collective bargaining agreement in Chicago also made it very
difficult for principals to dismiss non-tenured teachers. Perhaps for this reason, formal principal
evaluations in Chicago are remarkably generous. In 2007, for example, only 15 out of the
11,621 teachers who were evaluated in 2007 received a rating of unsatisfactory, and only 641 out
of 11,621 (roughly 5.5 percent) received a rating of satisfactory. The remaining teachers were
rated excellent or superior.
The adoption of a new collective bargaining agreement on July 1, 2004 made substantial
changes to the tenure system in Chicago that, for the first time in the 2004-05 school year,
provided principals with the ability to easily dismiss non-tenured teachers. So, in the analysis
that follows, the academic years 2001-02 through 2003-04 constitute the “pre-policy” period and
the academic years 2004-05 through 2006-07 constitute the “post-policy” period. The July 2004
contract created a new three-tiered classification system for Chicago teachers: (1) Temporarily
Assigned Teachers (TATs), e.g. individuals who are in a temporary placement (such as a longterm substitute who is filling in for a teacher on leave) and are not earning tenure; (2)
Probationary Appointed Teachers (PATs), e.g. individuals who have been regularly appointed to
a position but have been teaching for fewer than five consecutive years (i.e., during this period,
Chicago teachers received tenure after four years of service) and; (3) tenured teachers.
Non-renewal works in the following way. Each February, principals are able to log into a
district computer system that has a list of all of the PATs in their school. The principal can then
check one of two boxes: renew or non-renew.2 The administrative ease with which

2

If the principal checks the “non-renewal” box, he or she must check indicate at least one of the following five
reasons for the non-renewal: deficiencies with instruction (e.g., planning, methods, subject matter knowledge),
deficiencies with environment (e.g., classroom management, teacher-pupil relationships), deficiencies with
professional and personal responsibilities (e.g., attendance, tardiness, professional judgment), deficiencies with
communication (e.g., parent conference skills, relations with staff), or deficiencies with attitude (e.g., lack of
cooperation, lack of respect for others).

10

administrators can dismiss a probationary teacher – with a simple “click” of a button – is
noteworthy. In essence, the collective bargaining agreement adopted in July 2004 dramatically
reduced the costs of firing a probationary teacher in the district. This policy change made
Chicago the only large, public school district in the country to provide principals with this type
of flexibility over personnel decisions.3
Teachers are notified by formal letter of non-renewal sometime in late April or early
May. If a principal chooses to non-renew a teacher, the teacher is guaranteed health benefits
through August 31st of the current year, and is allowed to reapply to positions in other Chicago
public schools. Moreover, the teacher is eligible for unemployment benefits as non-renewal is
viewed as a layoff rather than a dismissal for cause.4 However, non-renewed teachers are not
guaranteed another job in the CPS.5 Although principals are required to provide district officials
with at least one reason for the non-renewal decision, they are not required to justify or explain
their decision and they do not need to provide teachers with this reason.6

4. Data
The data for this study comes from several sources. Teacher personnel files provide
information on teacher background, current assignment and, for probationary teachers, whether

3

Principals are not required to make any decision for a particular teacher. If a principal either chooses to renew a
PAT or takes no action, then the teacher is still eligible to be laid off through the standard RIF process.
4
PATs who are rehired by November 1st will not experience a break in service for tenure purposes.
5
PATs who are displaced through the standard RIF process are also guaranteed health benefits through August 31st
and eligible for unemployment insurance. However, they are also guaranteed a position as a cadre teacher, which
means that they are guaranteed work as a substitute every day and receive a higher rate of pay and better benefits
than a day-to-day substitute. In contrast, non-renewed teachers have to apply to be a cadre teacher, and are accepted
on a case-by-case basis after displaced PATs. Tenured teachers who are displaced through the RIF process receive
even more benefits. Personal communication with Nancy Slavin, Director of Teacher Recruitment, Chicago Public
Schools, June 22, 2007.
6
If a principal chooses to non-renew a PAT in his or her fourth year (that is, immediately prior to tenure), the
principal is required to inform the teacher which reason(s) were listed, but is not required to further justify or explain
the decision.

11

they were renewed or not. We supplement this teacher-level data with information on school
demographics, principal characteristics from personnel files, and student test score information
(which is used to construct value-added measures of teacher effectiveness).
The initial sample includes probationary teachers in the Chicago Public Schools in three
consecutive years: 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07. I exclude individuals who were employed by
the central office, including speech pathologists, nurses, counselors and teachers working in
administrative or professional development capacities. Moreover, I exclude teachers in a handful
of “alternative” schools that serve severely disabled students or other special populations as well
as teachers on leave or who were employed less than half time. For a small number of teachers
who taught subjects such as art or music in multiple schools, I include only the observation in the
school that is listed as their “primary” appointment.7
The final sample consists of 16,246 elementary school teachers and 7,764 high school
teachers spread across 588 schools. Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample. Women
comprise roughly 85 percent of the sample in elementary schools, and 60 percent of high school
teachers. About 50 percent of teachers are White, compared with 28 and 16 percent for Black
and Hispanic teachers respectively. Roughly 25 percent of teachers in this sample are less than
28 years old, and 14 percent are over 50 years of age. Interestingly, there are a number of
teachers with more than four years of experience in the CPS who were nonetheless classified as
probationary teachers during this period. The reason for this is that prior to the 2004 contract,
the CPS frequently hired teachers but did not appoint them to tenure-track positions. As part of
the new collective bargaining agreement, these teachers were moved to the tenure-track, and thus
became probationary teachers regardless of their level of experience.8

7
8

Including all observations for these teachers does not change our results.
Moving forward, all fully certified teachers are immediately placed on the tenure track.

12

Roughly 45 percent of teachers received a BA in education, and about 28 percent
attended colleges or universities that were rated “non-competitive” (or were unrated) by Barron’s
Guide to Colleges. On the other hand, roughly 11 percent of the teachers attended colleges rated
highly competitive or most competitive. According to Illinois state certification information,
about 23 percent of teachers in the sample had failed at least one certification exam in the past,
and 5 percent had never passed a certification exam. This later group consists of older teachers
who entered the system before such exams were mandatory.

4.1 Measures of Teacher Quality
The analysis incorporates three proxies for teacher quality. First, I use teacher absences
because they are measured extremely well, they are easily interpretable, and they impose
substantial financial and non-financials costs on the school, which has to arrange for and pay
substitutes. Moreover, several recent studies have documented that teacher absences have a
strong, negative association with student achievement, providing evidence that this association is
causal (Clotfelter et al. 2007, Miller et al. forthcoming).9 Indeed, in other work using Chicago
data from a similar time period, I show that a teacher’s absences are negatively associated with
principal evaluations of the teacher and with a teacher’s value-added contribution to student
achievement (Jacob and Walsh 2009). Finally, there is considerable evidence that absences are
at least partly discretionary. Research suggests that teacher absences are more frequent on
Mondays and Fridays (ERS 1980), higher among temporary teachers and correlated with more

9

Using North Carolina data, Clotfelter et al. (2007) employ teacher fixed effects and find that each 10 days of
teacher absences decrease student achievement by 2.6 percent of a standard deviation. Miller et al. (2007,
forthcoming) focus on one disadvantaged urban district and also use teacher fixed effects. They find that each 10
days of teacher absences reduce students’ mathematics achievement by 3.3 percent of a standard deviation. In the
context of a developing economy, Duflo and Hanna (2006) provide experimental evidence that teacher absences
reduce student performance.

13

general shirking in the workplace (Bradley et al. 2007) and negatively associated with buy-back
provisions that allow teachers to receive payment for unused absences (Ehrenberg et al. 1991).
Hansen (2009a) finds that teacher absences in NC correspond to experience, tenure in a school,
the presence of a new principal and proximity to retirement in ways that would suggest absences
are a good proxy for discretionary effort.
Teachers in Chicago are allotted 10-12 paid sick or personal days per year. Teachers can
accumulate unused sick days across years, up to a maximum of 315 days. These days can be
cashed in upon leaving the district at a rate of 100% for those teachers retiring with at least 40
years of experience and at a 90% rate for teachers with 20-40 years of experience. In addition,
teachers get 3 personal days per year, which can be used for emergencies, religious holidays or
personal business. There are some restrictions regarding the use of personal days (e.g., teachers
cannot use all three days in succession and they cannot be used in the first or last week of school,
or on a day before or after a holiday), although unused personal days get banked as sick days.10
Using daily level teacher attendance data from payroll records, I calculated the total
number of days that each teacher was absent between September 1st and March 1st during the
academic year in which the dismissal decision was made, excluding “excused absences” for
professional development or other sanctioned activities.11 For new hires, I count absences
accrued only after the teachers' date of hire.

10

Information on teacher absence policy comes from a review of the recent CPS teacher collective bargaining
agreements. Teachers with 13+ years of experience are entitled to 11 paid sick/personal days per year and (as of
2008) teachers with 18+ years of experience are entitled to 12 paid days. Starting in 2009, teachers were allowed to
accumulate up to 320 days of sick leave across years. Teachers who retire at age 65 or older they would get to cash
in 85% of their sick days. Teachers who retire before 65 years of age with less than 20 years of experience cannot
cash in any of their sick days. For leaves due to illness over 10 days, teachers must apply for a personal illness
leave.
11
Unfortunately, I do not have additional detail such as whether the teacher notified the principal ahead of time, or
simply did not show up in school.

14

The second measure is the formal performance rating that the principal gave the teacher
in prior years. Traditionally principals rate teachers every one to three years (depending on the
tenure status of the teacher) on a four-point scale that includes superior, excellent, satisfactory
and unsatisfactory.12These ratings do not determine promotion or compensation, with the
exception of an unsatisfactory rating, which is necessary to proceed with a dismissal for cause.
Many principals and district administrators believe that these ratings are inflated, and not terribly
informative. Indeed, only a handful of teachers in our sample received an unsatisfactory rating
in the past. However, there does still appear to be variation in this measure, with 21, 20 and 3
percent of teachers receiving superior, excellent and satisfactory ratings respectively. Of course,
principal ratings are not an objective measure of teaching effectiveness, although prior work
suggests that they may be highly predictive of teacher value-added at the tails (Jacob and
Lefgren 2008).
The third measure is a value-added indicator of teacher effectiveness. This measure is
meant to capture the extent to which each teacher contributes to student achievement growth, as
measured by the standardized tests taken by students in the CPS. While this is an objective and
direct measure of one important dimension of teacher effectiveness, value-added indicators have
several important limitations. First, only a modest fraction of teachers work in grades and
subjects in which students take standardized tests. Hence, it is not possible to calculate valueadded measures for a large fraction of the teachers in our sample, including teachers in grade two
or below, most teachers in grades 10 or above and any teacher in a non-core subject. Second, it
is not clear that one should consider the value-added measures from the year in which the non12

Over 95 percent of efficiency ratings were given to teachers between April and June with the rest assigned
between January and March. When available, we use the April-June rating. In practice, less than 3 percent of
teachers with ratings are assigned multiple ratings in a single academic year. For these teachers, we use the latest
rating. For teachers with no ratings in the immediately prior year, we assign them the ratings received in the most
recent prior year available.

15

renewal decision was made. Non-renewal decisions are made in late February or early March,
and the standardized tests are not administered until May. To the extent that the decision to nonrenew a teacher influences his or her performance in the final months of school, one might be
worried that the current year value-added measures would systematically understate the
effectiveness of non-renewed teachers, and thus introduce a mechanical negative association
between value-added and non-renewal. If one chooses to focus on value-added from prior years,
this means that it is not possible to consider the value-added for first-year teachers.
Finally, value-added indicators capture only one (albeit important) dimension of teacher
effectiveness.
With these caveats in mind, I attempt to construct value-added indicators for as many
teachers in the sample as possible. Unlike some school districts, Chicago traditionally has not
maintained reliable data linking teachers to classrooms, particularly at the elementary level.
Working with CPS officials, however, I was able to obtain such links for a limited sample, thus
allowing me to create value-added measures for some, but not all, teachers in the analysis file.
Appendix A provides more detail on the construction of the value-added measures used in this
analysis.

5. Empirical Strategy
The goal of this analysis is to determine whether any teacher, principal or school
characteristics are associated with the likelihood that a teacher will be dismissed. To do so, I
estimate discrete-choice models of principal decisions. The model utilized here follows the
general structure of a discrete-time hazard model. The dependent variable is a binary indicator,
, that takes on a value of one if teacher i in school j in year t was dismissed, and zero

16

otherwise. The explanatory variables in this model include teacher characteristics, X, and
principal and/or school characteristics, Z.
(1)
Note that the sample includes teachers “at risk” of being dismissed in the given year –
that is, all probationary teachers. If a teacher is dismissed and not rehired, leaves the district
voluntarily or receives tenure, she is no longer in the risk set, and is thus excluded from the
analysis. The vector X includes an indicator of the teacher’s probation year to capture the effect
of “surviving” dismissal in year t on the likelihood of being dismissed in year t+1.
To examine the influence of specific school-level characteristics, we estimate
specifications that include a set of observable school and/or principal characteristics. However,
when I estimate the influence of teacher characteristics on the likelihood of dismissal, I include a
complete set of school x year fixed effects (

) to account for unobserved school-level factors

that might be correlated with teacher characteristics and the probability of dismissal. Finally, in
some specifications, I include interactions between teacher and school characteristics, which can
be identified even if school x year fixed effects are included in the model.
Following the standard approach for discrete-time hazard models, I initially estimate
equation (1) using a conditional Logit specification, conditioning on the teacher’s school x year.
I then re-estimate equation (1) as a linear probability model (LPM) with school x year fixed
effects. While the use of linear models for binary outcomes has several well-known limitations
(e.g., a potential reduction in efficiency, predictions outside the unit interval, heteroskedastic
error terms), in this case the estimated effects from the LPM are virtually identical to those one
obtains from a conditional Logit. Given the equivalence of results, I present marginal effects
from the LPM for ease of interpretation. In all models, I report standard errors clustered by

17

school to account for arbitrary heteroskedasticity within a school x year as well as serial
correlation within a school across years.
With several reasonable assumptions, the coefficients estimated from the model above
can be interpreted as reflecting the principal preferences for particular teacher attributes (see
below for a discussion of these assumptions). The first assumption is that principals are aware of
the policy and observe the teacher characteristics included in the model. The second assumption
involves the standard concern with omitted variables. If the model does not include a teacher
characteristic that principals consider in the dismissal decision and that is also correlated with
one of the included variables, the estimate for the included characteristic may be biased.
One potentially important variant of this omitted variables concern involves the supply of
teachers. If it is more difficult to find qualified teachers in certain subjects or grade levels, then
the principal may be less likely to dismiss teachers in these areas. To the extent that teachers in
harder-to-staff areas are concentrated among particular demographic groups, or tend to graduate
from particular institutions, one might be concerned that estimated coefficients on these teacher
characteristics are biased. As a control for the supply of teachers in particular areas, all
regressions include a series of variables that indicate the teacher’s program area including, for
example, regular education grades 1-3, regular education grades 4-8, secondary math, secondary
science, bilingual education, vocational education, etc. Schools fund teachers from a variety of
revenue streams and according to discussions with school administrators it is often difficult for
principals to reallocate positions across funds. For this reason, if a school experiences a decline
in a particular revenue fund, the principal may be more inclined to dismiss teachers funded by
this revenue source. To control for these factors, all regressions also include a series of binary
variables that indicate the revenue source from which each teacher position is funded.

18

Another potentially important form of selection bias is introduced through the hiring
process itself. For example, if a principal has a strong preference for female teachers, then a
male teacher hired by the principal must have some unobservable asset relative to an
observationally equivalent female teacher hired by the principal. Because we do not observe this
quality, it may lead us to understate the principal’s preference for female teachers. This selection
will be particularly important for very easily observable characteristics such as teacher race,
gender and age. In theory, one could circumvent this concern by focusing on teachers who were
not hired by the current principal, although even in this case one might be concerned about
correlation of preferences across principals within the same school, particularly if certain views
are commonly held in the profession (e.g., male teachers are not as effective as female teachers).
In practice, there are not sufficient numbers of cases in which principals switched schools or
were newly hired to obtain precise estimates from this approach.
Fortunately, this type of selection will not bias the primary teacher productivity measures
– i.e., absences, value-added and principal ratings – because these factors only become known
after hiring. To the extent that the principal was not aware of an individual’s educational
background or prior failure of the state certification exam, estimates of these coefficients would
not suffer from this type of bias either.
Of course, it is still possible that the estimates of these characteristics suffer from a more
standard omitted variable bias. For example, it may be the case that high rates of absenteeism
are associated with a bad attitude or shirking in other dimensions, and it is these factors – rather
than the absences per se – that the principal is reacting to in dismissing teachers with more
absences. In this case, one may not be able to say something definitive about teacher views

19

regarding teacher absenteeism per se, but rather about behaviors/characteristics associated with
absenteeism, all of which presumably speak to productivity in some form or another.

6. Results
This section presents the main findings of the analysis. Section 6.1 presents some basic
facts about teacher dismissals under this policy. Section 6.2 examines how school, principal and
teacher characteristics are associated with the likelihood of dismissal. Section 6.3 reports a
variety of sensitivity analyses. Section 6.4 examines how the effects vary by school and
principal characteristics. Section 6.5 presents results on the relationship between teacher valueadded and the probability of dismissal. Section 6.6 explores interactions between teacher and
school (or principal) characteristics.

6.1 Some Basic Facts about Teacher Dismissals in Chicago
Table 2 provides summary statistics on the prevalence of teacher dismissal under this
new policy. Several interesting facts stand out. First, while roughly 9-13 percent of
probationary teachers were dismissed each year under the new policy, 30-40 of schools did not
dismiss any teachers. This did not change dramatically between 2005 and 2007. Younger
probationary teachers were substantially more likely to be dismissed than others, consistent with
the idea that principals learn the most about a new teacher in his or her first year. The total
fraction of teachers dismissed declined somewhat from 2005 to 2007, but not as dramatically as
one might have expected, particularly for elementary schools.
These statistics seem to suggest that the introduction of the dismissal policy had a large
impact on job separations in the district. However, the numbers of teachers who were non-

20

renewed in any given year likely overstates the impact of the policy because a number of young
teachers would likely have left the CPS in the absence of the policy, either voluntarily or due to
subtle “encouragement” on the part of the principals. If the dismissal policy merely formalized
previously informal dismissals, then one would not necessarily expect to find a substantial
change in separations. Even in this case, however, the policy may have influenced teacher
productivity if it changed the expectation or transparency of the dismissal process. In other
work, I document that the dismissal did have an impact on overall teacher separations, although
not as large as the overall nonrenewal numbers would suggest (Jacob 2010). For example, the
fraction of first-year teachers leaving the CPS rose from about 10 percent in 2004 to roughly 19
percent in 2005 and 2006.
While there was a positive correlation between low student performance and the
prevalence of teacher dismissal in a school, it was not merely high-performing schools that failed
to dismiss any of their teachers. In 2005, 65 percent of schools in the lowest quartile of student
achievement in the district dismissed at least one teacher compared with 46 percent of the
highest-achieving schools in the district. Splits using school value-added measures yield
comparable results.
As part of the dismissal process, principals were asked to indicate one or more of the
following pre-specified reasons for the dismissal: deficiencies with instruction (i.e., planning,
subject matter knowledge), classroom environment (i.e., classroom management, teacher-pupil
relationships), professional and personal responsibilities (i.e., attendance, tardiness, professional
judgement), communication (i.e., parent conference skills, relations with staff) or attitude (lack
of cooperation, lack of respect for others). The most common reason cited for dismissal
involved classroom environment, which principals cited in 50 to 60 percent of cases. The next

21

most common reasons were instruction (45-55 percent of cases), followed by professional
responsibility (35-45 percent of cases).
Finally, it is worth noting that in any given year, over half of the dismissed teachers were
rehired the following year by another school in the district. For example, 50.6% of first-year
probationary teachers who were dismissed in Spring 2005 were rehired by a CPS school in Fall
2005. Among third- and fourth-year probationary teachers who were dismissed, the rate was
over 60%. Given the fact that at least some of the dismissals under the policy were the result of
position cuts, in which case the teacher’s former principal may have provided the teacher with a
good recommendation, it is not surprising that some fraction of dismissed teachers were rehired.
However, it is also likely that some fraction of teachers dismissed due to poor performance were
also rehired by other CPS schools. It is not clear why principals would rehire teachers who had
been dismissed from a different school for performance reasons. Non-renewal decisions are not
made public to all principals in the district, but a hiring principal could almost certainly get this
information by contacting the candidate’s former principal.

6.2 The Relationship between School, Principal, Teacher Characteristics and Teacher Dismissal
Table 3 examines the relationship between school-level characteristics and teacher
dismissal. Each column represents a separate OLS regression where the dependent variable is a
binary indicator that takes on a value of one if the teacher was dismissed. School fixed effects
are not included, but the standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the school level.
In both elementary and secondary schools, principals in larger schools dismissed a
smaller fraction of probationary teachers. In elementary schools, higher student achievement is
associated with a smaller fraction of probationary teachers while the opposite pattern occurred at

22

the secondary level. Principals who attended more competitive colleges and principals who were
older dismissed a smaller proportion of teachers in both elementary and high schools. However,
male high school principals dismissed a significantly smaller percentage of their teachers while
principal gender did not play as important a role at the elementary level. Finally, principals new
to the building dismissed a substantially larger fraction of teachers in elementary schools, but not
in high schools.
Table 4 explores the association between teacher characteristics and the likelihood of
dismissal, relying solely on variation within school x years to identify the effects. The estimates
shown in column 1 indicate that two proxies for teacher quality – prior year principal evaluations
and current year teacher absences – both influence the likelihood of dismissal. Teachers who
were rated satisfactory in the prior academic year were roughly 22 percentage points more likely
to be non-renewed relative to teachers who were rate superior. Teachers rated excellent were 4
percentage points more likely to be dismissed. Given an average dismissal rate of roughly 11
percent, these results suggest that teacher performance as measured in prior evaluations is
strongly associated with dismissal. In this way, the policy facilitated principals’ ability to
dismiss teachers with relatively poor performance in the past.
Teachers who were absent more than 10 times between September and March of the
current year were 11-13 percentage points more likely to be non-renewed than their colleagues
who were never absent. Teachers absent 6-10 days were 3 percentage points more likely to be
dismissed. In analyses not presented here, I confirm that these results are robust to the inclusion
of personal days and to normalizations that account for differential employment length during
the current school year.

23

The specification shown in column 2 includes several other potential proxies for teacher
quality. The results indicate that principals value teachers with stronger educational
backgrounds as measured by college quality, certification test scores and advanced degrees. For
example, the coefficient of -0.009 on Barron’s rating means that, all else equal, a teacher who
attended a highly competitive college (ranking=4) is nearly 3 percentage points (roughly 15
percent) less likely to be dismissed than a teacher who attended a least competitive (or unrated)
college (ranking=1).13 On the other hand, on average principals do not seem to value
certification exam performance or advanced degrees, at least after conditioning on the other
proxies of quality.
The specification in column 3 includes a host of teacher demographics along with the
proxies for relative supply in a teacher’s field (i.e., certification area, funding source, etc.).
Perhaps the most important thing to note is that the inclusion of these other characteristics does
not materially change the coefficients on the teacher quality indicators. Prior evaluations, ratings
and undergraduate college quality remain significant predictors of non-renewal.
However, it is also worth noting that several teacher demographics – including age,
gender and race – are associated with the likelihood of dismissal, even after conditioning on the
measures of teacher productivity and qualifications described above. Principals are roughly 3
percentage points more likely to dismiss male teachers than female teachers, an effect of over 25
percent given the baseline dismissal rate of 10-12 percent. Principals are considerably more

13

Barron’s rating can be thought of as both a proxy for the cognitive ability of the individual teacher as well as a
measure of the quality of the individual’s undergraduate education. In preliminary analyses, we explored several
different ways to measure the quality of the teacher’s undergraduate college, including the ACT/SAT scores of
students in the school and the Barron’s rating of the school’s competitiveness. All of these measures produced
qualitatively similar results. For the sake of simplicity, and because a non-trivial fraction of schools were missing
ACT/SAT information, we chose to focus on a linear measure of the college’s competitiveness ranging from 1
(noncompetitive or unrated) to 5 (most competitive) taken from the Barron’s Guide to Colleges. The Barron’s
rankings are highly correlated with the average ACT/SAT scores of incoming students and with more informal
perceptions of the “quality” of the institution.

24

likely to dismiss older teachers. For example, teachers 36 to 50 years of age are roughly 4
percentage points (33 percent) more likely to be dismissed relative to teachers age 22 to 28.
Teachers over 50 are 10 percentage points (nearly 100 percent) more likely to face dismissal than
their youngest counterparts.14 And Black teachers are roughly 2 percentage points less likely to
be dismissed than their colleagues.
The bottom panel shows estimates for several indicators of teacher status. We see that
principals are significantly more likely to dismiss teachers who were in the system in other
positions prior to starting on the tenure track. For the most part, this includes individuals who
started as temporary (i.e., uncertified) teachers, teacher’s aides or certified teachers who were not
assigned to the tenure track. Probationary teachers in years 2-4 who worked at the same school
in the previous year are substantially less likely to be dismissed than first-year probationary
teachers. This is consistent with principals learning the most about teachers in their first year on
the job.15
Interestingly, probationary teachers who were dismissed from another school in the prior
year, and re-hired by the current school, are substantially more likely to be dismissed. For
example, elementary school teachers who were dismissed from another school in the prior year
were 5 percentage points (about 45 percent) more likely to be dismissed relative to first-year
teachers in the school. In high school, previously dismissed teachers were over 13 percentage
points (more than 130 percent) more likely to be dismissed than first-year teachers. These
results suggest that many of the initial non-renewal decision were not idiosyncratic, stemming
from a particularly bad match, or based on temporary difficulties experienced by the teacher.

14

Note that the models shown in Table 4 include a quadratic in experience as well as the off-track indicator to
account for the correlation between teacher age and prior (non-teaching) experience in the CPS.
15
In most specifications, there are no significant differences between second through fourth year teachers in
dismissal likelihood.

25

Rather, this suggests that, at least in many cases, the initial non-renewal decision reflected a
concern with the teacher’s general productivity.
The results in columns 4 and 5 show the full set of results separately for elementary and
high schools. With only a few exceptions, the determinants of teacher dismissal are roughly
equivalent across the two school levels.

6.3 Sensitivity Analyses
Table 5 presents the estimates from a variety of alternative specifications to test the
robustness of the main results. The baseline model shown in column 1 is a replication of the
estimates shown in Table 4, column 4. Column 2 presents odds ratios from a conditional Logit
specification to test whether the imposition of a linear functional form is biasing the results. As
mentioned earlier, the linear model appears to yield inferences essentially equivalent to the nonlinear model.
Columns 3-7 report specifications with alternate samples and/or alternate definitions of
the dependent variable. The specification in column 3 uses a measure of teacher dismissal that
considers teachers who were non-renewed and not rehired at the same school as never dismissed,
since principals have indicated that a non-trivial fraction of non-renewal decisions in the first
year or two of the policy were driven by potential budget concerns and many of these teachers
were later rehired. Column 4 drops all observations in which the principal did not make an
active decision to renew or non-renew the teacher. Column 5 sets the principal rating measures
to missing if the teacher or the principal were not in the same school in the previous year, under
the assumption that in such cases the principal may not be as aware of the teacher’s past
performance. Column 6 limits the sample to schools in which at least one teacher was dismissed

26

since it is possible that some principals were not fully aware of the non-renewal policy,
particularly in 2005. Column 7 combines the restrictions imposed in columns 4 and 6. In each of
these cases, the main findings described above remain consistent.
Column 8 reports results for a sample of probationary teachers who “survived” dismissal
in prior years – specifically, teachers in the 2006 and 2007 cohorts who were not dismissed in the
prior year and who remained in the same school. Given that principals had an opportunity to
dismiss these teachers, one might expect that time-varying performance measures (e.g.,
absences) or less easily observable characteristics (e.g., quality of teacher’s college) might be
more salient, and easily observable permanent characteristics (i.e., age, gender, race) might be
less salient, in the principal’s dismissal decision for this set of teachers. In contrast, the results
for this group are roughly equivalent to those for the full sample.
Columns 9-10 report results for schools that indicated budget cuts did and did not play an
important role in teacher dismissals. Principals are not required to provide any justification for
dismissing probationary teachers under the new policy. Specifically, principals were permitted
to non-renew a teacher even in the absence of any necessary reduction-in-force. However,
informal conversations with school officials suggest that some principals used dismissal
primarily in response to budget cuts while others made dismissal decisions independent of
budget considerations. In both cases, one would expect principals to dismiss teachers with the
lowest perceived value to the school. However, if those principals who non-renew teachers on
the basis of budget considerations focus explicitly on program area, revenue source or seniority,
the inclusion of these schools will attenuate the coefficients on the teacher productivity
measures.

27

Using a survey administered to principals in Spring 2007, I explore this possibility.16
Column 9 presents results for schools where the principal indicated that anticipated position
closings were very important to some or all of his or her non-renewal decisions. Column 10
shows the results for schools where the principal indicated that these factors were very minor or
not at all important to his or her non-renewal decisions. The two sets of schools appear to value
many teacher characteristics similarly, including teacher age, gender, educational background
and performance as measured by absences and prior rating. However, schools making nonrenewal decisions in light of budget cuts were significantly less likely to dismiss Black and
Hispanic teachers (relative to white teachers) than schools not facing cuts. Similarly, schools
facing cuts were significantly more likely to dismiss teachers with prior non-teaching experience
in the district.
Finally, in results not shown here, I find that the determinants of teacher dismissal were
quite stable across the three cohort years in this sample.

6.4 Heterogeneity of Effects across Schools
Table 6 explores whether principal responses varied across schools. Preliminary analyses
indicated that the relationships were comparable for elementary and high schools, so the results
presented here include all schools. Columns 2 and 3 present results for schools in the top and

16

The survey was administered to principals who registered their schools to attend CPS job fairs in May or June
2007, which included 320 of the 584 schools in our sample. The survey asked about non-renewal decisions in the
2005-2006 and 2006-2007 school years. As part of the survey, principals were asked “What level of importance did
anticipated position closings have on your non-renewal decisions (in past years)?” Principals responding “Very
important to all of my non-renewal decisions” or “Very important to some of my non-renewal decisions” were
categorized as making at least some non-renewal decisions because of anticipated budget cuts. Roughly 29 percent
of responses fell into this category. Principals responding “Very minor to my non-renewal decisions” or “Not at all
important to my non-renewal decisions” were categorized as not making non-renewal decisions on the basis of
anticipated budget cuts. Roughly 44 percent of responses fell into this category.

28

bottom half of Chicago school achievement distribution.17 Perhaps most importantly, principals
across school types appear to place similar weight on many of the teacher productivity measures,
including absences and prior ratings. However, principals in higher-achieving schools are less
likely to dismiss teachers with a MA degree and more likely to dismiss teachers that failed a
certification whereas these characteristics are not significant predictors of dismiss in lowerachieving schools.
Several other interesting differences appear with respect to the demographics. Most
notably, the higher dismissal rates among male teachers appear to be driven largely by lowachieving schools. In low-achieving schools, male teachers are 6.7 percentage points more likely
to be dismissed than female teachers. Conversely, the lower dismissal likelihood for Black and
Hispanic teachers appears to be driven by low-achieving schools. I explore this finding in more
detail below.
One might also imagine that principal decisions would differ based on the competence of
the principal. On the one hand, one might suspect that more effective principals would be better
able and/or more inclined to use non-renewal to remove low-quality teachers, in which case one
would expect the coefficients on the productivity measures to be larger. On the other hand, it is
also possible that highly effective principals do a better job of screening applicants during the
hiring practice and a better job of encouraging poor teachers to leave, in which case the
relationship between observed productivity measures and dismissal might be lower. To explore
this possibility, I estimated the baseline model for schools with value-added measures above and

17

For elementary schools, school achievement is the enrollment weighted fraction of third, fifth, and eighth grade
students in the school-year testing at or above proficiency on the ISAT averaged across math and reading. For high
schools, school achievement is the fraction of students in the school-year testing at or above national norms on the
PSAE. Data from the years 2002-2004 (prior to the implementation of the new policy) is used to determine school
achievement.

29

below district median respectively.18 Overall, the pattern of results appears remarkably similar
across these groups (results available upon request).
Given that a principal’s age and college quality appear to be at least somewhat predictive
of dismissal propensity (Table 3), columns 4-9 in Table 6 examine whether a principal’s age
and/or educational background influence the weight that she places on different teacher
characteristics. While there is no striking difference across principal college quality categories in
terms of their valuation of teacher prior ratings or absences, principals who attended the most
competitive colleges (similar to principals from high-achieving schools) seem to be place more
emphasis on teachers’ educational background than their peers from less competitive colleges.19
There is no clear pattern of effects by principal age with respect to valuation of teacher prior
ratings, current absences or educational background. Interestingly, however, there appears to be
some evidence of an interaction between principal and teacher age – namely, younger principals
appear to be slightly more likely to dismiss older teachers compared with older principals. I
explore this finding in more detail below.

6.5 Teacher Value-Added and Dismissal
The results in Table 4 provide evidence that principals consider some measures of teacher
qualifications and/or performance (e.g., absences, educational background, prior evaluations) in
making their dismissal decisions. There is some evidence that subjective principal ratings (Jacob
and Lefgren 2008) and teacher absences (Miller et al. forthcoming, Clotfelter et al. 2006) are
associated with student learning. However, to the extent that one views student achievement as
18

School value-added measures are calculated by regressing student-level achievement scores on prior student
achievement and a vector of standard student demographics (e.g., race, gender, free-lunch eligibility, etc.) and then
aggregating the residuals to the school level.
19
This is due in part (but not entirely) to the fact that principals from the most competitive colleges are more likely
to work in high-achieving than low-achieving schools.

30

the primary outcome of interest, one should directly assess how a teacher’s ability to improve
student achievement influences the likelihood of dismissal.
Table 7 presents some evidence on this issue by focusing on the relationship between
teacher value-added and dismissal. Unfortunately, as mentioned above, it is only possible to
calculate teacher value-added for a limited number of teachers in our sample. For elementary
schools, we have value-added indicators on (virtually) all math and reading teachers in grades 25 in a set of 327 schools, which is roughly two-thirds of the elementary schools in the district.20
For high schools, the data includes value-added measures for all core-subject 9th grade teachers.
To examine the relationship between the other teacher characteristics and dismissal in the
value-added sample, columns 1 and 4 in Table 7 replicate columns 4 and 5 from Table 4. The
estimates for this sub-sample are much less precise than those for the full sample, and many of
the estimates are not statistically different than zero. However, if one examines the magnitude of
the point estimates, most results appear comparable across the two samples. Interestingly, the
mean dismissal rate in this sample is considerably lower than among all probationary teachers.
Only 6.2 percent of elementary teachers in the value-added sample are dismissed relative to 11.4
percent in the full elementary sample.
Given the limited student achievement data available, the estimated teacher value-added
indicators that we use as predictors likely will be measured with considerable error. Hence, in
order to correct for this attenuation bias, I use an instrumental variables strategy in which I split
the data sample used to calculate the value-added measures and use the value-added measures
calculated from one half of the sample as an instrument for the value-added measures calculated

20

These schools are roughly comparable to all CPS schools on standard observable measures.

31

from the other half of the sample.21 This strategy will not help correct any inconsistency in the
estimates arising from non-random sorting of students and teachers, nor will it correct for
classroom-year sources of error arising (e.g., a dog barking in the parking lot during the end-ofthe-year test), but will correct for the attenuation bias stemming from the measurement error in
the value-added indicators associated with sampling variability.
Columns 2 and 5 present the main estimates from dismissal models that include valueadded measures of teacher effectiveness, along with teacher demographics and school x year
fixed effects but no other teacher qualification/performance characteristics. The value-added
measures have been normalized to mean zero and standard deviation one. For elementary
schools, the point estimate of -.071 indicates that a one standard deviation increase in teacher
value-added is associated with a 7.1 percentage point (over 100 percent) decrease in the
likelihood of dismissal. The inclusion of other teacher performance measures in column 3 (e.g.,
teacher absences and prior principal rating) does not change the coefficient on the value-added
measure, suggesting that the other quality measures are only weakly correlated with value-added
in this sample.
In contrast to the results for elementary schools, I find that teacher value-added has zero
association with dismissal among the sample of 9th grade core subject teachers in high schools.
One potential reason for the difference across grade levels is that the outcome measure for the 9th
grade value-added measures is the PLAN test, which is given in the Fall of a student’s 10th grade
year. PLAN is developed by ACT to test knowledge and skills in math, science and language
arts, resembles the ACT in that it is not tightly linked to any particular curriculum. Hence,
because of both the timing of the exam (in the Fall of the following year) and the content of the
21

For example, if teacher A had 26 students in her class during a particular year, I would calculate two value-added
measures for the teacher, each of which would use a randomly selected 13 students. These two measures are highly
correlated with each other, and thus provide powerful instruments.

32

exam, the 10th grade value-added measures may not capture teacher effectiveness as well as the
elementary value-added measures.

6.6 Principal-Teacher Interactions and Dismissal
To this point, we have seen evidence that principals do consider some measures of
teacher qualifications, effort and productivity when making non-renewal decisions. This
suggests that this policy might improve student achievement in the long run. However, one of
the primary concerns with this and other similar policies is that principals will dismiss teachers
capriciously and/or on the basis of illegitimate (i.e., non-productivity related) criteria.
In the results presented earlier (Table 4), we saw that principals were substantially more
likely to dismiss male teachers and older teachers, even after controlling for background and
productivity measures. Similarly, we saw that principals were somewhat less likely to dismiss
Black teachers after controlling for other factors.
While these results raise some potential concerns, it would be incorrect to conclude on
the basis of this evidence alone that principals in Chicago were acting in a discriminatory
manner. First, while the models above include some proxies for teacher effectiveness, they
undoubtedly cannot capture many of the individual teacher qualities that principals consider
essential. For example, if older teachers are less adept with technology, have a more difficult
time relating to children, or are less aware of recent innovations in curriculum and pedagogy,
principals who are concerned solely with teacher productivity may legitimately dismiss a larger
fraction of senior teachers. Second, as discussed in the previous section, selection generated
through the hiring process makes it difficult to interpret the results for characteristics like age,
race and gender, which were clearly known by the principal ex-ante.

33

In order to shed additional light on the issue of principal discrimination, Table 8
examines whether interactions between teacher and principal characteristics are significant
predictors of dismissal. Note that the inclusion of school x year fixed effects ensures that these
interactions are identified by differences in principal behavior across teachers within the same
school.
As a point of comparison, column 1 reproduces the baseline model with one change that
will facilitate interpretation of the subsequent results – i.e., teacher age is specified as a linear
term instead of grouped into discrete categories. Consistent with the results shown in Table 4,
older teachers are more likely to be dismissed even after controlling for other demographic,
educational and productivity measures. Specifically, coefficient of .003 indicates that the average
principal would be 3 percentage points (about 27 percent) more likely to dismiss a 50-year-old
teacher relative to a 40-year-old teacher, all else equal. (Note that all of the other predictors
shown in the baseline model are included in the specification, though they are not presented in
the table for the sake of parsimony.)
Column 2 includes interactions between principal and teacher race, gender and age. There
is no significant interaction between principal-teacher gender, though the analogous interactions
for principal-teacher race and age are statistically significant. The negative coefficient on the
principal-teacher age interaction indicates that older principals are less concerned with a
teacher’s age than younger principals. For example, a 65-year-old principal would only be 2
percentage points (about 18 percent) more likely to dismiss the 50- versus 40-year-old teacher,
relative to the 55-year-old principal above.
Column 3 explores whether teacher dismissal is associated with the characteristics of the
student population. Given the widespread belief that same-race role models are crucial for low-

34

income students, it would not be surprising if principals took into account the composition of
their student body when making dismissal decisions. Indeed, insofar as prior research has
demonstrated that, all else equal, students learn more when taught by a teacher of the same race
(Dee 2004, Hanushek et al. 2005), this might be a legitimate determination on the part of the
principal.
The estimate of -.025 indicates that as the fraction of students in the school that share the
race of the teacher rises, the likelihood that the teacher will be dismissed declines. Specifically,
an increase of 50 percentage points in the fraction of students who share the teacher’s race
decreases the likelihood that the teacher will be dismissed by slightly more than 1 percentage
point, or 10 percent.22 This result is consistent with the model of “customer discrimination”
highlighted in Holzer and Ihlanfeldt (1998).
Column 4 examines whether desegregation mandates may have influenced principal
dismissal decisions. According to the consent decree that the CPS signed with the U.S.
Department of Justice in September 1980, the district committed to developing a comprehensive
student desegregation plan (CPS 1994). The plan stipulated that the racial/ethnic composition
and experience level of teachers in each school faculty should be between plus or minus 10
percent of the district-wide proportion of such teachers. Under the plan, the district was
supposed to the extent possible follow teacher assignment and transfer practices to facilitate this
goal.23 To account for this, we include a quadratic term in the difference between the fraction of
teachers in the district of a certain race and the fraction of teacher’s in the school of the same
22

Additional analyses not presented here confirmed that the linear specification of the same-race variable provides
the best fit for the data. In results not reported here, we find that this phenomenon applies to white, Black, and
Hispanic teachers, though the standard errors increase considerably. I also confirm that this result is not driven by
an interaction between student poverty and/or student achievement and teacher race.
23
The consent decree was lifted in 2006, however, and did not apply to schools during the 2006-07 school year. It is
possible that principals and district officials may have maintained some of the procedures/systems for at least some
time afterwards.

35

race. This variable will be negative if a teacher race group is overrepresented in the school,
relative to the district. In this case, a principal might be more likely to dismiss the teacher.
Conversely, when a teacher race group is underrepresented in the school relative to the district
the variable will be positive and the principal may be less likely to dismiss the teacher. While
the estimates are imprecise, the point estimates are consistent with this phenomenon.
Column 5 includes the student-teacher, principal-teacher and relative teacher racial
composition variables in the same model. The coefficients on both the teacher-student race and
principal-teacher race interactions decrease (in absolute value) and are no longer statistically
significant. The principal-teacher age interaction remains significant.
Columns 6-9 replicate the specifications in columns 2-5, but allow the key interactions to
vary by the race of the teacher. In general, we find that the effects described above are driven
largely by decisions regarding Black teachers. Interestingly, relative teacher racial composition
is a significant predictor of dismissal decisions for white and Black, but not Hispanic, teachers.
On the other hand, the principal-teacher and student-teacher interactions are still not statistically
significant.

7. Conclusions
This paper examines a new policy that provided Chicago Public School principals the
flexibility to dismiss probationary teachers for any reason and without the documentation and
hearing process that is typically required for dismissals in other districts. By comparing the
characteristics of dismissed versus non-dismissed probationary teachers within the same school
and year, the analysis aims to learn which teacher characteristics principals value most highly,

36

and whether there are any important interactions between school or principal characteristics and
the dismissal decision.
I find evidence that principals do consider teacher productivity in determining which
teachers to dismiss. Principals are significantly more likely to dismiss teachers who are
frequently absent and who have received worse evaluations in the past. Elementary teachers
who were dismissed had significantly lower value-added with regard to student achievement in
prior years compared with their peers who were not dismissed. In addition, principals were
significantly less likely to dismiss teachers with stronger educational qualifications as measured
by things such as the competitiveness of their undergraduate college, whether they ever failed the
teacher certification exam and whether they had a Masters degree. Finally, dismissed teachers
who were subsequently re-hired by a different school are substantially more likely to be
dismissed again relative to first-year teachers in the school.
These results provide suggestive evidence that reforms along the lines of the Chicago
policy might improve student achievement, consistent with results from a related paper (Jacob
2010). At the same time, this analysis reveals that many principals – including those in some of
the worst performing schools in the district – did not dismiss any teachers despite how easy it
was under the new policy. This result is consistent with the fact that existing teacher contracts in
many large urban school districts actually provide considerably more flexibility than is
commonly believed and yet administrators rarely take advantage of such flexibility (Ballou 2000,
Hess and Loup 2008, Price 2009). The apparent reluctance of many Chicago principals to utilize
the additional flexibility granted under the new contract may indicate that issues such as teacher
supply and/or social norms governing employment relations are more important factors than
policymakers have realized.

37

I also find evidence that several teacher demographic characteristics are associated with
the probability of dismissal. Principals are more likely to dismiss male teachers, even after
controlling for other demographics, prior absences, formal evaluations and teacher value-added.
Older teachers are more likely to be dismissed, particularly those working in buildings with
younger principals. While these results do not necessarily indicate that principals are acting in a
discriminatory manner, they suggest that additional research into the decision-making process of
principals is warranted.

38

References
Ballou, D. (1996). “Do public schools hire the best applicants?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 97-133.
Ballou, D. (2000). Teacher Contracts in Massachusetts. Boston, MA: Pioneer Institute for Public
Policy.
Ballou, D. & Podgursky, M. (1997). Teacher pay and teacher quality, Kalamazoo, MI: E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Balter, D. & Duncombe, W. (2005a). Staffing classrooms: How do New York school districts
find their teachers? Paper presented at the Southern Economic Association Annual
Conference, Washington, DC, November.
Balter, D & Duncombe, W. (2005b). Teacher hiring practices in New York State school districts.
Report prepared for the Education Finance Research Consortium, January.
Balter, D. & Duncombe, W. (2005c). Staffing Classrooms: Do Teacher Hiring Practices Affect
Teacher Qualifications? Paper presented at the 2006 Meeting of the American Education
Finance Association, Denver, CO.
Blau, F. D., and Kahn, L. M. (1981). Causes and consequences of layoffs. Economic Inquiry,
19(2): 270-296.
Boyd, D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2005) “Explaining the Short Careers of HighAchieving Teachers in Schools with Low-Performing Students,” American Economic
Review 95(2005): 166-171.
Bradley, S., Green, C., and Leeves, G. (2007). Worker absence and shirking: Evidence from
matched teacher-school data. Labour Economics, 14(3), 319-34.
Brown, Charlie (1990). The quality dimension in army retention. Working Paper 3337, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Chicago Public Schools (1994). Final Report on Part I: Faculty Integration. Bureau of Equal
Educational Opportunity Programs/Personnel Compliance.
Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2007). Are teacher absences worth worrying
about in the U.S.? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #13648.
Clotfelter, C. T., Glennie, E., Ladd, H. F. & Vigdor, J. L. (2005) Teacher bonuses and teacher
retention in low performing schools: Evidence from the North Carolina $1,800 teacher
bonus program. Paper prepared for the Maxwell Policy Research Symposium.

39

Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2006). Teacher-Student matching and the
assessment of teacher effectiveness,” NBER Working Paper No. 11936.
Dee, T. S. (2004). Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 86:195-210.
Dolton, P. J. & van der Klaaw, W. (1999). The turnover of teachers: A competing risks
explanation. Review of Economics and Statistics, 81: 543-552.
Duflo, E., & Hanna, R. (2006). Monitoring works: Getting teachers to come to school. C.E.P.R.
Discussion Papers: 5426.
Educational Research Service. 1980. Employee absenteeism: A summary of research. Arlington,
VA: Educational Research Service.
Ehrenberg, R. G., Ehrenberg, R. A., Rees, D. I., & Ehrenberg, E. L. (1991). School district leave
policies, teacher absenteeism, and student achievement. Journal of Human Resources,
26(1), 72-105.
Elvira, M. M. & Zatzick, C. D. (2002). Who's displaced first? The role of race in layoff
decisions. Industrial Relations, 41(2): 329–361.
Hanushek, E. A., Kain, J. F., O’Brien, D. M., & Rivkin, S. G. (2005). The market for teacher
quality. NBER Working Paper No. 11252.
Hanushek, E. A. (1997). Assessing the effects of school resources on student performance: An
update. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19: 141-164.
Harris, D.N., Rutledge, S., Ingle, W.K., & Thompson, C. (2006). When supply meets demand:
Principal preferences and teacher hiring. Paper prepared for the 2006 annual meeting of
the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Hess, F. M., & Loup, C. (2008). The Leadership Limbo: Teacher Labor Agreements in America's
Fifty Largest School Districts. Washington, D.C.: Thomas B. Fordham Institute.
Holzer, H. J. & Ihlanfeldt, K. R. (1998). Customer discrimination and employment outcomes for
minority workers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(3): 835-867.
Jacob, B. A. and Lefgren, L. (2008). Principals as agents: Subjective performance measurement
in education. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(1): 101-136.
Jacob, B. A. (2010). The effect of employment protection on worker effort: Evidence from
public schooling. Working Paper.
Kane, T. J., Rockoff, J. E., & Staiger, D. O. (2006). What does certification tell us about teacher
effectiveness? Evidence from New York City. NBER Working Paper No. 12155.

40

Kletzer, L. G. (1998). Job displacement. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1): 115-136.
Miller, R. T., Murnane, R. J. & Willet, J. B. (Forthcoming). Do worker absences affect
productivity? The case of teachers. International Labor Review.
Moss, P. & Tilly, C. (1995). Skills and race in hiring: Quantitative findings from face-to-face
interviews. Eastern Economic Journal, 21(3): 357-374.
Murnane, R. J. and Levy, F. (1996). Teaching the new basic skills: Principles for educating
children to thrive in a changing economy. New York: The Free Press.
Pflaum, S. W. & Abramson, T. Teacher assignment, hiring and preparation: Minority teachers in
New York City. The Urban Review, 22: 17-31.
Price, M. (2009). Teacher Union Contracts and High School Reform. Seattle, WA: Center on
Reinventing Public Education.
Scafidi, B., Stinebrickner, T. & Sjoquist, D. L. (2003). The relationship between school
characteristics and teacher mobility. Working paper.
Stinebrickner, T. R. (1998). An empirical investigation of teacher attrition. Economics of
Education Review 17: 127-136.
Stinebrickner, T. R. (2002). An analysis of occupational change and departure from the labor
force. Evidence of the reasons that teachers leave. Journal of Human Resources, 37, 192–
216.
Strauss, R. P., Bowes, L. R., Marks, M. S., & Plesko, M. R. (2000). Improving teacher
preparation and selection: Lessons from the Pennsylvania experience. Economics of
Education Review, 19(4): 387-415.
Wilson, George (2005). Race and job dismissal. The American Behavioral Scientist
48(9): 1182-1199.
Zwerling, Craig and Hilary Silver (1992). Race and job dismissals in a federal bureaucracy.
American Sociological Review, 57(5): 651-660.

41

Appendix A: Construction of Teacher Value-Added Measures
For elementary schools, I was able to obtain teacher-student links for core-subject
classroom teachers in the 2004-05 and 2005-06 school years. This allows me to calculate valueadded measures in the non-renewal year for the 2005 and 2006 cohorts, and in the year prior to
non-renewal for the 2006 and 2007 cohorts. Preliminary analyses and conversations with CPS
officials concluded that these links were only reliable for teachers in grades 2-5 in roughly threequarters of the schools. Given the limited data, I estimated relatively simple models in which the
dependent variable, y, is the math or reading achievement score of student i with teacher j in
school k in year t.
(A1)
I control for prior student achievement flexibly using polynomials of both prior math and reading
scores

. I also control for a standard set of student demographics, X, including age, gender,

race, special education status, free-lunch eligibility, etc. Finally, I include school-fixed effects,
, which insure that the value-added measures are identified by comparisons of teachers within
the same school. Standard errors are corrected to account for clustering of students within
classroom.24
For secondary schools, it is only possible to reliably calculate value-added measures for
individuals who teach ninth grade math, reading or science. During the years covered in this
study, high schools students in Chicago took a series of standardized tests developed by the
makers of the ACT exam. In preparation for the ACT, which Chicago students typically take in
11th grade, students take the EXPLORE and PLAN exams in the fall of the 9th and 10th grades

24

Because I estimate each of the two years separately, there is only one teacher observation per sample and I thus
cannot separately identify classroom-level covariates, or distinguish between idiosyncratic teacher-year effects and
true value-added.

42

respectively. These exams are developed by ACT to test knowledge and skills in math, science
and language arts. Working with CPS officials, I obtained achievement scores for 9th and 10th
grade students along with course files and teacher records that allow me to link students to
teachers. Unlike elementary school, I have such data on all teachers who taught a 9th grade math,
science or language arts course. Using this data, I create value-added measures for 9th grade
teachers using the Fall 10th grade score (on the PLAN exam) as the post-test and the Fall 9th
grade score (on the EXPLORE exam) as the pre-test.
Specifically, I estimated models in which the dependent variable, y, is the math or
reading achievement score of student i with teacher j in school k in year t.
(A2)
As with the elementary models, I control for prior student achievement flexibly using
polynomials of prior math, reading and science scores along with a standard set of student
demographics, classroom demographics such as race composition, fraction male, class size,
semester and class period, and school fixed effects. Using this data, I am able to calculate valueadded measures for the 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 school years, which means that I will
have a measure of teacher effectiveness prior to the non-renewal year for all cohorts, and a
measure in the actual non-renewal year for the 2005 and 2006 (but not 2007) cohort.

43

Table 1 – Summary Statistics
Elementary Schools

High Schools

Probationary
All
Probationary
All
Probationary teachers who Probationary teachers who
Teachers were dismissed Teachers were dismissed
Number of observations

16246

1858

7764

822

Fraction Non-Renewed

0.114

1

0.106

1

Male

0.163

0.222

0.399

0.501

Black

0.282

0.314

0.260

0.294

Hispanic

0.184

0.148

0.104

0.112

White

0.485

0.496

0.561

0.533

Asian

0.048

0.043

0.074

0.061

1st year probationary teacher

0.303

0.407

0.327

0.408

2nd year probationary teacher

0.292

0.291

0.297

0.270

3rd year probationary teacher

0.230

0.178

0.224

0.167

4th year probationary teacher

0.174

0.124

0.152

0.156

Years of experience
Worked in CPS prior to starting as a tenure
track teacher

5.290

5.519

4.944

5.903

0.327

0.388

0.277

0.394

Age <=27

0.260

0.223

0.231

0.137

Age 28-35

0.339

0.279

0.327

0.232

Age 35-50

0.276

0.305

0.285

0.355

Age 50+

0.125

0.193

0.157

0.277

MA+

0.453

0.459

0.516

0.522

Education Major

0.546

0.495

0.230

0.242

Math/Science Major

0.085

0.087

0.207

0.242

Social Science/Humanities Major

0.163

0.164

0.368

0.330

Art Major

0.051

0.064

0.069

0.049

Other Major

0.064

0.067

0.055

0.057

Vocational Major
Barron's Rating (1=not competitive or
unrated to 5=most competitive)

0.045

0.051

0.047

0.050

2.124

2.053

2.301

2.147

Failed at least one test

0.227

0.245

0.225

0.262

Has not passed any tests

0.047

0.067

0.062

0.086

Teacher new to school

0.300

0.425

0.304

0.391

In multiple schools

0.006

0.010

0.001

0.000

Part time

0.073

0.088

0.005

0.004

Demographics

Education

Other Teacher Background

School Characteristics

Predominantly Minority

0.143

0.135

0.244

0.266

Predominantly Black

0.396

0.491

0.389

0.477

Predominantly Hispanic

0.233

0.192

0.062

0.061

Mixed/Integrated
Achievement level (% meeting national
norms or achieving proficiency)

0.228

0.182

0.306

0.196

56.925

52.679

25.439

21.961

Enrollment/100

7.735

7.122

16.826

14.680

Magnet school

0.083

0.074

0.192

0.118

Principal new to school

0.130

0.194

0.161

0.168

Principal male

0.311

0.276

0.509

0.416

Principal Black

0.480

0.582

0.506

0.590

Principal White

0.319

0.231

0.323

0.207

Principal Hispanic

0.184

0.172

0.163

0.187

Principal age

53.594

52.698

54.346

53.357

Principal B.A. in Education
Barron’s Rating (1=not competitive or
unrated to 5=most competitive)

0.690

0.698

0.405

0.434

2.011

1.920

2.174

2.119

Prior year rating = none

0.637

0.731

0.696

0.774

Prior year rating = satisfactory

0.096

0.301

0.103

0.349

Prior year rating = excellent

0.449

0.477

0.474

0.489

Prior year rating = superior

0.455

0.222

0.423

0.161

0 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

0.111

0.097

0.110

0.098

1-5 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

0.551

0.463

0.525

0.400

6-10 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

0.252

0.285

0.272

0.306

11-20 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

0.068

0.124

0.082

0.163

21+ current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

0.019

0.031

0.011

0.033

Prior year value added estimate = none

0.937

0.966

0.791

0.815

Estimated prior year value-added

0.022

-0.398

-0.022

-0.065

Principal Characteristics

Effectiveness

Notes: The sample includes probationary teachers in the 2004-2005, 2005-2006, and 2006-2007 school
years. We exclude individuals employed in positions other than teachers, teachers in specialized
“alternative” schools, teachers on leave or who are employed at under half time. For the small number of
teachers employed in multiple schools we keep only the observation listed as their “primary” appointment.

Number of teachers per school

0.161
0.082
0.090
0.074

0.116

0.581

12.3

0.163
0.137
0.089
0.100

0.125

0.612

11.6

0.143
0.105
0.087
0.073

0.100

0.538

10.3

Elementary Schools
2005
2006
2007
35.7
34.5
33.6

0.163
0.061
0.088
0.120

0.123

0.660

26.6

2005
68.1

0.449

0.111
0.115
0.058
0.109

0.103

0.695

25.6

High Schools
2006
65.6

0.455

0.083
0.090
0.088
0.100

0.088

0.720

23.4

2007
66.7

0.490
0.549
0.458

0.564

0.507
0.607
0.682

0.547

0.441
0.585
0.619

0.507

0.518
0.561
0.561

0.506

Table 2 – Basic Statistics on Teacher Dismissal in Chicago

Number of probationary teachers per school
Among schools with any probationary teachers,
fraction that dismissed at least one probationary
teacher
Overall fraction of probationary teachers who were
dismissed
Fraction of probationary teachers who were dismissed
1 year experience
2 years experience
3 years experience
4 years experience
Among probationary teachers who were dismissed,
fraction who were rehired as a teacher in the district
1 year experience

2 years experience
0.513
0.521
3 years experience
0.640
0.573
4 years experience
0.622
0.674
Notes: Based on author's calculations using CPS administrative data.

Table 3 – The Relationship between School Characteristics and Teacher Dismissal
Elementary Schools
High Schools
Dependent Variable = Non-Renewed
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
School Characteristics
School achievement (percent meeting national norms
-0.151**
-0.094**
0.001
0.001**
or achieving proficiency)
(0.033)
(0.033)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Predominantly minority
-0.006
-0.002
-0.020
-0.013
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.016)
(0.017)
Predominantly hispanic
0.014
0.012
-0.040
-0.042
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.028)
(0.029)
Mixed/Integrated
0.027
0.020
-0.052**
-0.051**
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.024)
(0.023)
Enrollment/100
-0.004**
-0.003**
-0.002**
-0.001*
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Magnet school
0.018
0.010
-0.058**
-0.058**
(0.015)
(0.016)
(0.020)
(0.018)
Multiple schools in building
0.029
0.025
-0.035**
-0.046**
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.013)
Year 2006
0.028**
0.020**
-0.020
-0.026**
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.013)
(0.013)
Year 2007
0.009
0.007
-0.036**
-0.024**
(0.010)
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.011)
Principal Characteristics
Principal new to school
0.057**
0.054**
0.002
-0.004
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.013)
Principal male
-0.007
-0.005
-0.025**
-0.024**
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.011)
Principal black
0.022
0.011
0.025
0.009
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.019)
(0.018)
Principal hispanic
0.004
-0.003
0.030
0.033*
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.021)
(0.020)
Principal age
-0.001**
-0.001**
-0.001
-0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Principal B.A. in Education
0.002
-0.002
-0.005
-0.005
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.012)
Principal's Barron’s rating (1=not competitive or
-0.015**
-0.014**
-0.017**
-0.012*
unrated to 5=most competitive)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.007)
Controls for teacher characteristics
Mean of dependent variable
Number of observations
Number of teachers

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.114
16246
8700

0.114
16246
8700

0.106
7764
4117

0.106
7764
4117

Number of schools
R-Squared

480
0.020

480
0.063

108
0.022

108
0.093

Notes: Each column is an OLS regression with standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. All
specifications include missing value indicators for principal demographics, and school achievement.
Specifications with teacher characteristics include controls for teacher effectiveness, teacher education,
teacher demographics, teacher experience and status, and a set of teacher fund and certification area
indicators. For elementary schools school achievement is the enrollment weighted fraction of third, fifth,
and eighth grade students in the school-year testing at or above proficiency on the ISAT averaged across
math and reading. For high schools school achievement is the fraction of students in the school-year
testing at or above national norms on the PSAE.

Table 4 – The Relationship between Teacher Characteristics and Dismissal
Elementary
All Schools
Schools
Dependent Variable = Non-Renewed
Teacher Effectiveness
Satisfactory prior year rating relative to
superior
Excellent prior year rating relative to
superior
1-5 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)
6-10 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)
11-20 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)
21+ current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

High
Schools

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.221**

0.221**

0.185**

0.190**

0.169**

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.021)

(0.033)

0.043**

0.044**

0.037**

0.045**

0.017

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.011)

0.002

0.002

0.018**

0.019**

0.016

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.008)

(0.010)

0.035**

0.036**

0.057**

0.058**

0.056**

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.014)

0.113**

0.113**

0.131**

0.130**

0.128**

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.013)

(0.020)

0.129**

0.129**

0.152**

0.127**

0.232**

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.022)

(0.049)

0.007

-0.007

-0.006

-0.010

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.006)

(0.007)

-0.009**

-0.005**

-0.005*

-0.005

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.003)

0.003

0.007

0.004

0.012

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.006)

(0.009)

0.005

0.002

0.011

(0.005)

(0.007)

(0.009)

0.040**

0.032**

0.057**

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.014)

0.100**

0.092**

0.115**

(0.010)

(0.012)

(0.019)

-0.021**

-0.023**

-0.019**

(0.006)

(0.008)

(0.009)

-0.004

-0.010

0.014

(0.006)

(0.007)

(0.010)

0.038**

0.041**

0.034**

(0.006)

(0.008)

(0.008)

0.013

0.014

-0.004

Teacher Education
MA+
Barron’s rating (1=not competitive or
unrated to 5=most competitive)
Failed at least one test
Teacher Demographics
Age 28-35
Age 35-50
Age 50+
Black
Hispanic
Male
Part time teacher

Teacher in multiple schools
Teacher Status
Worked in CPS prior to starting as a tenure
track teacher
PAT 2-4 and dismissed in prior year
PAT 2-4, in same school and not dismissed
in prior year
PAT 2-4, in different school and not
dismissed in prior year

(0.011)

(0.012)

(0.043)

0.006

0.023

-0.193*

(0.040)

(0.042)

(0.107)

0.026**

0.029**

0.023

(0.008)

(0.010)

(0.014)

0.080**

0.049**

0.134**

(0.019)

(0.021)

(0.035)

-0.045**

-0.049**

-0.038**

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.012)

-0.021

-0.020

-0.026

(0.013)

(0.017)

(0.021)

Mean of dependent variable

0.112

0.112

0.112

0.114

0.106

Number of observations

24010

24010

24010

16246

7764

Number of teachers

12670

12670

12670

8700

4117

Number of schools

588

588

588

480

108

0.173

0.174

0.195

0.209

0.168

R-Squared

Notes: Each column is an OLS regression with school-year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by
school in parentheses. All specifications include a set of teacher fund and certification area indicators, a
quadratic in years of experience, and missing value indicators for efficiency ratings, absences, and age.

Table 5 – Sensitivity of Results to Alternative Samples and Specifications

(0.007)

0.037**

(0.018)

0.185**

(1)

(0.097)

1.208**

(0.292)

2.345**

(1.295)

8.090**

(2)

(0.004)

0.025**

(0.004)

0.010**

(0.003)

0.000

(0.007)

0.015**

(3)

(0.013)

0.143**

(0.009)

0.065**

(0.007)

0.020**

(0.008)

0.045**

(0.019)

0.181**

(4)

(0.021)

0.152**

(0.011)

0.131**

(0.008)

0.057**

(0.006)

0.017**

(0.007)

0.039**

(0.024)

0.227**

(5)

(0.028)

0.205**

(0.015)

0.179**

(0.011)

0.078**

(0.009)

0.023**

(0.009)

0.058**

(0.023)

0.253**

(6)

(0.031)

0.199**

(0.016)

0.185**

(0.012)

0.085**

(0.010)

0.025**

(0.010)

0.068**

(0.024)

0.241**

(7)

(0.028)

0.097**

(0.017)

0.103**

(0.012)

0.041**

(0.010)

0.009

(0.010)

0.049**

(0.030)

0.207**

(8)

(0.059)

0.293**

(0.030)

0.174**

(0.021)

0.076**

(0.016)

0.017

(0.020)

0.040**

(0.042)

0.258**

(9)

Sample = schools
that indicated they
did not make nonrenewal decisions
in response to
anticipated cuts

(0.073)

0.148**

(0.042)

0.230**

(0.032)

0.139**

(0.025)

0.065**

(0.030)

0.028

(0.071)

0.172**

(10)

Sample = schools that
indicated they made at
least some nonrenewal decisions in
response to anticipated
cuts

Baseline

(0.006)

0.018**

(0.176)

1.931**

(0.008)

0.060**

(0.024)

0.157**

Dependent
Rating set to
Sample =
Conditional Variable =
Sample = missing if
schools
Logit
non-renewed excludes no not in same
where 1+
and not
decision school last
fired
rehired
year

1-5 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

(0.008)

0.057**

(0.404)

3.773**

(0.015)

0.081**

Sample = Sample = teachers
schools
who were not
where 1+ dismissed in the
fired,
prior year and who
excluding
remained in the
no decision
same school

6-10 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

(0.011)

0.131**

(0.734)

4.209**

Dependent Variable = Non-Renewed

11-20 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

(0.021)

0.152**

Excellent prior year rating relative to
superior

Teacher Effectiveness
Satisfactory prior year rating relative to
superior

21+ current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

(0.007)

0.040**

(0.005)

0.005

(0.005)

0.007

(0.002)

-0.005**

(0.004)

-0.007

(0.284)

2.884**

(0.138)

1.601**

(0.077)

1.032

(0.064)

1.081

(0.024)

0.926**

(0.048)

0.931

-0.022**

(0.006)

0.041**

(0.004)

0.008*

(0.003)

0.002

(0.003)

-0.003

(0.001)

-0.002*

(0.003)

-0.001

-0.009

(0.007)

-0.018**

(0.012)

0.115**

(0.008)

0.040**

(0.006)

0.004

(0.006)

0.009

(0.002)

-0.007**

(0.005)

-0.007

-0.005

(0.006)

-0.021**

(0.010)

0.100**

(0.007)

0.039**

(0.005)

0.004

(0.005)

0.007

(0.002)

-0.005**

(0.004)

-0.006

-0.006

(0.008)

-0.028**

(0.013)

0.136**

(0.010)

0.054**

(0.007)

0.006

(0.007)

0.008

(0.003)

-0.008**

(0.006)

-0.008

-0.012

(0.009)

-0.024**

(0.015)

0.150**

(0.011)

0.052**

(0.008)

0.005

(0.008)

0.013

(0.003)

-0.009**

(0.007)

-0.008

-0.009

(0.008)

0.001

(0.014)

0.071**

(0.010)

0.028**

(0.008)

0.004

(0.008)

0.001

(0.003)

-0.001

(0.007)

-0.013*

0.015

(0.013)

0.006

(0.026)

0.127**

(0.020)

0.065**

(0.014)

-0.009

(0.014)

-0.020

(0.006)

-0.008

(0.011)

-0.004

(0.027)

-0.075**

(0.039)

0.165**

(0.027)

0.081**

(0.019)

0.028

(0.019)

0.018

(0.010)

-0.007

(0.018)

-0.006

Teacher Education

Age 35-50

(0.010)

0.100**

0.796**

(0.004)

MA+

Age 50+

-0.021**

-0.009**

Age 28-35

Teacher Demographics

Failed at least one test

Barron’s rating (1=not competitive or
unrated to 5=most competitive)

Black

0.941

(0.050)

-0.057**

-0.004

(0.006)
Hispanic

Male
Part time teacher
Teacher in multiple schools
Teacher Status
Worked in CPS prior to starting as a tenure
track teacher
PAT 2-4 and dismissed in prior year
PAT 2-4, in same school and not dismissed
in prior year

0.011**

(0.004)
0.038**

(0.006)
0.038**

(0.006)
0.050**

(0.008)
0.048**

(0.009)

0.028**

(0.009)

0.039**

(0.018)

0.049**

(0.023)

0.135

(0.033)

(0.073)

(0.034)

(0.152)

1.521**

-0.067

(0.006)

(0.014)

(0.088)

0.038**

0.047

0.093**

0.008

(0.018)

(0.066)

0.001

0.060

(0.035)

(0.024)

-0.015

(0.023)

0.033

(0.017)

(0.068)

0.034**

0.095**

(0.013)

0.004

0.045**

(0.011)

-0.007

(0.011)
(0.060)

(0.012)

(0.009)

0.005

0.037**

0.093**

0.033*

(0.013)
(0.040)

(0.011)

(0.008)

-0.002

0.026**

0.100**

0.025

(0.007)
(0.049)

(0.008)

(0.007)

-0.019

0.035**

0.090**

0.011

(0.142)
(0.018)

(0.009)

(0.060)

(0.006)

0.878

0.012**

0.073**

(0.037)

-0.075**

0.020

(0.011)
(0.320)

(0.005)

(0.025)

-0.044**

(0.024)

(0.007)

0.006

1.434**

0.020**

(0.024)

-0.059**

(0.019)

0.014*

(0.040)

(0.128)
(0.018)

-0.061**

(0.010)

0.002

(0.003)

0.026**

1.642**
(0.021)

-0.047**

(0.009)

-0.054*

1.194

(0.008)
(0.010)
-0.046**

(0.006)

-0.023

(0.092)

0.080**
(0.220)
-0.011**
(0.008)

-0.025

(0.045)

0.013

(0.019)
0.611**
(0.004)

-0.033**

(0.029)

(0.006)

-0.045**
(0.042)

-0.020

(0.021)

(0.007)
-0.003

(0.019)

0.788

(0.013)

2105

0.162

0.112

-0.021

(0.016)

0.134

1672

(0.007)

0.080

3923

(0.116)

0.193

3210

(0.013)

0.159

8862

Mean of dependent variable

PAT 2-4, in different school and not
dismissed in prior year

0.112

6750

16848

0.143

9451

13868

10687

0.035

16877

24010

0.157

10703

12670

24010

Number of observations

12670

Number of teachers

11167

103

18711

173

24010

554

10687

521

519

521

519

588

588

582

Number of schools

R-Squared
0.195
0.135
0.316
0.195
0.168
0.288
0.205
0.172
0.192
Notes: Each column is an OLS regression with school-year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by school in parentheses, except column 2, which presents odds ratios from a conditional logit. All
specifications include a set of teacher fund and certification area indicators, a quadratic in years of experience, and missing value indicators for efficiency ratings, absences, and age.

(0.007)

0.018**

(0.007)

0.037**

(0.019)

0.185**

(1)

0.036**

(0.008)

0.005

(0.009)

0.037**

(0.028)

0.182**

(2)

(0.014)

0.079**

(0.012)

0.029**

(0.012)

0.043**

(0.026)

0.195**

(3)

(0.032)

0.154**

(0.019)

0.077**

(0.016)

0.011

(0.022)

0.091**

(0.046)

0.282**

(0.017)

0.121**

(0.012)

0.058**

(0.010)

0.016*

(0.009)

0.023**

(0.023)

0.170**

(0.020)

0.140**

(0.013)

0.047**

(0.011)

0.023**

(0.012)

0.038**

(0.038)

0.152**

(0.027)

0.180**

(0.016)

0.075**

(0.014)

0.030**

(0.015)

0.039**

(0.039)

0.195**

(0.018)

0.128**

(0.012)

0.056**

(0.010)

0.021**

(0.010)

0.035**

(0.026)

0.177**

(0.019)

0.098**

(0.015)

0.041**

(0.011)

-0.001

(0.013)

0.039**

(0.034)

0.187**

Baseline

0.057**
(0.010)

(0.019)

0.174**

(0.035)

0.147**

Table 6 – Heterogeneity of Teacher Dismissal Effects
Principal's Barron's
Principal's
Principal's
LowHighrating competitive, Principal's Principal's Principal's
Barron's rating
Barron's rating
achieving
achieving
very competitive, or age <50 age 50-57 age 58+
not competitive
less competitive
schools
Schools
most competitive
or unrated
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

(0.008)
(0.014)

0.082**

(0.031)

0.134**

Dependent Variable = Non-Renewed

(0.012)

0.131**

(0.043)

0.183**

6-10 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

1-5 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

Excellent prior year rating relative to
superior

Teacher Effectiveness
Satisfactory prior year rating relative to
superior

11-20 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

(0.035)

0.165**

0.003

(0.031)

-0.005

(0.008)

0.159**

-0.025**

(0.006)

-0.009**

(0.051)

-0.014*

(0.010)

-0.004

0.106**

-0.004

(0.008)

-0.003

0.004

(0.004)

(0.033)

0.002

(0.006)

-0.010**

0.011

(0.003)

0.223**

-0.002

(0.013)

-0.002

-0.001

(0.005)

(0.027)
-0.011**

(0.008)

-0.007

(0.003)

0.079**

-0.007

(0.005)

-0.004

0.018**

(0.021)

(0.005)

-0.006**

0.007

(0.003)

0.152**

-0.005**

-0.012

(0.007)

(0.009)

0.003

(0.008)

(0.004)

(0.013)

0.013*

(0.009)

-0.005

(0.002)

(0.007)

0.014*

0.007

(0.014)

0.003

0.020

(0.009)

(0.009)

0.005

(0.008)

(0.007)

0.009

0.043**

(0.005)

-0.010

(0.012)

-0.001

0.063**

0.012*

(0.008)

0.005

0.035**

0.032

(0.017)

(0.008)

(0.010)

0.046**

0.045**

(0.013)

(0.007)

0.074**

0.035**

(0.010)

(0.006)

0.110**

0.040**

(0.017)

(0.010)

0.117**

0.101**

(0.012)

(0.021)

0.089**

0.124**

(0.017)

(0.013)

-0.023**

0.111**

(0.015)

(0.009)

(0.007)

-0.021**

0.089**

0.100**

-0.014

(0.023)

(0.014)

-0.003

-0.036**

(0.016)
0.010

(0.031)
-0.010

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.010)

-0.028**

-0.021**

(0.010)

(0.002)

21+ current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)
Teacher Education
MA+
Barron’s rating (1=not competitive or
unrated to 5=most competitive)
Failed at least one test
Teacher Demographics
Age 28-35
Age 35-50
Age 50+
Black

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.013)

(0.008)

(0.009)

(0.018)

(0.007)

(0.006)

Hispanic
Male
Part time teacher
Teacher in multiple schools
Teacher Status
Worked in CPS prior to starting as a tenure
track teacher
PAT 2-4 and dismissed in prior year
PAT 2-4, in same school and not dismissed
in prior year

-0.004

0.003

-0.026**

-0.020
(0.008)

0.002

(0.010)

-0.005

(0.014)

-0.007

(0.008)

-0.001

(0.011)

-0.006

0.013

(0.016)

(0.025)

(0.012)

0.014

-0.016

(0.007)

(0.015)

(0.067)

(0.006)

0.015

0.014

(0.010)

(0.023)

(0.059)

0.035**
0.008

0.033

(0.009)
(0.020)

(0.114)

0.023

0.036**

0.012

-0.044

0.035**

0.039

(0.015)

(0.013)

(0.015)

(0.070)

(0.013)

0.044**

0.015
0.026

0.011

0.078**

(0.009)

(0.035)

(0.052)

(0.019)

0.041**

0.006
0.077

-0.014

0.108**

(0.009)

(0.019)
(0.172)

(0.013)

0.043**

0.019
0.052

0.044**

0.121**

0.007

(0.014)
(0.078)

(0.012)

(0.032)

(0.016)

0.013
-0.019

0.050**

0.070**

(0.034)

-0.075**

(0.011)

(0.011)
(0.048)
0.031**
0.051

(0.025)

(0.034)

-0.033**

0.067**

0.006

(0.013)

(0.041)

-0.031**

(0.013)

(0.007)

(0.041)
0.027**
0.097**

(0.026)

-0.039**

(0.010)

0.020**

0.026**
0.050*

(0.011)

(0.041)

-0.042**

(0.015)

(0.006)

(0.008)
(0.028)

-0.065**

(0.012)

-0.051**

0.038**

0.080**
(0.028)
-0.051**

(0.010)

0.005

(0.020)
-0.039**

(0.017)

-0.031

-0.045**
(0.011)

-0.010

(0.009)

-0.030*

(0.024)

(0.007)

-0.018

(0.022)

-0.017

(0.028)

-0.016

(0.026)

-0.021

(0.018)

(0.014)

(0.038)

0.101

(0.023)

0.107

(0.018)

0.134

0.112

PAT 2-4, in different school and not
dismissed in prior year

0.100

0.112

Mean of dependent variable

0.089

0.134

7042

0.140

4634

7653

7124

4655

11346
7340

12566

5468

3791

3683

2395

24010

5617

12670

10084

Number of observations

7314

Number of teachers

13334

197

229

220

363

345

291

121

588

273

Number of schools

R-Squared
0.195
0.170
0.214
0.209
0.189
0.210
0.196
0.194
0.193
Notes: Each column is an OLS regression with school-year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. All specifications include a set of teacher fund and
certification area indicators, a quadratic in years of experience, and missing value indicators for efficiency ratings, absences, and age. High achieving schools are schools with above
median mean proficiency rates (or fraction at national norms in high schools) across the 2001-2002, 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 school years.

Table 7 – The Relationship between Teacher Value-Added and Dismissal
Elementary Schools
Dependent Variable = Non-Renewed

(1)

Value added in prior year

(2)

Excellent prior year rating relative to
superior
1-5 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)
6-10 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)
11-20 current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)
21+ current year absences (Sept. – Mar.)

(4)

-0.071** -0.070**
(0.021)

Teacher Effectiveness
Satisfactory prior year rating relative to
superior

(3)

High Schools

(0.021)

(5)

(6)

-0.004

-0.010

(0.022)

(0.022)

0.148*

0.117*

0.081

0.082*

(0.080)

(0.061)

(0.067)

(0.045)

0.059

0.044

-0.003

-0.002

(0.037)

(0.037)

(0.030)

(0.030)

-0.010

-0.014

0.022

0.022

(0.027)

(0.031)

(0.022)

(0.029)

0.003

-0.005

0.051*

0.051*

(0.032)

(0.036)

(0.027)

(0.031)

-0.034

-0.039

0.094**

0.095**

(0.052)

(0.055)

(0.038)

(0.037)

0.026

0.070

0.351**

0.353**

(0.035)

(0.102)

(0.118)

(0.083)

-0.005

-0.004

-0.021

-0.021

(0.022)

(0.023)

(0.015)

(0.016)

-0.014

-0.018*

0.001

0.001

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.007)

(0.007)

0.012

0.008

0.037*

0.036*

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.021)

(0.019)

Teacher Education
MA+
Barron’s rating (1=not competitive or
unrated to 5=most competitive)
Failed at least one test
Teacher Demographics
Age 28-35
Age 35-50
Age 50+
Black
Hispanic
Male

-0.033

-0.023

-0.026

-0.007

-0.013

-0.007

(0.028)

(0.026)

(0.027)

(0.022)

(0.019)

(0.020)

-0.041

-0.034

-0.042

0.018

0.006

0.018

(0.028)

(0.030)

(0.032)

(0.028)

(0.022)

(0.023)

0.032

0.034

0.015

0.087**

0.078**

0.085**

(0.056)

(0.046)

(0.048)

(0.033)

(0.031)

(0.032)

0.027

0.040

0.027

0.010

0.030

0.010

(0.031)

(0.028)

(0.029)

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.021)

-0.006

-0.002

-0.011

0.025

0.030

0.025

(0.017)

(0.032)

(0.032)

(0.024)

(0.027)

(0.027)

0.046

0.034

0.028

0.013

0.006

0.013

(0.034)

(0.029)

(0.029)

(0.018)

(0.015)

(0.016)

Part time teacher

-0.051

-0.060

-0.063

-0.089*

-0.096

-0.092

(0.046)

(0.052)

(0.053)

(0.051)

(0.215)

(0.213)

-0.008

-0.020

-0.026

0.007

0.010

0.006

(0.038)

(0.042)

(0.043)

(0.030)

(0.029)

(0.029)

0.119

0.164**

0.148**

0.202**

0.229**

0.203**

(0.114)

(0.073)

(0.076)

(0.078)

(0.052)

(0.052)

-0.053

-0.053

-0.039

(0.041)

(0.033)

(0.036)

(0.021)

(0.024)

(0.024)

-0.042

-0.059

-0.033

-0.083

-0.095

-0.085

(0.067)

(0.061)

(0.063)

(0.058)

(0.059)

(0.058)

Mean of dependent variable

0.062

0.062

0.062

0.094

0.094

0.094

Number of observations

1017

1017

1017

1621

1621

1621

Number of teachers

803

803

803

1134

1134

1134

Number of schools

327

327

327

100

100

100

Teacher Status
Worked in CPS prior to starting as a tenure
track teacher
PAT 2-4 and dismissed in prior year
PAT 2-4, in same school and not dismissed
in prior year
PAT 2-4, in different school and not
dismissed in prior year

R-Squared

0.546

-0.081** -0.092** -0.082**

0.344

Notes: All columns restrict the sample to teachers with value added scores and include school-year fixed
effects. See appendix for details on value added estimation. Value added scores are standardized at the teacher
level within year to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Columns 1 and 5 are OLS regressions
with standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. All other columns are 2SLS regressions using one halfclassroom sample estimate of value added as an instrument for the other half-classroom sample estimate with
heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. The sample in columns 4 and 8 is limited to schoolyears with principals who fired at least one teacher in the value added sample.

Table 8 – The Relationship between Teacher Value-Added and Dismissal

Black
Hispanic
Male
Age

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-0.022**

-0.014**

-0.005

-0.006

-0.006

-0.022

-0.000

-0.008

-0.007

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.009)

(0.030)

-0.004

-0.005

0.010

0.005

0.005

-0.002

-0.000

-0.013

-0.025

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.010)

(0.035)

0.036**

0.035**

0.036**

0.035**

0.035**

0.035**

0.036**

0.036**

0.035**

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.003**

0.003**

0.003**

0.003**

0.003**

0.003**

0.003**

0.003**

0.003**

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

Percent of students in school same race as teacher

Teacher and principal different race
Teacher and principal different gender
Principal age x teacher age/100 (both demeaned)

-0.026**

-0.009

(0.008)

(0.012)

0.014**

0.007

(0.005)

(0.006)

0.005

0.005

0.005

0.005

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

-0.010**

-0.010**

-0.010**

-0.009**

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

Teacher Racial Composition Relative to the
District (fraction teachers in district same race as
teacher - fraction teachers in the school same race
as teacher)
Teacher Racial Composition Relative to the
District Squared

0.024

0.003

(0.019)

(0.027)

-0.130

-0.125

(0.103)

(0.104)

Percent of students in school white or asian and
teacher white or asian

-0.029

0.008

(0.026)

(0.044)

Percent of students in school black and teacher
black

-0.033*

-0.021

(0.017)

(0.040)

Percent of students in school hispanic and teacher
hispanic
Teacher and principal different race x teacher white
Teacher and principal different race x teacher black
Teacher and principal different race x teacher hispanic

-0.010

0.017

(0.020)

(0.036)

0.009

-0.001

(0.014)

(0.017)

0.029*

0.029

(0.017)

(0.023)

0.007

0.007

(0.015)

(0.018)

White x (fraction teachers in district whitefraction of teachers in school white)

-0.021
(0.052)

(0.075)

White x (fraction teachers in district whitefraction of teachers in school white) squared

-0.599**

-0.585**

(0.240)

(0.260)

Black x (fraction teachers in district black- fraction
of teachers in school black)
Black x (fraction teachers in district black- fraction
of teachers in school black) squared
Hispanic x (fraction teachers in district hispanicfraction of teachers in school hispanic)
Hispanic x (fraction teachers in district hispanicfraction of teachers in school hispanic) squared

-0.014

0.038

-0.054

(0.043)

(0.101)

-0.424**

-0.513**

(0.200)

(0.222)

-0.014

0.030

(0.086)

(0.122)

-0.135

-0.056

(0.218)

(0.218)

Mean of dependent variable

0.112

0.112

0.112

0.112

0.112

0.112

0.112

0.112

0.112

Number of observations

24010

24010

24010

24010

24010

24010

24010

24010

24010

Number of teachers

12670

12670

12670

12670

12670

12670

12670

12670

12670

Number of schools

588

588

588

588

588

588

588

588

588

Notes: Each column is an OLS regression with school-year fixed effects and standard errors clustered by school in parentheses. All specifications include controls for teacher
effectiveness, teacher education, teacher demographics, teacher experience and status, and a set of teacher fund and certification area indicators. Specifications with principal and
teacher race or gender interactions also include principal demographic missing value indicators interacted with teacher male, black and hispanic.

