NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC POLICY UNDER
CURRENCY INCONVERTIBILITY

Jorge

Braga de Macedo

Working Paper No. 1571

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1985

Earlier versions were presented at Colegio de Mexico, the
University of South Carolina and the University of Clermont I
(France). Comments from participants are gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity and Industrial
Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #157 1
February 1985

Macroeconomic Policy Under
Currency Inconvertibility
ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the macroeconomics of currency inconvertibility,
building on the role of relative prices in a portfolio balance model.

The relationship between black markets for foreign exchange and smuggling
is first analyzed from the perspective of an individual importer.

According to the portfolio view, the black market rate behaves like the

financial rate in a dual market. The premium of the black marlet rate
over the official rate is thus related to the probability of success in
smuggling and the tariff.

Then the black market is analyzed using a simple three-good,

two-asset general equilibrium model. Under the

assumption of

regressive

exchange rate expectations, the portfolio view is contrasted with a

monetary approach to the black market. The short-run and long-run
effects of monetary and exchange rate policies on relative prices are

assessed. Different assumptions about expected returns are contrasted,
but emphasis is placed on the perfect foresight case. Unless expectations are static, official exchange rate policy has to adjust to the
private valuation of foreign exchange, as stressed in the conclusion.

Jorge Braga de Macedo
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University

Princeton, NJ 08544
r'_

r.A_Ir ')_i.7I.

Introduction

Restricting the ability to convert the domestic currency into
foreign exchange may involve restrictions on international trade or
capital movements: currency inconvertibility is to be understood relative
to particular items in the balance of recorded international

transactions.1 While inconvertibility promotes smuggling and black
markets for foreign exchange, these may exist even when a currency is

legally "convertible". In effect, the definition in the Articles of
Agreement of the International Monetary Fund only requires the absence of
restrictions on current account transactions.
Some basic features of the black market for foreign exchange can be

derived in partial equilibrium models. The relationship between recorded
trade, smuggling and the demand for and supply of black market foreign
exchange is evident in the choice between importing at the official
exchange rate plus the tariff or at the black market rate.

Under incon-

vertibility, therefore, domestic and foreign assets are not perfect

substitutes. Applying the conventional monetary approach - where assets
(and goods) are assumed to be perfect substitutes -

to

the inconvertible

exchange rate would be misleading. On the contrary, the portfolio
approach assumes a stock demand for the foreign, as well as for the
domestic, currency and does not require perfect goods arbitrage.

It can

thus explain the observed diversification of currency portfolios and

provide a useful framework in which to analyze macro—economic policy
under inconvertibility.

-2-

The paper is divided into two parts. Part I contains a partial
equilibrium model of the black market for foreign exchange which brings

together the smuggling literature and the portfolio view. Different
mechanisms of expectations formation are contrasted, but emphasis is

placed on the perfect foresight case. It is shown under what condition
the premium of the black market rate over the official rate is likely to
be positively related to the probability of success in smuggling, along
the lines of the classic "Beccaria formula".
In Part II, the black market for foreign exchange is analyzed using
a simple three-good, two-asset general equilibrium model in the spirit of

Kouri (1975). Under the assumption of "stabilizing", or regressive,
expectations about returns to domestic and foreign currencies, the
portfolio view is contrasted in section 2 with the monetary model of

Blejer (1978a). Then, assuming static expectations, the black market
premium (which is also the relative price of traded goods) and the
relative price of non—traded goods are endogenously determined in temporary equilibrium (section 3), while the asset mix is determined in

steady- state equilibrium (section 4). The effects of monetary and
exchange rate policies on relative prices and asset stocks are analyzed

in this set-up. The implications of perfect foresight are explored in
Section 5. The conclusion summarizes the results.
I.

Partial equilibrium

1.

The Beccaria formula

The formal analysis on black markets can be traced back to the mideighteenth century, when - as Hume was writing on the specie-flow mecha-

nism -

Beccaria (1764-65) developed a break-even condition for smuggling

-3-

activity, involving the probability of. success and the tariff rate on
imports:

(1)

ztl

where

z is the probability of success in smuggling

and

t is one plus the tariff rate

A higher degree of enforcement of tariff regulations that is implies a lower z -

is

to

the extent

associated with negative profits from

smuggling unless a higher rate raises the domestic price and thus re-

stores profitability. The objective of the analysis was precisely
directing the attention of policy-makers to the trade-off between the
revenue from higher tariffs and the associated higher enforcement costs.3

After some centuries of neglect, the literature picked up about ten

years ago. Bhagwati and Hansen (1973) - who refer to Beccaria's work showed that tariffs do induce smuggling but, together with Sheikh (1974),
they claimed that a black market for foreign exchange would not be

induced by trade restrictions alone. Sheikh (1976) adapted the traditional analysis of black markets by Michaely (1954) and others to the
foreign exchange market.4

By introducing real costs to smuggling in the form of a "smuggling

function", Pitt (1981) and (1982) showed that legal and illegal trade in
goods and money coexist even in the absence of exchange restrictions. If
some legal trade is necessary in order to engage in smuggling, the

domestic price may be less than the cost of legal imports, a phenomenon

-4-

which he calls "price disparity". Along the same lines, Martin and
Panagaryia (1983) propose a crime-theoretic approach to smuggling, which
provides microeconomic foundations to Pitt's smuggling function but they
neglect the black market for foreign exchange.

Noting that this revival of interest in the supervision aspect would have
pleased Beccaria, a criminologist by training, we will show how the
Pitt-Martin-Panagaryia (PMP) analysis is consistent with his formula,

modified to allow for a black market for foreign exchange. In fact, the
black market premium is a measure of the cost of smuggling. We begin by
describing how this premium is determined in a portfolio model.

2.

A portfolio model

Consider a small country whose residents are not authorized to hold
foreign assets, but who nevertheless allocate their financial wealth

between domestic and foreign currency.5 The terms of trade between legal
("official") and illegal ("smuggled") imports and exports are given in

the world market. Alternatively, as is done below, the same good is
traded through both channels and there is a non-traded good.
If foreigners do not hold the inconvertible domestic currency in
their portfolios, the domestic currency price of foreign currency in the
black market will be such that the existing stock is willingly held.
Furthermore, the only way for domestic residents to acquire foreign
currency is through the underinvoicing of exports and the overinvoicing

of imports. In the absence of endogenous reported capital flows and
errors and omissions, as well as interest payments on unrecorded capital
flows, excess supply of the two traded goods equals the change in the

-5-

stock of foreign currency of the private sector and the central bank
respectively.

The black market rate is determined so that the private stock of
black market foreign exchange is willingly held, and demand a is propor-

tional to wealth for simplicity. Demand increases with expected depreciation of the black market rate or with a higher probability of success in
smuggling:

eF = a(&Ii, z)W

(2)

c =

a4i/a

y=az/a
e is the black market exchange rate

where

F is the stock of black market foreign exchange (in foreign
currency)

W is private financial wealth (in domestic currency)
and

4

is

the expected rate of change of the black market rate.

The measure of relative real return is the expected change in the
black market rate because domestic residents are assumed to be identical
in their consumption preferences.6
Given an official exchange •rate, ,

the

requirement of portfolio

balance can be written in terms of the black market premium and of
financial wealth valued at the official rate:

(3)

pFa

where

p =

e/

is the black market premium

-6—

and

=

W/

is financial wealth valued at the official exchange
rate.

The change in F is given by smuggling and other unreported current

account transactions. The unreported surplus, B, is zero for a particular value of the premium, taken to be one, and, if the elasticities

condition holds, improves with an increase in the premium. Denoting
rates of change by dots:

(4)

F = B(p)

B(1) = 0

Bt > 0

Assuming that the opposite holds for the reported trade surplus, IL
we show temporary equilibrium in Figure 1, a variant of the Kouri (1983)

diagram. The right panel shows the instantaneous determination of the
black market exchange rate, given demand for foreign currency and no
expected change in relative returns, along a rectangular hyperbola PP.
Under perfect foresight, demand for foreign currency will increase when
the black market rate depreciates, constraining its initial value for a

given stock of foreign currency F0 to e, on the saddle path S (below
the corresponding initial value under static expectations, e0). For a
given official exchange rate,

(< e0 so that p0 >

1),

the left panel of

Figure 1 plots the unreported trade surplus in foreign currency, B (which

equals the increase in F) and the exogenous reported trade deficit, -.

Assuming a stronger effect of the black market rate on B, the relative
slopes will be as drawn. For simplicity, assume that the unreported
trade balance equilibrium associated with the given official exchange
rate is at e* <

e0.

—6a-

Figure 1

Portfolio Model
of the black market rate
A

P2
B1

e2
—B0

a,

—

a1

a 'a
0

s

0

S
P

B

F1

F0

0

—7—

If the associated reported deficit

is corrected by devaluation

of the official exchange rate to its long-run equilibrium level, ,

the

two schedules will shift up and intersect on the vertical axis at a point

where, by choice of units, e1 =

so that p1 = 1.

The implications of

the official devaluation differ depending on the expectations formation

mechanism. If expectations are static, the black market exchange rate
will gradually depreciate from e0 to e1 as the stock of foreign assets

decreases from F0 to F1. Under perfect foresight, the black market rate
jumps from

to e and then gradually depreciates to the same long-run

value. If the official devaluation generates an increase in the demand
for foreign assets from PP to P2P2, furthermore, the black market rate

will overshoot to e2 (e under perfect foresight) and gradually
appreciate back to e1 as the stock of foreign assets increases to F.
The same would be true of an exogenous increase in z: in the short-run
the premium would rise, in the long-run F would rise.

The analysis remains applicable under a crawling peg regime, where
the rate of depreciation equals the reported trade deficit as a propor-

tion of central bank reserves. It does, however, assume that these are
large enough, so as to be able to neglect the "collapse problem" of

Krugman (1979).

3.

Special risks

Consider the profit p in domestic currency of a price-taking import-

er. It varies depending on whether smuggling is successful

or not

Setting the foreign currency price at unity, we get profits as a

-8—

linear function of the amounts imported through legal and illegal
channels:

z=P(L+S)- tL-eS
(6)

p1_PL_tL-eS

where

P is the domestic price
L is the amount legally imported

S is the amount smuggled

Under perfect competition, profits will be zero at the optimum,

which is independent of demand conditions. If the probability of success
is exogenous to the firm, expected profits will also be linear in the
decision variables, S and L, since they are a z—weighted average of (5)
and (6):

(7)

p = z pz + (1

—

z) p12

The basic idea behind the so-called "crimetheoretic" approach is,
however, to make the special risks, measured by the probability of

success, depend on the decision variables of the firm. Assume it is a
decreasing function of the ratio of smuggled to legal imports.

(8)

z =

z(s)

;

=

-sz'/z

—9—

S

where s=
Using (3) and (8) in (7), first-order conditions for profit maximization
can be solved for the optimal combination of price and import pattern,
given the tariff and the premium:

t + ysp

(9)

(1 + zCs) =

(10)

z(1 - C) = p(1

where

=

-

LL locus

SS

locus

P/

To preserve the zero-profit condition for legal imports in (9), an
increase in the smuggling ratio requires a lower price in terms of the
official exchange rate if both z and p are elastic or inelastic with

respect to s and z respectively. This implies a downward sloping LL
locus. If one of the functions is elastic and the other is inelastic,

though, the LL locus will be upward sloping. The slope of the LL locus
is given by:

('1)

dsI

—

-

1+Czs

To preserve the zero-profit condition for smuggling imports in (10),
an increase in the smuggling ratio requires a higher price unless p is

elastic with respect to the probability of success. The slope of the SS
locus is given by:

-10-

dP J

12
/

ds

1-y _zp

—

I

ss

(i_t'2

s

Adapting a diagram from Martin and Panagaryia (1983), we present the
inelastic case (y,

to t1 raises

<

1) in Figure 2. An increase in the tariff from

and s. A decrease in z (or F) from z0 (or FO) to z1 (or

but lowers s.

F1) raise

Now eliminating

between (9) and (10) we obtain a more general

version of the Beccaria formula:

(13)

zt = pA

where

A

1-[Y•zs(1y)1

Note first that, if demand for black market foreign exchange in-

creases in proportion with the probability of success (y
exogenously given (C

= 0),

1) or if z is

then A = 1 in (13). This is a sufficient

condition for the premium to be less than the tariff (t >

p).

Put

another way, given the probability of success in smuggling, an increase
in the premium lowers profits unless there is an increase in the tariff.
The Beccaria is now between more supervision (lowering z)and a higher
tariff or an official devaluation (lowering p/t).
On the other hand, a new trade-off arose between profits from the
smuggling activity and profits in the black market for foreign exchange.

Higher supervision of smuggling is now associated with a lower black

market. In Figure 2, or in the elastic case, we have A > 1 so that again
t >

p.8

—1 Oa—

Figure 2
The P!vlP

model of smuggling

(inelastic case)

I
p

L(t0)

L(t1)

/

S

/
S(:1,F1)

S(z01F0)

/

1

—11—

While some basic features of the black market for foreign exchange
can be derived in partial equilibrium models, the interaction between the

private and official valuation of foreign exchange, on the one hand, and
the role of the black market premium as a relative price, on the other,

call for a general equilibrium approach. In the model presented next, we
determine not only the black market premium but also the relative price

of non-traded goods, their ratio being the real exchange rate. To
sharpen the analysis, we will ne.glect the role of the black market

premium emphasized in the previous section, namely determining whether a
transaction will go through the official or the black foreign exchange

market.9

II

General equilibrium

1.

The Model
Exports and imports are either traded through the official market or

smuggled. Their prices in foreign currency are determined in the world
market. It would, of course, be possible to reinterpret the results in
terms of the Beccaria analysis by allowing for a tariff on the official
import.

Using the wealth definition, the portfolio balance condition is (3)
becomes:

(14)

where

pFlaa
A..

A...•

N M/e is the domestic money stock, N, valued at the official

-12-

rate

h = eF/FI is the currency ratio

1(1+h)

and

The assumption of regressive expectations implies, in turn, that:

=

(15)

)

=

;

Excess-supply functions for the official traded good, the smuggled
good and the non-traded good depend on prices (e,

and

and wealth.

An income effect could easily be added but, as noted by Kouri (1975), it

would be irrelevant. We take the official exchange rate as the
numeraire.

The market for non-traded goods is always in equilibrium. Neglecting the cross-price effect (and indicating the sign of the partial
derivatives over the respective argument), excess supply for non-traded
goods is given by:

+

-

(16)

N(q, ) = 0

where

q =

PNIe

is the relative price of the non-traded good.

As mentioned, excess supply for traded goods equals the accumulation
of foreign currency by the central bank and the private sector through

the reported and unreported trade balances respectively. The domestic
money stock is made up of domestic credit (C) and foreign exchange

-13-

reserves, valued at the official exchange rate. The balance of payments
is the only endogenous source of money creation: capital gains on the
foreign currency value of reserves go into central bank net-worth forev-

er. Neglecting reported capital flows, (and denoting proportional rates
of change by hats), we get:

+

(17)

F = B(p, q,

(p,

=

(18)

where

2.

-

C

6

+ Ôi1

;,

"

-e

A Comparison of stock and flow specifications

If 6

0 but the excess supply of traded goods is zero, we obtain

from log differention of (14) and (16) the solution for the change in the
relative prices as a function of 6:

(19)

q=

(20)

=

where

8

=

8

-N/3 is the positive semi-elasticity of the excess
supply of non-traded goods with respect of real wealth;

-14-

V =

-qN/q

is the positive semi-elasticity of the excess

supply of non—traded goods with respect to the relative
price of non-traded goods.
and

is

c =

the positive elasticity of h with respect to the

premium.

We contrast (19) and (20) with the flow specification of the black

market rate due to Blejer (1978a). His model collapses into the usual
monetarist model of exchange rate determination when the real official
exchange rate is fixed by a purchasing-power-parity reaction function)°
To make the models compatible, this last aspect and many inessential
complications are ignored.

Arguing that excess demand for non-traded goods is a given fraction,
t, of excess demand in the goods market, and therefore of the ex-ante
excess supply of money, Blejer posits that changes in the relative price
of non-traded goods are proportional to 5:

(21)

q =

By interpreting t as

(21) is of course the same as (19). The

difference comes from the specification of the black market for foreign

exchange in flow terms. Supply per unit of time, sB, is a positive
function of the black market premium:

(22)

log

=

c11 + c12 log p

Demand per unit of time, DB, is a positive function of the expected
rate of change of the black market rate and a negative function of

-15-

expected inflation, as proxies for the real return to holding black

market foreign exchange and holding the non-traded good. Since own and
cross effects are the same, and expectations are assumed to be regres13

sive, we get:

log DB =

(23)

=

where

c21 - c22 log

e/P

Note that (23) is not consistent with domestic residents having the same

consumption preferences, as assumed in (12), where ,

rather

than the

expected change in , measures the real return differential.
Log differentiating (22) and (23) and equating yields a link between
the two relative prices p and q, represented in Figure 3 by point E:

A

A

(24)

p=cq

where

c =

C22/(C12 + C22)

Substituting (24) into (21) we obtain, instead of (20):

(25)

pctô
According to (25), the effect on the premium isdampened by Ct < 1.

Clearly, if q is not responsive to ô and t =

0,

the black market premium

is constant. The same happens when the flow supply of foreign exchange

-16—

does not respond to the premium - say because expectations are static -

and c = 0.

However in (20), if =

0 we get p =

ô =

q/t,

so that the premium

moves by more than the relative price of non-traded goods, as seems

plausible. The equilibrium is now at E' in Figure 3, and the flow model
understates the change in the premium by EtE. Since

>

0,

under

regressive expectations the premium will be lower. It will nevertheless
be larger than at E if the elasticity of expectations and of the currency
ratio are sufficiently larger than the ratio of the flow supply and

demand elasticities, as at E". The condition is:

>

(25')

where

=

C12/C22

—
1 -a

We now analyze, in the case = y

0, the temporary equilibrium of

the system, where excess supply for traded goods is non-zero, and
steady-state equilibrium, where asset stocks are constant.

3.

12

Temporary equilibrium

Equations (14) and (16) determine the relative prices of the smuggled and non-traded good in terms of the numeraire, given asset stocks.
An increase in the return to foreign assets (or in the probability of
success in smuggling) would increase h, that is the black market rate.
For a given h, (14) states that there is a single value of p consistent

with portfolio balance. Similarly, from (16), an increase in q must be

—16a—

Figure 3

Stock and Flow
Equilibria Compared

p

CT 6

a

q

—17—

matched by an increase in wealth, that is in p, in order to eliminate the
associated excess-supply of non-traded goods.

(26)

pa-F

(27)

According to (26) and 27), an increase in foreign money decrease p
and leaves q unchanged, while domestic monetary expansion increases p
one-to-one and q by t.

If the relative price effect dominates the wealth

effect (t < 1), then, domestic monetary expansion will imply a real
depreciation of the black market rate expressed in terms of non-traded

goods. The same will be true for a once-and-for-all devaluation of the
official exchange rate, which leaves the demand for foreign currency
unchanged, so p falls, and generates an excess demand for non-traded
goods, so q falls:

(28)

It can similarly be shown that an increase in h will increase p more
than q (i.e. lead to a real depreciation) unless t > 1 + 1/h.

4.

Steady-state equilibrium

Steady-state asset stock are such that, aside from portfolio balance
and equilibrium in the non-traded goods market, there is zero

-18-

excess-supply of the smuggled good, so that B = 0 and, therefore, zero
excess-supply of the official traded good as well,

=

0.

We thus need 6

= 0 in steady-state.
Substituting for p and q from the temporary equilibrium equations,
the asset accumulation equations in (17) and (18) can be used to show
that the reported (unreported) trade balances deteriorate sufficiently
with increases in domestic (foreign) currency for the system to be
stable.

Consider now the steady-state effects of monetary and exchange rate

policies when the currency ratio is fixed. The total differential of the
system can be expressed as a function of disturbances which affect the
currency ratio and official exchange rate policies:

0

1

1

p

h

0

q

cnuNdh+(vuiN)e

-1

(29)

',

-p

-w

0

it

-p

-w

0

.'..

where

',

-it

ciw dh -(n+p+w)e-Mdô

F

aw dh

(n) is the positive semi-elasticity of (B) with
respect to the premium

11(p) is the positive semi-elasticity of (B) with respect
to the relative price of non-traded goods;
and

(w) is the positive semi-elasticity of (B) with
respect to real wealth

-19—

A once-and-for-all devaluation leaves the stock of foreign assets

unchanged and raises e, N and N in proportion, so that p, q and
also unchanged. An increase in domestic credit creation in the rate of crawl -

or

are

a decline

increases p, q and i, whereas the effect on F is

ambiguous:

p= idó

(30)

dô

(31)

1dô

(32)

(33) F= ido
where

=pt+w;
= pt + w

and

When own-price effects are stronger than wealth and cross-price
effects, it > .

Then, when ô rises, p rises by less than i, so that F

rises. Defining ratjos of semi-elasticities, as in (21) above, we can
rewrite the condition in (33) as:

(33')

1- 4t> t'

=

where
and

t'

p/n

= w/it.

-20-

The condition for a real depreciation when the rate of crawl in-

creases (or, equivalently, for a fall in
than (33 ).

It

(1 —

(34)

after a rise in 6) is stronger

13

is given by:

4)t

> t'

An increase in h has no steady-state effects on relative prices. It

increases F by 1 + a and decreases by a.

We now allow for endogenous

changes in h. Rather than making the currency ratio a function of the
premium, though, we focus on the case of perfect foresight.

4.

The implication of perfect foresight

The well-known portfolio model of flexible exchange rates with
non-traded goods of Calvo and Rodriguez (1977) asssumes that expectations
about relative returns are continuously realized, so that i = e.

Using

this in (14) and inverting, we obtain a differential equation for the

black market rate. Since the rate of change of

is pegged to the rate

of crawl by the assumption that the market for non-traded goods clears,

we solve out for q. We also assume that the official rate is constant.
Then we express the system in terms of p, f and F by taking a linear

approximation around steady-state equilibrium, where p = 1 by choice of
units.

-21-

—1/c

1/c

1/c

p — 1

=

(35)

F;F*

F

To solve the characteristic equation of the system in (35) we assume
that Q =

and obtain:

(36)

X2[1 -

where

fl=it-t-it

14

+ c2)] +

x(

÷ 11) ÷ Qil =

0

The, trace and determinant are given by:

X1X2X3 =

(37)

+

(38)

Noting

r1Q/

x2+ X3

that

-

=

-O satisfies (36), we get two roots of opposite

signs:

(39)

X=-±
-.
2c
4c

-22-

The solution is therefore saddle-point-stable with one direction of
instability associated with the jump variable p and two directions of
stability associated with the assets stocks.
Suppose now that a crawling peg policy is implemented from a

steady-state situation where the rate of crawl is zero. In steady-state
the premium is constant, so that the rate of depreciation of the black

market rate has to increase. This makes foreign currency more attractive
and raises the currency ratio.

Suppose now that the expected rate of change of the black market is

given by the rate of crawl, 4

= , the

case of hyperopic expectation)5

The currency ratio also increases.

We now return to the diagram in the right panel of Figure 1 above,
in order to represent a simplified version of the general equilibrium

system, given by a monetary policy such that = 0 at all times, so that
we can solve out for

and obtain a two-by-two dynamic system. Using the

ratios of elasticities already introduced, we get:

p-i

)

t
(40)

rc(]. +

t

where

=

4t

0

F_F*

w/n

and

The trace of the matrix in (40) is positive and the determinant is
negative, so that once again the roots are of opposite sign and the

-23—

system is saddle-point stable. Since the wealth effects cancel, the
locus'where F = 0 is horizontal in p, F space, and defines the long-run

value

of the premium.16. The linear approximation to the portfolio

balance locus,

given by (t

= 0, has negative slope less than one in absolute value,

+ t)/(1

+

' + t). Now

reinterpret Figure 1 as if the

premium were measured on the vertical axis, and the F = 0 locus were a

straight line. Then, as stated in Part I, under perfect foresight,
demand for foreign currency increases when the black market rate depreciates, constraining its initial value for a given stock of foreign currency to a value below the corresponding initial value under static

expectations. The effect of an increase in the demand for foreign assets
is also smaller than under static expectations. It is followed by a
continuous decline of the black market premium along a higher perfect

foresight path. Conversely, the effect of an exogenous increase in the
foreign demand for the smuggled good is a downward shift in the F = 0
locus, which leads to a jump fall in p and a continuous decline along a

lower perfect foresight path to F2. Under static expectations, there
would be no jump

fall, in

p, but only a decline along the portfolio

balance locus.

Conclusion

The paper has analyzed regimes of currency inconvertibility using
the portfolio approach to exchange rate determination developed by Kouri
(1983) and others. Reference was also made to a "crime-theoretict'
approach pioneered by Beccaria (1764) and to the monetary approach of

Blejer (1978a). In a simple three—good, two-asset general equilibrium

-24-

model, the condition for a crawling peg to induce real depreciation of
the black market rate in terms of non-traded goods was shown to be the

dominance of the price effect over the wealth effect. Increases in the
demand for foreign assets increase relative prices in the short-run and
the currency ratio in the long-run.

Allowing the currency ratio to be changed by monetary and exchange
rate policy, it was shown that, under perfect foresight, it would be

raised by an increase in the rate of crawl. The assumption of perfect
foresight may seem particularly strained in a black market, but the
result also holds when expectations are hyperopic, so, in the long run
that the private valuation of foreign currency adjusts to the official
one.

The contrast of the various expectations formation mechanisms brings

out an important dilemma of currency inconvertibility. If the monetary
authorities believe that, in the long-run, the private valuation of
foreign currency adjusts to the official one, they also have to accept
that the wrong exchange rate policy will set the black market for foreign
exchange off the stable path where expectations are continuously real-

ized, making domestic money worthless. To rule out destabilizing expectations, the official valuation has to adjust to the private valuation,
as in a dual market for foreign exchange.

Such a regime has the advantage of giving a warning signal which may

prevent the collapse of a fixed exchange rate regime. The literature on
this latter issue, beyond the scope of the present paper, has been
surveyed by Garber (1983), who mentions in passing the potential role of

a dual exchange rate in preventing the speculative attack. This, in

-25-

turn, provides a justification for the weak standard of convertibility
found in the 11fF

Articles

of Agreement.

-26-

NOTES

1.

Thus, restricting convertibility for current account transactions
would tend to promote factor mobility and trade in assets.

Conversely restricting convertibility for capital account transactions would tend to promote trade in goods.
2.

In response to the greater mobility of capital, some governments
have attempted to recapture foreign exchange by offering special
advantages to the types of transactions, where evasion of exchange
controls would be easier, like tourist services and migrant's

remittances. According to the IMP's latest Annual Report on
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, only 33 out of 148
member countries have fully convertible currencies,

while 67

(Western Europe, Middle-East and Latin America) have accepted
convertibility for current account transactions only.
3.

As Cooper (1974) showed for the case of Indonesia, tariff collections as a percent of imports were less than schedule rates at

higher duties because of the increased incentive to smuggling

activity. While higher collections are presumably achievable with
greater law enforcement, net revenues might still be less than
proportional to rates.
4.

A brief survey of this literature is in Macedo (1979).

5.

See Macedo (1982a) and (1982b, Essay III) and Dornbusch et al.
(1983) for the analysis of black markets for foreign exchange in
Egypt, Portugal and Brazil, respectively, using the portfolio
approach.

—27—

6.

Strictly speaking, this also requires constant expenditure shares.
See Kouri (1975, P. 77, note 1).

7.

The "collapse" literature is surveyed by Garber (1983).

8.

In the case where LL is upward sloping, the existence of a solution
(A >

0) requires that, when

have [y - zs (1 9.

y)}

> 1 and 1 >

y zs/(1 + zs), we also

> 1, so that A < 1 and if A <

z,

then t <

p.

In Macedo (1982b, Essay II), S, L and their ratios depend on p. An
alternative, suggested by Al Fishlow, would be to make the ratio a
function of 4s.

10. Other references in the monetarist spirit are Culbertson (1975) who
used annual data on black market rates in India, the Philippines and

Turkey for purchasing power parity calculations; Giddy (1978) who
attempted to show the "efficiency" of black markets for foreign
exchange in Columbia, Brazil and Israel by testing the randomness of
the black market premium and changes therein using weekly data;

Blejer (1978b) who used annual data on a black-market-based real
exchange rate for Brazil, Chile and Colombia to estimate money
demand functions in these countries; and Canto (1983), who performed
time-series analysis on data from the Dominican Republic.

11. Under rational expectations the "real rate"

would be a double

exponential function of time.

12. See the analysis in Macedo (1983) for the cases where

0, so that

the currency ratio changes, where there are terms-of-trade changes
and where alternative assumptions about capital gain on reserves are
explored.

13. This real appreciation is used to characterize the "Egyptian disease" in Macedo (1982a).

-28-

14. This allows it

because the elasticity relative to the nuineraire

can also differ.

15. See Allen and Kenen (1980, p. 242).

16. If, instead, we assumed that =

at

all times, the F = 0 locus

would be upward sloping because of the wealth effect. None of the
conclusions would be changed.

-29-

References

Allen, P.R. and P. Kenen (1980). Asset Markets, Exchange Rates and
Economic Integration, Cambridge.
Beccaria, C. (1764-65), Tentativo Analitico Sui Contrabbandi, reprinted
in Scrittori Classici Italiana di Economia Politica, Vol. XII,
Milan, 1804, p. 235-241.
Bhagwati, J. and B. Hansen (1973), A Theoretical Analysis of Smuggling,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.

Blejer, M. (1978a), Exchange Restrictions and the Monetary Approach to
the Exchange Rate, in J. Frenkel and H. Johnson eds., The Economics
of Flexible Exchange Rates, Addison-Wesley.

_________ (1978b), Black Market Exchange Rate Expectations and the
Domestic Demand for Money: Some Empirical Results, Journal of
Monetary Economics.

Calvo, G. and C. Rodriguez (1977), A Model of Exchange Rate Determination Under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations, Journal
of Political Economy, June.

Canto, V. (1983), Monetary Policy, "Dollarization" and Parallel Market

Exchange Rates: The Case of Dominican Republic, draft, University
of Southern California, February.
Cooper, R. (1974), Tariffs and Smuggling in Indonesia, in Bhagwati ed.,
Illegal Transactions in International Trade, North—Holland.

Culbertson, W. (1975), Purchasing Power Parity and Black Market Exchange
Rates, Economic Inquiry, May.

-30-

Dornbusch, R. et al. (1983), The Black Market for Dollars in Brazil,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February.

Garber, P. ((1983), The Collapse of Asset Price Fixing Regimes, draft,
University of Rochester, November.

Giddy, I. (1978), The Efficiency of Black Markets for Foreign Exchange,
draft, Columbia Business School.
Kouri, P. (1975), Essays in the Theory of Flexible Exchange Rates,
Ph.D Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

_________ (1983),. Balance of Payments and the Foreign Exchange Market:
A Dynamic Partial Equilibrium Model, in J. Bhandari and B. Putnam
(eds.), The International Transmission of Disturbances under
Flexible Exchange Rates, MIT Press.
Krugman, P. (1979), A Model of Balance of Payments Crises, Journal
of Money Credit and Banking.

Macedo, J. (1979), Exchange Rate Behavior Under Currency Inconvertibility, Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper no. 319, Yale
University, September.

_________ (1982a), Currency Diversification and Export Competitiveness: A Model of the "Dutch Disease" in Egypt, Journal of
Development Economics, December.

_________ (1982b), Portfolio Diversification and Currency
tibility: Three Essays in International Monetary Economics,
Lisbon (Portugal); Servicos Graficos da Universidade Nova de
Lisboa.

_________ (1983), Currency Inconvertibility, Portfolio Balance and
Relative Prices, in T. Basar and L.F. Pau (eds.), Dynamic

-31-

Modelling
and Control of National Economics 1983, Pergamon Press, 1984.
Martin, L. and.A. Panagariya (1983), Smuggling, Trade and Price

Disparity: A Crime Theoretic Approach, forthcoming Journal of
International Economics

Michaely, H. (1954), A Geometrical Analysis of Black Market Behavior,
American Economic Review, September.

Pitt, N. (1981), Smuggling and Price Disparity, Journal of International
Economics, December.

_________ (1982), Smuggling and the Black Market for Foreign Exchange,
draft, University of Minnesota, December.

Sheikh, M. (1974), Smuggling, Production and Welfare, Journal of
national Economics.

_________ (1976), Black Markets for Foreign Exchange, Capital Flows
and Smuggling, Journal of Development Economics, 3.

