NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SIMPLE ANALYTICS OF THE GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE MULTIPLIER
Michael Woodford
Working Paper 15714
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15714

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2010

Prepared for the session "Fiscal Stabilization Policy" at the meetings of the Allied Social Science Associations,
Atlanta, Georgia, January 3-5, 2010. I would like to thank Marco Bassetto, Pierpaolo Benigno, Sergio
de Ferra, Gauti Eggertsson, Marty Eichenbaum, Bob Gordon, Bob Hall, John Taylor and Volker Wieland
for helpful discussions, Dmitriy Sergeyev and Luminita Stevens for research assistance, and the National
Science Foundation for research support under grant SES-0820438. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier
Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 15714
January 2010, Revised June 2010
JEL No. E62
ABSTRACT
This paper explains the key factors that determine the effectiveness of government purchases as a means
of increasing output and employment in New Keynesian models, through a series of simple examples
that can be solved analytically. Delays in the adjustment of prices or wages can allow for larger multipliers
than exist in the case of fully flexible prices and wages; in a fairly broad class of simple models, the
multiplier is 1 in the case that the monetary authority maintains a constant path for real interest rates.
The multiplier can be considerably smaller, however, if the monetary authority raises real interest
rates in response to increases in inflation or real activity resulting from the fiscal stimulus. A large
multiplier is especially plausible when monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on
nominal interest rates; in such a case, expected utility is maximized by expanding government purchases
to at least partially fill the output gap that would otherwise exist owing to the central bank's inability
to cut interest rates. However, it is important in such a case that neither the increased government purchases
nor the increased taxes required to finance them be expected to persist beyond the period over which
monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound.
Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
michael.woodford@columbia.edu

The recent worldwide economic crisis has brought renewed attention to the question of the usefulness of government spending as a way of stimulating aggregate
economic activity and employment during a slump. Interest in fiscal stimulus as an
option has been greatly increased by the fact that in many countries by the end
of 2008, the short-term nominal interest rate used as the main operating target for
monetary policy had reached zero — or at any rate, some very low value regarded as
an effective lower bound by the central bank in question — so that further interest
rate cuts were no longer available to stave off spiraling unemployment and fears of
economic collapse. Increases in government spending were at least a dimension on
which it was possible for governments to do more — but how effective should this be
expected to be as a remedy?
Much public discussion of this issue has been based on old-fashioned models (both
Keynesian and anti-Keynesian) that take little account of the role of intertemporal
optimization and expectations in the determination of aggregate economic activity.
The present paper instead reviews the implications for this question of the kind of New
Keynesian DSGE models that are now commonly used in monetary policy analysis.
It focuses on one specific question of current interest: the determinants of the size of
the effect on aggregate output of an increase in government purchases, or what has
been known since Keynes (1936) as the government expenditure “multiplier.”
I discuss this issue in the context of a series of models that are each simple enough
for the effects to be computed analytically, so that the consequences of parameter
variation for the quantitative results will be completely clear. It is hoped that the
economic mechanisms behind the various results will be fairly transparent as well. I
also restrict my attention to policy experiments that are defined in such a way that
the time path of the increase in output has the same shape as the time path of the
increase in government purchases, so that there is a clear meaning to the calculation
of a “multiplier” (though more generally this need not be the case). These models
are too simple to be taken seriously as the basis for quantitative estimates of the
effects of some actually contemplated policy change; nonetheless, I believe that the
mechanisms displayed in these simple examples explain many of the numerical results
obtained by a variety of recent authors in the context of empirical New Keynesian
DSGE models,1 and the simpler analysis here may be of pedagogical value.
I begin be reviewing in section 1 the neoclassical benchmark under which in1

See, for example, comments below on the studies of Christiano et al. (2009), Cogan et al. (2010),
Erceg and Lindé (2009), and Uhlig (2010).

1

tertemporal optimization should result in a multiplier less than 1. Section 2 then
shows that in simple New Keynesian models, if monetary policy maintains a constant
real interest rate, the multiplier is instead equal to 1. Section 3 shows that under
more realistic assumptions about monetary policy under normal circumstances, the
multiplier will be less than 1, because real interest rates will increase; but section 4
shows that when the zero lower bound is a binding constraint on monetary policy,
the multiplier is instead greater than 1, because fiscal expansion should cause the real
interest rate to fall. Section 5 considers the welfare effects of government purchases
in these various case, while section 6 briefly discusses the consequences of allowing
for tax distortions. Section 7 summarizes the paper’s conclusions.

1

A Neoclassical Benchmark

I shall begin by reviewing the argument that government purchases necessarily crowd
out private expenditure (at least to some extent), according to a neoclassical generalequilibrium model in which wages and prices are both assumed to be perfectly flexible.
This provides a useful benchmark, relative to which I shall wish to discuss the consequences of allowing for wage or price rigidity. I shall confine my analysis here to
a relatively special case of the neoclassical model, first analyzed by Barro and King
(1984), though the result that the multiplier for government purchases is less than
one does not require such special assumptions.2

1.1

A Competitive Economy

Consider an economy made up of a large number of identical, infinite-lived households,
each of which seeks to maximize
∞
X

β t [u(Ct ) − v(Ht )],

(1.1)

t=0

where Ct is the quantity consumed in period t of the economy’s single produced
good, Ht is hours of labor supplied in period t, the period utility functions satisfy
u0 > 0, u00 < 0, v 0 > 0, v 00 > 0, and the discount factor satisfies 0 < β < 1. The good
2

More general expositions of the neoclassical theory include Barro (1989), Aiyagari et al. (1992),
and Baxter and King (1993).

2

is produced using a production technology yielding output
Yt = f (Ht ),

(1.2)

where f 0 > 0, f 00 < 0. This output is consumed either by households or by the
government, so that in equilibrium
Yt = Ct + Gt

(1.3)

each period. I shall begin by considering the perfect foresight equilibrium of a purely
deterministic economy; the alternative fiscal policies considered will correspond to
alternative deterministic sequences for the path of government purchases {Gt }. I shall
also simplify (until section 6) by assuming that government purchases are financed
through lump-sum taxation; a change in the path of government purchases is assumed
to imply a change in the path of tax collections so as to maintain intertemporal
government solvency. (The exact timing of the path of tax collections is irrelevant in
the case of lump-sum taxes, in accordance with the standard argument for “Ricardian
equivalence.”)
One of the requirements for competitive equilibrium in this model is that in any
period,
Wt
v 0 (Ht )
=
.
(1.4)
0
u (Ct )
Pt
This is a requirement for optimal labor supply by the representative household, where
Wt is the nominal wage in period t, and Pt is the price of the good. Another requirement is that
Wt
.
(1.5)
f 0 (Ht ) =
Pt
This is a requirement for profit-maximizing labor demand by the representative firm.
In order for these conditions to simultaneously be true, one must have v 0 /u0 = f 0 at
each point in time.
Using (1.2) to substitute for Ht and (1.3) to substitute for Ct in this relation, one
obtains an equilibrium condition
u0 (Yt − Gt ) = ṽ 0 (Yt )

(1.6)

in which Yt is the only endogenous variable. Here ṽ(Y ) ≡ v(f −1 (Y )) is the disutility
to the representative household of supplying a quantity of output Y , so that ṽ 0 =
3

v 0 /f 0 . (Note that our previous assumptions imply that ṽ 0 > 0, ṽ 00 > 0.) This is also
obviously the first-order condition for the planning problem of choosing Yt maximize
utility, given preferences, technology, and the level of government purchases; thus
this equilibrium condition reflects the familiar result that competitive equilibrium
maximizes the welfare of the representative household (in the case that there is a
representative household).
Condition (1.6) can be solved for equilibrium output Yt as a function of Gt . Differentiation of the function implicitly defined by (1.6) yields a formula for the “multiplier”,
ηu
dY
=
,
(1.7)
dG
ηu + ηv
where η u > 0 is the negative of the elasticity of u0 and η v > 0 is the elasticity of
ṽ 0 with respect to increases in Y .3 It follows that the multiplier is positive, but
necessarily less than 1. This means that private expenditure (here, entirely modeled
as non-durable consumer expenditure) is necessarily crowded out, at least partially, by
government purchases. In the case that the degree of intertemporal substitutability of
private expenditure is high (so that η u is small), while the marginal cost of employing
additional resources in production is sharply rising (that η v is large), the multiplier
may be only a small fraction of 1.

1.2

Monopolistic Competition

The mere existence of some degree of market power in either product or labor markets
does not much change this result. Suppose, for example, that instead of a single
good there are a large number of differentiated goods, each with a single monopoly
producer; and, as in the familiar Dixit-Stiglitz model of monopolistic competition, let
us suppose that the representative household’s preferences are again of the form (1.1),
but that Ct is now a constant-elasticity-of-substitution aggregate of the household’s
purchases of each of the differentiated goods,
·Z

1

Ct ≡

ct (i)

θ−1
θ

θ
¸ θ−1
di
,

(1.8)

0

where ct (i) is the quantity purchased of good i, and θ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution among differentiated goods. Let us suppose for simplicity that each good
3

That is, η u ≡ −Ȳ u00 /u0 , η v ≡ Ȳ ṽ 00 /ṽ 0 .

4

is produced using a common production function of the form (1.2), with a single
homogeneous labor input used in producing all goods. In this model, each producer
will face a downward-sloping demand curve for its product, with elasticity θ; profit
maximization will then require not production to the point where marginal cost is
equal to the price for which it sells its good, but only to the point at which the price
of good i is equal to µ times marginal cost, where the desired markup factor is given
by
θ
> 1.
(1.9)
µ≡
θ−1
Hence condition (1.5) must be replaced by the requirement that pt (i) = µWt /f 0 (ht (i))
for each good i.
Let us consider a monopolistically competitive equilibrium, in which each firm
chooses its price optimally, taking as given the wage and the demand curve that it
faces. (I continue to assume perfectly flexible prices, and a competitive labor market,
or some other form of efficient labor contracting.) Since each firm faces the same
wage and a demand curve of the same form, in equilibrium each firm chooses the
same price, hires the same amount of labor, and produces the same quantity. It
follows that we must also have
Pt = µWt /f 0 (Ht ),

(1.10)

where Pt is the common price of all goods (and also the price of the composite good)
and Ht is the common quantity of labor hired by each firm (and also the aggregate
hours worked). It also follows that aggregate output Yt (in units of the composite
good) and aggregate hours worked Ht must again satisfy (1.2). Optimal labor supply
by the representative household also continues to require that (1.4) hold, where Pt is
now the price of the composite good.
Relations (1.2), (1.4) and (1.10) allow us to derive a simple generalization of
equation (1.6),
u0 (Yt − Gt ) = µṽ 0 (Yt )
(1.11)
which again suffices to determine equilibrium output as a function of the current level
of government purchases. While the equilibrium level of output is no longer efficient,
the multiplier is still given by (1.7), regardless of the value of µ. A similar conclusion
is obtained in the case of a constant markup of wages relative to households’ marginal
rate of substitution: aggregate output is again determined by (1.11), where µ is now
5

an “efficiency wedge” that depends on the degree of market power in both product
and labor markets, and so the multiplier calculation remains the same.4
A different result can be obtained, however, if the size of the efficiency wedge
is endogenous. One of the most obvious sources of such endogeneity is delay in
the adjustment of wages or prices to changing market conditions.5 If prices are not
immediately adjusted in full proportion to the increase in marginal cost resulting
from an increase in government purchases, the right-hand side of (1.10) will increase
more than does the left-hand side; as a consequence the right-hand side of (1.11)
will increase more than does the left-hand side of that expression. This implies an
increase in Yt greater than the one implied by (1.11). One can similarly show that if
wages are not immediately adjusted in full proportion to the increase in the marginal
rate of substitution between leisure and consumption, the right-hand side of (1.11)
will increase more than does the left-hand side, again implying a larger multiplier
than the one given in (1.7).
Hence the key to obtaining a larger multiplier is an endogenous decline in the
labor-efficiency wedge.6 However, in a model with sticky prices or wages, the degree
to which the efficiency wedge changes depends on the degree to which aggregate
demand differs from what it was expected to be when prices and wages were set.
Equilibrium output is thus no longer determined solely by supply-side considerations;
we must instead consider the effects of government purchases on aggregate demand.

2

A New Keynesian Benchmark

What is the size of the government expenditure multiplier if prices or wages are
sticky — as many empirical DSGE models posit, in order to account for the observed
4

The same result is also obtained in the case of a constant rate of taxation or subsidization of
labor income, firms’ payrolls, consumption spending, or firms’ revenues. The tax distortions simply
change the size of the efficiency wedge µ in equation (1.11).
5
Another possible source of endogeneity is cyclical variation in desired markups due to implicit
collusion, as in the model of Rotemberg and Woodford (1992). In that model, a temporary increase
in government purchases reduces the ability of oligopolistic producers to maintain collusion; the
resulting decline in markups increases equilibrium output more than would occur in a perfectly
competitive model.
6
Hall (2009) says that the key is a decline in the price markup; but this is not the only possibility,
as is discussed further at the end of section 2.

6

effects of monetary policy on real activity? The answer does not depend solely on
the assumed structure of the economy. If prices or wages are sticky, monetary policy
affects real activity, and so the consequences of an increase in government purchases
depend on the monetary policy response. One might suppose that the question
of interest should be the effects of government purchases “leaving monetary policy
unchanged”; but one must take care to specify just what is assumed to be unchanged.
It is not the same thing to assume that the path of the money supply is unchanged
as to assume that the path of interest rates is unchanged, or that the central bank’s
inflation target is unchanged, or that the central bank continues to adhere to a “Taylor
rule,” to list only a few of the possibilities.
I shall first consider, as a useful benchmark, a policy experiment in which it is
assumed that the central bank maintains an unchanged path for the real interest rate,
regardless of the path of government purchases. This case corresponds, essentially to
the standard “multiplier” calculation in undergraduate textbooks, where the question
asked is how much the “IS curve” shifts to the right — that is, how much output
would be increased if the real interest rate were not to change. Here I wish to consider
a similar question; but in a dynamic model, it is necessary to define the hypothetical
policy in terms of the entire forward path of the real interest rate. The answer to this
question provides a useful benchmark for two reasons. The first is that it is simple
to calculate; but the second is that the answer is the same under a wide range of
alternative assumptions about the nature of price or wage stickiness.
Again I consider a purely deterministic economy, and let the path of government
purchases be given by a sequence {Gt } such that Gt → Ḡ for large t; the longrun level of government purchases Ḡ is held constant while considering alternative
possible assumptions about near-term government purchases. Thus I shall consider
only the consequences of temporary variations in the level of government purchases.
I shall furthermore assume that monetary policy brings about a zero rate of inflation
in the long run. (That is, the inflation rate {π t } is also a deterministic sequence, such
that π t → 0 for large t.) Under quite weak assumptions about the nature of wage
and price adjustment, these assumptions about monetary and fiscal policy in the
long run imply that the economy converges asymptotically to a steady state in which
government purchases equal Ḡ each period, inflation is equal to zero, and output is
equal to some constant level Ȳ .7
7

Under many reasonable assumptions about wage and price adjustment, the steady-state level of

7

Given preferences (1.1), optimization by households requires that in equilibrium,
u0 (Ct )
= ert
βu0 (Ct+1 )

(2.1)

each period, where rt is the (continuously compounded) real rate of return between t
and t + 1. It follows from (2.1) that in the long-run steady state, rt = r̄ ≡ − log β > 0
each period. Since I wish to consider a monetary policy that maintains a constant
real rate of interest, regardless of the temporary variation in government purchases, it
is necessary to assume that monetary policy maintains rt = r̄ for all t; this is the only
constant real interest rate consistent with the assumption of asymptotic convergence
to a long-run steady state.
We may suppose that the central bank chooses an operating target for the nominal
interest rate it according to a Taylor rule of the form
it = ı̄t + φπ π t + φy log(Yt /Ȳ )

(2.2)

where the response coefficients φπ , φy are chosen so as to imply a determinate equilibrium under this policy,8 and where the sequence {ı̄t } is chosen so that ı̄t → r̄ for
large t (the requirement for asymptotic convergence to the zero-inflation steady state)
and so that the equilibrium determined by this monetary policy involves rt = r̄ each
period. However, there is no need to assume that the equilibrium is implemented
in this way; all that matters for the analysis here is that a monetary policy can be
specified that implements the equilibrium in which the real interest rate is constant.
Let us set aside for the moment the question whether such an equilibrium exists (and what sort of monetary policy implements it), and consider what such an
equilibrium must be like if it exists. If rt = r̄ for all t, it follows from (2.1) that
Ct = Ct+1 for all t. Thus the representative household must be planning a constant
level of consumption over the indefinite future, at whatever level is consistent with its
intertemporal budget constraint. Convergence to the steady state referred to above
implies that Ct → C̄ ≡ Ȳ − Ḡ for large t; hence equilibrium must involve Ct = C̄ for
output Ȳ will be the same as in the model with flexible wages and prices, namely, the solution to
(1.11) when Gt = Ḡ.
8
See Woodford (2003, Proposition 4.3) for the conditions required in the case of the Calvo model
of price adjustment described in section 3. In general, the precise conditions for determinacy of
equilibrium will depend on the details of wage and price adjustment.

8

all t.9 It then follows from (1.3) that
Yt = C̄ + Gt

(2.3)

for all t. Hence in this case, we find once again that equilibrium output depends only
on the level of government purchases in the current period — so that the effects of a
given size increase in government purchases are the same regardless of how persistent
the increase is expected to be10 — but now the multiplier (dYt /dGt ) is equal to 1.
There is no crowding out of private expenditure by government purchases, though no
stimulus of additional private expenditure, either.11
An interesting feature of this simple result is that it is quite independent of any
very specific assumption about the dynamics of wage and price adjustment: under
the particular assumption about monetary policy made here, the effect on aggregate
output depends purely on the demand side of the model. The supply side of the model
matters only in solving for the implied path of inflation, wages and employment, and
for the monetary policy required to achieve the hypothesized path of real interest
rates. I have, however, made one crucial assumption about the supply side: I have
supposed that it is possible for monetary policy to maintain rt = r̄ at all times,
regardless of the chosen short-run path of government purchases. This assumption
is violated by the model with fully flexible wages and prices. However, under many
specifications of sticky prices or wages (or both), it is possible for monetary policy to
affect real interest rates, and a path for monetary policy can be chosen under which
rt = r̄ will hold, in the case of any path for government purchases satisfying certain
bounds.
Essentially, it is simply necessary to use the model of wage and price adjustment
implied by such a model to determine the paths of wages and prices implied by the
9

This is the point at which it matters to the argument that I consider only paths for government
purchases such that Gt → Ḡ. In the case of a change in the long-run level of government purchases,
the long-run steady-state value C̄ would also change.
10
This statement is subject to the proviso, of course, that the long-run level of government purchases, Ḡ, is not changed. If the short-run increase in Gt actually implies that government purchases
will have to be reduced in the long run, then consumption will increase, and the multiplier will be
greater than 1, as concluded by Corsetti et al. (2009).
11
It is possible, instead, to obtain an increase in private expenditure, and hence a multiplier greater
than 1, if household preferences are non-separable between consumption and leisure, as discussed
by Monacelli and Perotti (2010) and Bilbiie (2009).

9

dynamics of consumption and output solved for above. Assuming that a solution
exists, the implied path for inflation and hence for inflation expectations will then
yield the required path of the nominal interest rate. (Adjoining a money-demand
equation to the model would then allow one to determine the required path of the
money supply as well.) In the next section, I present the equations of a particular
familiar model of price adjustment (the model with flexible wages and Calvo-style
staggered adjustment of prices), and show how it is possible to determine the monetary policy required to keep the real interest rate constant in that model. But it
should be evident that the conclusion that some monetary policy would be consistent
with a constant real rate is in no way dependent on the special details of the Calvo
model of price adjustment; it is equally true in many other models of the dynamics
of price adjustment, in models with sticky wages instead of (or in addition to) sticky
prices, in models with “sticky information” instead of sticky prices, and so on.
It may seem surprising that the multiplier in this baseline case is independent of
the degree of flexibility of prices and wages; there thus appears to be a discontinuity
in the case of complete flexibility (and full information), where the multiplier is given
by (1.7). The explanation is that the derivation of (2.3) requires that it be possible
for monetary policy to maintain a constant real interest rate despite an increase in
government purchases; and while such a policy is technically possible, according to
the model of price adjustment presented in section 3.1, for any positive degree of
price stickiness, as the degree of price stickiness becomes small, the required degree
of inflation becomes extreme. Hence it becomes implausible to believe that a central
bank will actually maintain a constant real interest rate (even if this is technically
feasible) in the case of sufficiently flexible (even though not perfectly flexible) prices.
For this reason, the relevance of the New Keynesian benchmark does depend on the
existence of a sufficient degree of stickiness of prices, wages, information (or more
than one of these).
It is also noteworthy that in this benchmark case, the predicted multiplier is
independent of the degree to which resource utilization is slack; in the derivation of
(2.3), the costs of supplying a given level of output do not figure at all. But once
again, supply costs do generally matter for the rate of inflation associated with a
given size of government purchases under the assumed monetary policy; more steeply
increasing marginal costs as output increases will lead to larger price increases. Again,
this means that it is much more plausible to imagine a central bank holding real
10

interest rates constant in response to an increase in government purchases when
there is a great deal of excess capacity (so that marginal cost increases little with
increased output), rather than when capacity utilization is high (so that marginal
cost is steeply increasing); and if capacity constraints are severe enough, it may
actually be infeasible to maintain a constant real interest rate under any monetary
policy, because no amount of monetary stimulus can induce the increase in supply
required in order for the current goods not to be expensive relative to future goods
(or indexed bonds).
The simple case considered in this section suffices to establish that New Keynesian
models can easily deliver multipliers higher than the one predicted by the neoclassical
model; this makes them easier to reconcile with empirical evidence. For example,
Hall’s (2009) review of the empirical evidence concludes that “GDP rises by roughly
the amount of an increase in government purchases” under normal circumstances,12
which is to say that the multiplier is roughly 1. While this is too large an effect to be
consistent with neoclassical theory, at least in standard models, it is easily consistent
with a simple New Keynesian model, at least to the extent that monetary policy
has in fact maintained a relatively constant real interest rate in response to fiscal
shocks.13 (The response of the real interest rate to fiscal shocks is seldom considered
in the literature that Hall reviews; this is a topic that deserves further attention.)
Hall (2009) argues that while New Keynesian models can explain the possibility of a multiplier on the order of 1, they can do so only under the hypothesis of
countercyclical movement in the markup of prices relative to marginal cost, and he
questions the realism of the latter assumption, citing evidence such as the findings of
Nekarda and Ramey (2010). Nekarda and Ramey find that increases in government
purchases have little effect on their measure of the markup (the ratio of average labor
productivity to the real wage). However, New Keynesian models do not necessarily
imply that this measure of the markup must decline in response to an increase in
12

He notes that the multiplier may be substantially larger when monetary policy is constrained
by the zero bound; this special case is discussed below in section 4.
13
Under some familiar hypotheses about monetary policy, such as the Taylor rule, the New Keynesian model would predict a smaller multiplier, as is discussed in section 3. However, authors such
as Taylor (1999) and Clarida et al. (2000) argue that U.S. monetary policy in the 1960s and 1970s
was considerably more “passive” than the Taylor rule would prescribe, allowing the real interest rate
to fall in response to increases in inflation, and it is possible that the fiscal multipliers found in the
empirical literature mainly reflect responses from such periods.

11

government purchases; the real wage may remain constant, or even fall, if wages are
sticky, while average labor productivity may remain constant, or even increase, in the
presence of overhead labor or procyclical effort (to cite only two familiar hypotheses).
Yet hypotheses of these types, that are consistent with the Nekarda-Ramey findings,
are also consistent with the reasoning given above; under the hypothesis of a central bank that maintains the path of real interest rates fixed despite the increase in
government purchases, the multiplier will equal 1. Hence Hall’s critique of the basic
mechanism that allows New Keynesian models to predict multipliers of this size seems
to be misplaced.

3

Alternative Degrees of Monetary Accommodation

The result obtained in the previous section applies only under one specific assumption
about monetary policy, namely, that the path of the real interest rate will remain
fixed despite the temporary increase in government purchases. Under alternative
assumptions about the degree of monetary accommodation of the fiscal stimulus,
the size of the increase in output will be different. Indeed, under some assumptions
about monetary policy, the output response predicted by the New Keynesian model
may be even smaller than in the neoclassical model. Hence an empirical finding of a
multiplier less than 1, under the monetary policy that has been followed historically,
does not necessarily disconfirm the validity of the New Keynesian model.
In order to illustrate this point by computing multipliers associated with alternative monetary policies, it is necessary to adopt a specific model of wage and price
adjustment. The calculations in this section and the one that follows are based on a
particular, very familiar New Keynesian model, in which wages are flexible and prices
adjust according to the Calvo model of staggered price adjustment.

3.1

Inflation Dynamics and Aggregate Supply: A Simple
Model

Let us assume Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition, as discussed in section 1, but
now let us suppose that each differentiated good i is produced using a constant-

12

returns-to-scale technology of the form
yt (i) = kt (i)f (ht (i)/kt (i)),

(3.1)

where kt (i) is the quantity of capital goods used in production by firm i, ht (i) are the
hours of labor hired by the firm, and f (·) is the same increasing, concave function as
before. I shall assume for simplicity that the total supply of capital goods is exogenously given (and can be normalized to equal 1), but that capital goods are allocated
to firms each period through a competitive rental market. This assumption implies
that each firm will have a common marginal cost of production, a homogeneous degree 1 function of the two competitive factor prices, that is independent of the firm’s
chosen scale of production.
Cost-minimization will imply that each firm chooses the same labor/capital ratio,
regardless of its scale of production, and in equilibrium this common labor/capital
ratio will equal Ht , the aggregate labor supply (recalling that aggregate capital is
equal to 1). Hence the common nominal marginal cost of production St in any period
will equal
St = Wt /f 0 (Ht ).
(3.2)
If we assume flexible wages and a competitive labor market, (1.4) must again hold in
equilibrium; substituting this for Wt in (3.2) yields
St = Pt

ṽ 0 (f (Ht ))
.
u0 (Yt − Gt )

(3.3)

Note that in the case that each firm’s price is a fixed markup µ over marginal cost
(as would follow from Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition with flexible prices),
condition (3.3) together with (1.2) would imply that output must satisfy (1.11), as
concluded previously.
In the Calvo model of staggered price adjustment, it is assumed that fraction 1−α
of all firms reconsider their prices in any given period, while the others continue to
charge the same price as in the previous period. (The probability that any firm will
reconsider its price in any period is assumed to be independent of the time since it
last reconsidered its price, and of how high or low its current price may be.) To a
log-linear approximation,14 the optimal price p∗t chosen by each firm that reconsiders
14

Here I log-linearize around the zero-inflation steady state, which under the assumed monetary

13

its price in period t will be given by15
log p∗t = log µ +

∞
X
(1 − αβ)αj β j Et [log St+j ].

(3.4)

j=0

(This is just a weighted geometric average of the prices pft+j = µSt+j that a profitmaximizing flexible-price firm would choose in each of the future periods t + j.)
Since in each period, a fraction (1 − α)αj of all firms chose their current price j
periods earlier (for each j ≥ 0), in a similar log-linear approximation the price index
evolves according to a law of motion
log Pt = α log Pt−1 + (1 − α) log p∗t .

(3.5)

Condition (3.5) together with (3.4) allows one to show that
log(p∗t /Pt ) = (1 − αβ)

∞
X

β j Et [log µ + log St+j − log Pt+j ].

(3.6)

j=0

Thus a firm that reconsiders its price will choose a high relative price to the extent
that a weighted geometric average of the profit-maximizing relative prices µSt+j /Pt+j
in the various future periods t + j is high. In the case of fully flexible prices, Pt must
equal p∗t each period, in which case (3.6) requires that Pt = µSt each period, leading
again to (1.11). But with sticky prices, it is possible for Pt to differ from µSt (and
hence for Yt to violate equation (1.11)); this simply requires that firms that reconsider
their prices choose a price different from the general level of prices (p∗t 6= Pt ), resulting
in inflation or deflation (Pt 6= Pt−1 ) in accordance with (3.5).
A similar log-linear approximation to (3.3) takes the form16
log(St /Pt ) = − log µ + η v Ŷt + η u (Ŷt − Ĝt ),

(3.7)

policy is the equilibrium in the case that government purchases equal Ḡ each period; hence the
approximation is valid if in all periods Gt remains close enough to Ḡ. Further details of the calculation
sketched here are presented in Woodford (2003, chap. 3).
15
Here I write the condition in the more general form that applies in the case of a stochastic
environment, as preparation for further applications below.
16
Note that because the steady state around which the approximation is computed involves the
same level of production of each good, log-linearization of (3.1) and integration over i implies that,
to this order of approximation, the aggregate quantities Yt and Ht satisfy (1.2). This allows an
expression to be derived for real marginal cost as a function of Ŷt and Ĝt only.

14

where the elasticities η v , η u > 0 are defined as in (1.7), and the deviations from
steady state are defined as Ŷt ≡ log(Yt /Ȳ ), Ĝt ≡ (Gt − Ḡ)/Ȳ .17 Hence an increase
in Ŷt greater than the one implied by the flexible-price multiplier (1.7) requires that
real marginal cost St /Pt increases. Substituting this into (3.6), we obtain
log(p∗t /Pt )

= (1 − αβ)(η u + η v )

∞
X

β j Et [Ŷt+j − ΓĜt+j ],

(3.8)

j=0

where Γ < 1 is the flexible-price multiplier defined in (1.7). Then since (3.5) implies
that the inflation rate is given by
π t ≡ log(Pt /Pt−1 ) =
we obtain
πt = κ

∞
X

1−α
log(p∗t /Pt ),
α

β j Et [Ŷt+j − ΓĜt+j ],

(3.9)

(3.10)

j=0

where κ ≡ (1 − α)(1 − αβ)(η u + η v )/α > 0.
We can now answer the question whether it is possible for monetary policy to
maintain a constant real interest rate in the case of an arbitrary path {Gt } for government purchases, at least in the case that Gt remains always close enough to Ḡ for
the log-linear approximation to be accurate. For an arbitrary path {Gt }, the solution
for the path of output {Yt } is given by (2.3). Substituting this into (3.10), one obtains
a solution for the path of the inflation rate as well.18 It is then straightforward to
solve for the equilibrium path of the nominal interest rate, and for the path {ı̄t } of
intercepts for the central-bank reaction function (2.2). One thus obtains a policy that
implements the equilibrium conjectured in section 2.

3.2

A Strict Inflation Target

As an example of another simple hypothesis about monetary policy, suppose that the
central bank maintains a strict inflation target, regardless of the path of government
purchases. (For conformity with the assumption made above about the long-run
steady state, suppose that the inflation target is zero.) In the case of the Calvo model
17

The latter definition is chosen so that Ĝt is defined even if Ḡ = 0, and so that Ĝt and Ŷt are in
comparable units (i.e., percentages of steady-state output).
18
Note that for any bounded sequence {Ĝt }, the infinite sum is well-defined.

15

of price adjustment, (3.9) implies that maintaining a zero inflation rate each period
requires that p∗t = Pt each period. It then follows from (3.6) that this requires that
µSt = Pt each period.19 If we assume flexible wages (or efficient labor contracting),
(3.3) implies that this will hold if and only if Yt satisfies (1.11) each period. Hence
under this policy, aggregate output Yt will be the same function of Gt as in the case
of flexible prices, and the multiplier will be given by (1.7).
Again, this result does not depend on the precise details of the Calvo model of
price adjustment. In a wide range of specifications with sticky prices (or prices set
on the basis of sticky information), a sufficient (and often necessary) condition for
zero inflation each period is maintenance of aggregate conditions under which the
marginal cost of production satisfies St = Pt−1 /µ each period. For if this condition
holds, then under the assumption that each firm that reconsiders its price at any
date chooses p∗t = Pt−1 , not only will all prices remain constant over time, but each
firm will find that marginal revenue equals marginal cost each period, so that no firm
would expect to increase profits by deviating from this pricing strategy. But such
a policy thus ensures that each firm’s price is equal to µSt each period, so that the
equilibrium is the same as if all prices were fully flexible and set on the basis of full
information. Hence the multiplier will be given by (1.7), just as in the neoclassical
model.

3.3

Monetary Accommodation under a Taylor Rule

A less extreme hypothesis would assume that policy is not tightened so much in
response to a fiscal expansion as to prevent any increase in prices, but that real
interest rates do rise in response to any increase in prices that occurs, rather than
being held constant regardless of the consequences for inflation. For example, suppose
that interest rates are set in accordance with a “Taylor rule” of the form
it = r̄ + φπ π t + φy (Ŷt − ΓĜt ),

(3.11)

where it is a short-term riskless nominal rate (the central bank’s policy instrument), r̄
is the value of this rate in a steady state with zero inflation (so that the policy rule is
consistent with that steady state), and the response coefficients satisfy φπ > 1, φy > 0,
19

One can show that this is true in the exact model, and not merely in the log-linear approximation
used in (3.6).

16

as proposed by Taylor (1993). Here Ŷt − ΓĜt corresponds to one interpretation of the
“output gap,” namely, the number of percentage points by which aggregate output
exceeds the flexible-price equilibrium level.
In order to determine the equilibrium implications of a policy rule of this kind, it
is useful also to log-linearize equilibrium relation (2.1), yielding20
Ŷt − Ĝt = Et [Ŷt+1 − Ĝt+1 ] − σ(it − Et π t+1 − r̄),

(3.12)

where σ ≡ η −1
u > 0 measures the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of private
21
expenditure. If we consider deterministic paths for government purchases of the
simple form Ĝt = Ĝ0 ρt for some 0 ≤ ρ < 1, then the future path of government
purchases looking forward from any date t is a time-invariant function of the level of
Ĝt at that date. Conjecturing a solution of the form
Ŷt = γ y Ĝt ,

(3.13)

π t = γ π Ĝt ,

(3.14)

it = r̄ + γ i Ĝt ,

(3.15)

for some coefficients γ y , γ π , γ i , we can substitute these equations into (3.10), (3.11)
and (3.12), and solve for the values of the coefficients for which all three equilibrium
conditions are satisfied each period.
There is easily seen to be a unique solution of this form, in which
γy =
where

1 − ρ + ψΓ
,
1−ρ+ψ

(3.16)

·

¸
κ
ψ ≡ σ φy +
(φ − ρ) > 0.
1 − βρ π

It follows from (3.13) that in this case the multiplier is simply the coefficient γ y .
One observes from (3.16) that under this policy, Γ < γ y < 1. Thus the multiplier
is necessarily higher than in the flexible-price model (or under the strict inflation
20

Again I write the log-linear approximation for the more general stochastic form of this equilibrium condition, as this will be used in the next section.
21
Here it is a continuously compounded nominal rate — that is, it ≡ − log Qt , where Qt is the
nominal price of a bond that pays one unit of currency with certainty in period t + 1 — and
r̄ ≡ − log β is the corresponding continuously compounded rare of time preference.

17

targeting policy), but smaller than under the constant-real-interest rate policy. It is
higher than under strict inflation targeting, because under the Taylor rule, inflation
is allowed to rise somewhat in response to fiscal stimulus; but lower than under
the constant-real-interest rate policy, because the real interest rate is increased in
response to the increases in inflation and in the output gap. Note also that for a
policy rule of this form, the size of the multiplier depends on the degree of stickiness
of prices (through the dependence of ψ upon the value of κ); the more flexible are
prices (i.e., the smaller the value of α), the larger is κ and hence ψ, and the smaller
is the multiplier.
A still more realistic assumption about monetary policy might be to assume a
Taylor rule of the form (2.2), but with a constant intercept. (I shall assume ı̄t = r̄,
for consistency with the zero-inflation steady state.) In this case, the central bank
is assumed to respond to deviations of aggregate output from its average (or trend)
level, rather than to departures from the flexible-price equilibrium level. (In fact,
most central banks use measures of potential output that do not assume that potential
should depend on the level of government purchases, as in the specification (3.11).)
In this case, we again obtain a solution of the form (3.13)–(3.15), but with different
constant coefficients; the multiplier is now given by
γy =

1 − ρ + (ψ − σφy )Γ
.
1−ρ+ψ

(3.17)

The multiplier is necessarily smaller under this kind of Taylor rule, since (for any
φy > 0) the degree to which monetary policy is tightened in response to expansionary
fiscal policy is necessarily greater. In fact, in the case of any large enough value of φy ,
the multiplier under this kind of Taylor rule is even smaller than the one predicted
by the neoclassical model. In such a case, price stickiness results in even less output
increase than would occur with flexible prices, because the central bank’s reaction
function raises real interest rates more than would occur with flexible prices (and
more than is required to maintain zero inflation). Hence while larger multipliers are
possible according to a New Keynesian model, they are predicted to occur only in the
case of a sufficient degree of monetary accommodation of the increase in real activity;
and in general, this will also require the central bank to accommodate an increase in
the rate of inflation.

18

4

Fiscal Stimulus at the Zero Interest-Rate Lower
Bound

One case in which it is especially plausible to suppose that the central bank will not
tighten policy in response to an increase in government purchases is when monetary
policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on the short-term nominal interest
rate. This is a case in which it is plausible to assume not merely that the real interest
rate does not rise in response to fiscal stimulus, but that the nominal rate does not
rise; this will actually be associated with a decrease in the real rate of interest, to
the extent that the fiscal stimulus is associated with increased inflation expectations.
Hence government purchases should have an especially strong effect on aggregate
output when the central bank’s policy rate is at the zero lower bound.22 This is also
a case of particular interest, since calls for fiscal stimulus become more urgent when
it is no longer possible to achieve as much stimulus to aggregate demand as would be
desired through interest-rate cuts alone.
In practice, the zero lower bound is most likely to become a binding constraint
on monetary policy when financial intermediation is severely disrupted, as during the
Depression or the recent financial crisis.23 A simple extension of the model proposed
above allows us to see how this can occur. Suppose that the interest rate that is
relevant in condition (2.1) for the intertemporal allocation of expenditure is not the
same as the central bank’s policy rate, and furthermore that the spread between the
two interest rates varies over time, owing to changes in the efficiency of financial
intermediation.24 If we let it denote the policy rate, and it + ∆t the interest rate that
is relevant for the intertemporal allocation of expenditure, then (3.12) takes the more
general form
Ŷt − Ĝt = Et [Ŷt+1 − Ĝt+1 ] − σ(it − Et π t+1 − rtnet ),
(4.1)
where rtnet ≡ − log β − ∆t is the real policy rate required to maintain a constant path
22

In fact, it only matters that the policy rate be at a level that the central bank is unwilling to
go below; this “effective lower bound” need not be zero.
23
See Christiano (2004) for a quantitative analysis of the conditions under which the zero bound
would be a binding constraint even in the absence of financial frictions.
24
Cúrdia and Woodford (2009) present a complete general equilibrium model with credit frictions
in which the policy rate is lower than the rate of interest that enters the equilibrium relation that
generalizes (3.12), and describe a number of sources of variation in the spread between the two rates.

19

for private expenditure (at the steady-state level). If the spread ∆t becomes large
enough, for a period of time, as a result of a disturbance to the financial sector, then
the value of rtnet may temporarily be negative. In such a case the zero lower bound
on it will make (4.1) incompatible, for example, with achievement of the steady state
with zero inflation and government purchases equal to Ḡ in all periods.

4.1

A Two-State Example

As a simple example (based on Eggertsson, 2009), suppose that under normal conditions, rtnet = r̄ > 0, but that as a result of a financial disturbance at date zero, credit
spreads increase, and rtnet falls to a value rL < 0. Suppose that each period thereafter,
there is a probability 0 < µ < 1 that the elevated credit spreads persist in period t,
and that rtnet continues to equal rL , if credit spreads were elevated in period t − 1;
but with probability 1 − µ credit spreads return to their normal level, and rtnet = r̄.
Once credit spreads return to normal, they remain at the normal level thereafter.
(This exogenous evolution of the credit spread is assumed to be unaffected by either
monetary or fiscal policy choices.)
Suppose furthermore that monetary policy is described by a Taylor rule, except
that the interest rate target is set to zero if the linear rule would call for a negative
rate; specifically, let us suppose that
o
n
(4.2)
it = max r̄ + φπ π t + φy Ŷt , 0 ,
so that the rule would be consistent with the zero-inflation steady state, if rtnet were
to equal r̄ at all times. (We shall again suppose that φπ > 1, φy > 0, as prescribed by
Taylor.) Finally, let us consider fiscal policies under which government purchases are
equal to some level GL for all 0 ≤ t < T, where T is the random date at which credit
spreads return to their normal level, and equal to Ḡ for all t ≥ T. The question we
wish to consider is the effect of choosing a higher level of government purchases GL
during the crisis, taking as given the value of Ḡ (the level of government purchases
during normal times) and the monetary policy rule (4.2).
Since there is no further uncertainty from date T onward, and the equilibrium
conditions (3.10), (4.1) and (4.2) are all purely forward-looking, it is natural to suppose that the equilibrium from date T onward should be the zero-inflation steady

20

state; hence the equilibrium values will be π t = Ŷ = 0, it = r̄ > 0 for all t ≥ T.25
Given this solution for the equilibrium from date T onward, we wish to determine
the equilibrium evolution prior to date T . Equilibrium conditions (3.10), (4.1) and
(4.2 can be “solved forward” to obtain a unique bounded solution if and only if the
model parameters satisfy
κσµ < (1 − µ)(1 − βµ).
(4.3)
Note that this condition holds for all 0 ≤ µ < µ̄, where the upper bound µ̄ < 1
depends on the model parameters (β, κ, σ). I shall here consider only the case in
which (4.3) is satisfied, which is to say, in which it is not expected that the crisis is
likely to persist for too many years. Then since at each date t < T, the probability
distribution of future evolutions of fundamentals (the joint evolution of {rtnet , Ĝt }) is
the same, the unique bounded solution obtained by “solving forward” is one in which
π t = π L , Ŷt = ŶL , it = iL for each t < T, for certain constant values (π L , ŶL , iL ).
These constant values can be obtained by observing that (3.10) requires that
κ
(ŶL − ΓĜL ),
(4.4)
πL =
1 − βµ
and that (4.1) requires that
(1 − µ)(ŶL − ĜL ) = σ(−iL + µπ L + rL ).)

(4.5)

Using (4.4) to substitute for π L in (4.5), one obtains an equation that can be solved
to yield
ŶL = ϑr (rL − iL ) + ϑG ĜL ,
(4.6)
where
ϑr ≡

σ(1 − βµ)
> 0,
(1 − µ)(1 − βµ) − κσµ

ϑG ≡

(1 − µ)(1 − βµ) − κσµΓ
> 1.
(1 − µ)(1 − βµ) − κσµ

(4.7)

(Here the indicated bounds follow from (4.3) and the fact that Γ < 1.)
One can then substitute (4.6) and the associated solution for the inflation rate
into (4.2) and solve the resulting equation for iL . The solution lies on the branch of
(4.2) where iL = 0 for values of ĜL near zero if and only if
µ
¶
κ
r̄ +
(4.8)
φ + φy ϑr rL < 0.
1 − βµ π
25

One can show that this is a locally determinate rational-expectations equilibrium for dates
t ≥ T , under the policies assumed; that is, it is the only solution in which inflation and output
remain within certain bounded intervals.

21

This is the case of interest here; assuming that rL is negative enough for (4.8) to
hold, the zero lower bound will bind in the case that government purchases remain at
their normal (steady-state) level.26 In fact, it will bind in the case of any ĜL < Ĝcrit ,
where
³
´
κ
φ
+
φ
y ϑr (−rL ) − r̄
1−βµ π
> 0.
Ĝcrit ≡
κ
φ
(ϑ
−
Γ)
+
φ
ϑ
G
G
π
y
1−βµ
For any level of government purchases below this critical level, equilibrium output
will be given by
ŶL = ϑr rL + ϑG ĜL
(4.9)
for all t < T, and the inflation rate will equal the value π L given by (4.4).
In this equilibrium, there will be both deflation and a negative output gap (output
below its level with flexible wages and prices), for as long as credit spreads remain
elevated, in the case of any level of government purchases GL ≤ Gcrit .27 The deflation
and economic contraction can be quite severe, for even a modestly negative value of
rL , in the case that µ is large; in fact, ϑr (the multiplier dY /dr plotted in Figure 2)
becomes unboundedly large as µ approaches µ̄. Under such circumstances, it can be
highly desirable to stimulate aggregate demand by increasing the level of government
purchases.
For levels of government purchases up to Gcrit , (4.9) implies that each additional
dollar spend by the government increases GDP by ϑG dollars.28 Increases in govern26

Note that if, as in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), it is assumed that the central bank pursues
a strict zero inflation target as long as this is consistent with the zero lower bound, then the zero
lower bound necessarily binds at dates t < T if ĜL = 0, as long as rL < 0. The values computed
here for the multipliers dYL /drL and dYL /dGL are the same under that simpler hypothesis.
27
As illustrated in Figure 1, output may nonetheless exceed its steady-state level; for the parameter
values assumed in the figure, YL exceeds Ȳ (so that ŶL > 0) for values of GL near Gcrit , though the
output gap remains negative, because the increased government purchases increase the “natural”
level of output.
28
Note that this multiplier is calculated using approximations to the model structural equations
that have been log-linearized around the zero-inflation steady state, as in Eggertsson (2009) and
Christiano et al. (2009). However, the case considered here is necessarily some distance from
that steady state, so that the derivatives used need not yield a correct multiplier. (The multiplier
computed here is correct only in the case that rL is a sufficiently small negative quantity, so that
π L and ŶL remain close to zero when ĜL = 0.) Braun and Waki (2010) find that log-linearization
around the zero-inflation steady state can substantially exaggerate the size of the multiplier under
realistic parameter values; but they still conclude on the basis of their nonlinear analysis that the

22

0.05

0

−0.05

ŶL

−0.1

−0.15

−0.2

−0.25

−0.3

0

0.05

0.1
ĜL

0.15

0.2

Figure 1: Output as a function of the level of government purchases during the
period (t < T ) in which credit spreads remain elevated. A “Great Depression” shock
is assumed, parameterized as in Eggertsson (2009).
ment purchases beyond that level result in even higher levels of GDP, though the
increase per dollar of additional government purchases is smaller, as shown in Figure
1, owing to the central bank’s increase in interest rates in accordance with the Taylor
rule. (Figure 1 plots ŶL as a function of ĜL , for the numerical parameter values
proposed by Eggertsson, 2009.29 Under these parameter values, Gcrit is reached when
multiplier is well above 1.
29
Eggertsson chooses parameter values to fit the size of the contraction experienced by the U.S.
economy during the Great Depression. According to his modal parameter estimates (for a quarterly
model), β = 0.997, κ = 0.00859, σ = 0.862, and Γ = 0.425. The shock required to account for the
size of the contraction during the Depression is one under which rL = −0.010 (minus 4 percent
per annum) and µ = 0.903 (an expected mean duration a little over 10 quarters); the response
coefficients for monetary policy are assumed to be φπ = 1.5, φy = 0.25. (The justification of these
parameter values is discussed in greater detail in Denes and Eggertsson, 2009). Note that because
I use a simpler model of the labor market in the current exposition, κ is not the same function of
underlying parameters in (3.10) above as in Eggertsson’s paper. Here I parameterize the model so

23

government purchases exceed their steady-state value by 13.6 percent of steady-state
GDP.30 ) For values GL > Gcrit , the multiplier is no longer ϑG , but instead the coefficient γ y defined in (3.17), where the persistence parameter ρ is now replaced by
µ.31
It follows from (4.7) that the multiplier dYL /dGL = ϑG for government purchases
up to the level Ĝcrit is necessarily greater than 1 (for any µ > 0). The reason is that,
given that the nominal interest rate remains at zero in periods t < T, an increase in
GL , which increases π L , accordingly increases expected inflation (given some positive
probability of elevated credit spreads continuing for another period), and so lowers
the real rate of interest.32 Hence monetary policy is even more accommodative than
is assumed in the benchmark analysis in section 2, and the increase in aggregate
output is correspondingly higher.
The degree to which the multiplier exceeds 1 in this case can, in principle, be quite
considerable. In fact, for any given values of the other parameters, the multiplier
while the policy rate remains at the zero bound can be unboundedly large, for a
sufficiently value of the persistence parameter µ. Figure 2 plots the multiplier as
a function of µ, holding the other model parameters fixed at the values used by
Eggertsson (2009). The figure illustrates something that can be observed from (4.7)
to hold quite generally: the multiplier is monotonically increasing in µ, and increases
that the value of κ is the same as in Eggertsson’s paper, meaning that implicitly the value of α is
larger than the value assumed by Eggertsson. The difference in the values assumed for α has no
consequences for the multiplier calculations discussed here.
30
In drawing the figure, I have also assumed that the credit spread is zero in the “normal” state,
so that r̄ = − log β. Allowing for a small positive credit spread in this state would raise the value of
Gcrit .
31
Under Eggertsson’s parameter values, this quantity is equal only to 0.3. (Note that this is a case
in which, when the central bank is not constrained by the zero bound, the multiplier under a Taylor
rule that responds to detrended output is actually lower than the neoclassical benchmark; for under
Eggertsson’s parameter values, Γ = 0.4.) Under the alternative hypothesis that the central bank
implements a strict zero inflation target, except when prevented by the zero bound, the multiplier
above the critical level of government purchases is equal to Γ. If instead the central bank follows a
Taylor rule of the form (3.11), the multiplier beyond the critical level of government purchases is
given by (3.16).
32
Note that the increase in expected inflation referred to here is actually a reduction in the
expected rate of deflation. For all levels of government purchases below Gcrit , the output gap
remains negative (output remains below the flexible-price equilibrium level), and it is expected to
be non-positive in all future periods as well, so that a negative rate of inflation is implied by (3.10).

24

14
dY/dG
12

dY/dr

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

µ

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 2: Derivatives of YL with respect to the values of rL and GL , for alternative
assumed degrees of persistence µ of the financial disturbance. Other parameter values
are taken from Eggertsson (2009).
without bound as µ approaches µ̄. The figure also indicates that the multiplier is
in general not too much greater than 1, except if µ is fairly large. However, it is
important to note that the case in which µ is large (in particular, a large fraction of
µ̄) is precisely the case in which the multiplier dYL /drL is also large, which is to say,
the case in which a moderate increase in the size of credit spreads can cause a severe
output collapse.33
Thus increased government purchases when interest rates are at the zero bound
should be a powerful means through which to stave off economic crisis precisely
in those cases in which the constraint of the zero lower bound would otherwise be
most crippling — namely, those cases in which there is insufficient confidence that
the disruption of credit markets will be short-lived. For example, in Eggertsson’s
numerical example, a contraction of the size experienced during the Great Depression
33

See Denes and Eggertsson (2009) for further discussion of this point.

25

occurs as a result of a disturbance with a persistence coefficient of µ = 0.903; in
the case of this kind of disturbance, his parameter values imply a multiplier of 2.3.
Christiano et al. (2009) similarly find that a multiplier above 2 is possible at the
zero lower bound, in the context of a more complex New Keynesian model that is
estimated to match a large number of features of postwar U.S. data.
Evidence on the effects of defense spending during the 1930s suggest that substantial multipliers of this kind may indeed be possible during circumstances like those
of the Great Depression. For example, Almunia et al. (2010) estimate panel vector
autoregressions using data from 27 countries for the period 1925-1939, and look at the
response to innovations in defense purchases, taken to represent exogenous changes
in government purchases; depending on the specification used, they find a multiplier
during the year of the innovation of either 2.5 (their Figure 14) or 2.1 (their Figure
19). Gordon and Krenn (2010) similarly find a multiplier greater than 1 for the effects
of innovations in government purchases on U.S. real GDP during the military buildup
between 1940:Q2 and 1941:Q4. It is arguable that these relatively high multipliers
for defense purchases during the Depression, relative to those found by studies of the
effects of defense purchases at other times (e.g., those summarized in Hall, 2009),
reflect a greater degree of monetary accommodation under Depression circumstances
than has been typical of other military buildups.34

4.2

Importance of the Duration of Fiscal Stimulus

Cogan et al. (2010) instead find that a leading empirical New Keynesian model of
the U.S. economy predicts small multiplier effects of increased government purchases
during a situation in which the zero lower bound is assumed to bind. For example,
when Cogan et al. consider the effect of a permanent increase in government purchases
of 1 percent of GDP, they find an increase in GDP of only 1.0 percent in the first
quarter, which falls to only 0.6 percent by the end of the second year (the period
over which they assume that the federal funds rate rate remains at zero), and to
only 0.4 percent after four years. In the case of an assumed path of government
purchases intended to mimic projected expenditure under the February 2009 U.S.
federal stimulus package, their model implies an increase in GDP substantially smaller
34

In fact, the VAR results of Almunia et al. show central-bank discount rates being reduced,
rather than increased, in response to a positive innovation in defense purchases.

26

than the increase in government purchases in all quarters, and hence a particularly
modest increase in output during the first year of their simulation.
What accounts for the difference with the large multiplier obtained at the zero
bound by Eggertsson (2009)? While the empirical model used by Cogan et al. is
substantially more complex, this is probably not the most important difference in
their analysis.35 The crucial difference is that the calculations above assume an
increase in government purchases that lasts precisely as long as credit spreads are
elevated, and hence precisely as long as the zero lower bound is a binding constraint,
following which period Gt = Ḡ again each period; Cogan et al. instead consider
increases in government purchases that are initiated at a time when interest rates
are zero, but that extend much longer than the period over which the interest rate is
assumed to remain at zero.
In our simple model as well, the increase in output is predicted to be much smaller
if a substantial part of the increased government purchases are expected to occur
after the zero lower bound ceases to bind. For as explained above, once interest
rates are determined by a Taylor rule, a higher level of government purchases should
crowd out private spending (raising the marginal utility of private expenditure), and
may well cause lower inflation as well.36 But the expectation of a higher marginal
utility of expenditure and of lower inflation in the event that credit spreads normalize
in the following period both act as disincentives to private expenditure while the
nominal interest rate remains at zero. Hence while there is a positive effect on output
during the crisis of increased government purchases at dates t < T, an anticipation of
increased government purchases at dates t ≥ T has a negative effect on output prior
to date T .
A simple calculation can illustrate this. Suppose that instead of the two-state
Markov chain considered above, there are three states: after the “crisis” state (in
which rtnet = rL and Ĝt = ĜL ) ends, there is a probability 0 < λ < 1 each period that
government purchases will remain at their elevated level (Ĝt = ĜL ), even though
rtnet = r̄, though with probability 1 − λ each period the economy returns to the
35

The empirical model considered by Christiano et al. (2009) has a structure very similar to the
one used by Cogan et al., yet Christiano et al. obtain multipliers well in excess of 1 for a policy
experiment similar to the one analyzed above.
36
Both things occur in the case of the Eggertsson (2009) parameter values explained in footnote
29.

27

“normal” state (in which rtnet = r̄ and Gt = Ḡ) and remains there forever after. If we
let (π S , ŶS , iS ) be the constant values for (π t , Ŷt , it ) in the transitional state (i.e., for
all T ≥ t < T 0 , where T 0 is the random date at which government purchases return to
their “normal” level), then the value of Et Ŷt+1 during the “crisis” period is not µŶL ,
but µŶL + (1 − µ)λŶS , and similarly for expected future government purchases and
expected future inflation. We can repeat the previous derivation, obtaining instead
of (4.9) the more general form
ŶL = ϑr rL + ϑG ĜL + ϑπ π S + ϑC (ŶS − ĜL ),

(4.10)

where
ϑπ ≡ (1 − µ)λϑr > 0,

ϑC ≡ σ −1 ϑπ > 0.

The fact that ϑπ , ϑC > 0 indicates that an expectation of either lower private expenditure or lower inflation in the transitional state will lower output during the
crisis.
Using the same reasoning as in the previous section, one can show that the levels of output and inflation during the transitional state, when the interest rate is
determined by the Taylor rule but government purchases remain high, are given by
ŶS = γ y ĜL , π S = γ π ĜL , where γ y is the coefficient defined in (3.17) (but with the
persistence coefficient ρ equal to λ) and γ π is the corresponding inflation coefficient.
One thus obtains a multiplier
dYL
= ϑG + ϑπ γ π + ϑC (γ y − 1)
dGL

(4.11)

for government purchases below the critical level that causes the zero bound to no
longer bind even in the crisis state. Since γ Y < 1 as explained earlier, the contribution
of the final term is necessarily negative. In the case that either of the response
coefficients (φπ , φy ) is sufficiently large, the Taylor rule will not allow a large increase
in inflation during the transitional phase, and one obtains a multiplier smaller than
ϑG when λ > 0.
Figure 3 plots the value of the multiplier (4.11) as a function of λ, in the case
that the other parameters take the values proposed by Eggertsson (2009). When
λ = 0, the multiplier is nearly 2.3, as reported by Eggertsson, but it steadily falls as
λ is increased. For values of λ equal to 0.8 or higher (an expected duration of the
fiscal stimulus for 4 quarters or more after the end of the financial disturbance), the
28

3
2
1

dYL/dGL

0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5

0

0.2

0.4

λ

0.6

0.8

1

Figure 3: Derivative of YL with respect to GL , for alternative degrees of persistence
λ of the fiscal stimulus after the end of the financial disturbance. Other parameter
values are taken from Eggertsson (2009).
multiplier falls below 1. For values of λ equal to 0.91 or higher (an expected duration
of 10 quarters or more), the multiplier is negative. In particular, in the case of a
permanent increase in the level of government purchases (the case λ = 1), as in the
first case considered by Cogan et al., the multiplier is strongly negative (nearly -5!).
Hence a finding that a long-lasting fiscal stimulus is predicted to increase output only
modestly, as in the simulations of Cogan et al., does not mean that a better-targeted
fiscal stimulus cannot be much more effective.
Nor is it the case that to be effective, the government spending must occur immediately. In the model considered here, an increase in government purchases during
a period in which the interest rate is zero, which is expected to last for the current
quarter only, so that there is no change in expected future government purchases,
has a multiplier of exactly 1. (This is because with no change in expected future
fiscal policy, there is no change in expected future output or inflation. This means no

29

change in expected real interest rates in future periods, and, as long as the temporary increase in Gt remains within the range which implies a current nominal interest
rate of zero, no change in the current real interest rate either. Hence the benchmark
analysis in section 2 applies.) It follows that when Eggertsson obtains a multiplier
of 2.3, 1.0 of this is due to the increase in government purchases during the current
quarter, while the other 1.3 is the effect of higher anticipated government purchases
in the future.
Hence even if there were no increase in government purchases in the current quarter at all, an expectation of higher government purchases in all future quarters prior
to date T would increase output immediately by an amount that is 1.3 times as large
as the promised future increase in the level of government purchases. Of course,
an even longer delay would attenuate the effects on output at the time of the announcement to an even greater extent. Still, New Keynesian models certainly do not
imply that a delayed fiscal stimulus will serve no purpose — as long as the eventual
increase in government spending is contingent on the continued existence of the financial disruption that justifies the emergency measures. The kind of stimulus package
that is ineffective, or even counter-productive, is one under which a large part of the
increased government purchases are expected to occur in a post-crisis environment
in which monetary policy is not expected to accommodate an increase in aggregate
demand.37

5

Government Purchases and Welfare

Thus far, I have simply considered the extent to which it is possible for an increase
in government spending to increase aggregate output and employment, taking it for
granted (as in much popular discussion) that an increase in output would be desirable, at least under circumstances where output would otherwise be below its trend
path. But it is reasonable to ask whether our models imply not only that increased
government purchases will increase GDP, but that they will increase economic welfare
as well. This does not follow trivially from the existence of a positive multiplier (or
even a multiplier greater than 1); one must consider the value of the use to which the
37

This is illustrated not only by the simulations of Cogan et al. (2010), but also by those of Erceg
and Lindé (2009) for the case of a “gradual increase in government purchases” that continue beyond
the point at which the zero bound ceases to bind.

30

resources consumed by the government would otherwise be put.

5.1

Fiscal Stabilization in the Neoclassical Model

In the case of the neoclassical model, it is evident that if government purchases are
of no intrinsic value (“paying people to dig holes and then fill them again”), the
optimal level of government purchases must be zero, for any government purchases
crowd out private expenditure and increase the disutility of working. But of course
some kinds of government spending do benefit the public; we can represent this by
making the utility of the representative household depend on Gt , the level of public
goods provision. The calculations above are unaffected by this hypothesis, as long as
we suppose that utility is additively separable in public goods (the tacit assumption
earlier).38 Let us suppose, then, that the utility of the representative household is
given by
∞
X
β t [u(Ct ) + g(Gt ) − v(Ht )],
(5.1)
t=0
0

00

where g > 0, g ≤ 0. (Of course, the value of public projects does not depend solely
on the amount that is spent on them. But it is an obvious principle of optimal fiscal
policy that the projects financed should be those that yield the greatest additional
utility per dollar spent; the function g(G) accordingly indicates the utility obtained
in this case.)
Given that for any path {Gt } of government purchases, the competitive equilibrium will maximize the utility of the representative household, it is easily seen that
the optimal path of government purchases will be the one that satisfies the first-order
condition
g 0 (Gt ) = u0 (Yt − Gt )
(5.2)
each period. This condition has a simple interpretation: government purchases should
be undertaken if and only if they have a marginal utility as high as that associated
with additional private expenditure — i.e., if they satisfy the conventional (microeconomic) cost-benefit criterion. One way of stating this criterion is to say that government purchases should be chosen so as to maximize u(Yt − Gt ) + g(Gt ), taking
as given the quantity of aggregate expenditure Yt . (I shall call this the criterion of
38

For extension of the neoclassical theory to the case in which public goods are at least partially
substitutes for private expenditure, see, e.g., Baxter and King (1993).

31

efficient composition of expenditure.) Plainly, this is not a criterion that requires
one, in choosing whether to undertake a particular public project, to think about the
consequences of government spending for aggregate demand.

5.2

Fiscal Stabilization When Monetary Policy is Optimal

There is greater scope for fiscal stabilization policy in the case that prices or wages
are sticky (or based on older information than that available to the government). If a
recession is a time when output is below the full-information flexible-wage/price level,
owing to stickiness of one sort or another, this implies a misallocation of resources,
and a potential justification for fiscal stimulus to “fill the output gap.” If an increase
in government purchases Gt is associated with an increase in output Yt that period
(abstracting, for the moment, from changes in the allocation of resources in any other
periods), utility will be increased if the relative size of the two changes satisfies the
condition
dY
+ (g 0 − u0 ) > 0.
(5.3)
(u0 − ṽ 0 )
dG
In the neoclassical case, equilibrium condition (1.6) implies that the first term in (5.3)
is necessarily zero, so that increased government purchases increase welfare only to
the extent that g 0 exceeds u0 . But if during a recession, u0 > ṽ 0 , the condition can be
satisfied even when u0 exceeds g 0 to some extent; this will be more likely to be true
the greater the extent to which u0 exceeds ṽ 0 (i.e., the more negative the output gap),
and the greater the multiplier effects of government purchases.
Yet it is important to remember that in New Keynesian models, both the size
of the output gap and the size of the multiplier will depend on monetary policy;
and while there might well be significant opportunities for fiscal stabilization policy
under the assumption that prices, wages or information are sticky and that monetary
policy is inept, the most obvious solution in such a case is to increase the accuracy
of monetary stabilization policy. Indeed, given that effective monetary stabilization
policy should prevent there from being large variations in the ratio of u0 to ṽ 0 (by
stabilizing the output gap), it is not obvious that the novel considerations mentioned
in the previous paragraph should be of great quantitative significance when monetary
policy is used optimally.
A case that is especially simple to analyze is that in which we suppose that there
exists a constant employment or output subsidy, of precisely the magnitude necessary
32

to offset the distortion owing to the market power of monopolistically competitive
producers.39 In this case, the factor µ > 1 in (1.11) is canceled, and the equilibrium
with (full-information) flexible prices and wages is efficient, despite the assumption
of monopolistic competition. Now suppose that prices are sticky (or set on the basis
of sticky information), while wages are flexible (or there is efficient contracting in the
labor market). A monetary policy that maintains price stability at all times achieves
the (full-information) flexible-price equilibrium allocation, regardless of the path of
government purchases, as discussed above in section 3.1.; hence this policy maximizes
expected utility, given the path of government purchases.40 Thus one may conclude
that, regardless of the path of government purchases, an optimal monetary policy
achieves the allocation of resources predicted by the neoclassical model.41 But then
the condition for optimality of the level of government purchases is again simply (5.2),
which is to say, the principle of efficient composition of expenditure.
It is not simply a matter of there being two instruments which can each, in principle, address the problem of an insufficient level of aggregate nominal expenditure,
given the existing level of prices or wages, so that it does not matter which instrument is used for the job. Rather, to the extent that the problem can be solved using
monetary policy, it is costless to do so, since monetary policy has no other aims to
fulfill; whereas, while government spending can also be used to ameliorate the problem, this has a cost, since it requires the diversion of real resources to alternative
uses. Whenever government purchases are used for aggregate demand management,
there is a tension between this goal and the choice of government purchases so as to
maintain an optimal composition of expenditure. Since there is no equally important
conflict in the case of the use of monetary policy for aggregate demand management,
monetary policy should be used to the extent possible; and this should largely allow
decisions about government purchases to be made from the standpoint of the optimal
composition of expenditure.
39

For example, it suffices that there be a subsidy equal to fraction τ of a firm’s payroll, where
τ = 1 − µ−1 > 0, and µ > 1 is the markup factor in (1.11).
40
For a more formal presentation of this argument, see Woodford (2003, chap. 6, sec. 3.1).
41
This result depends on an assumption that the zero lower bound on interest rates does not
prevent monetary policy from achieving its inflation target at some points in time. The importance
of this caveat is made clear in the following section.

33

5.3

Fiscal Stabilization at the Zero Lower Bound

There is, however, one case in which a much stronger argument can be made for the
usefulness of variations in government spending for stabilization purposes. This is
when a financial disturbance makes it impossible for monetary policy to maintain
price stability and a zero output gap at all times, as the required path for the policy
rate would violate the zero lower bound. Under such circumstances, substantial
distortions due to deflation and a large negative output gap can exist in equilibrium,
even with a central bank that maintains a strict zero inflation target whenever this
is consistent a non-negative interest rate. It can then be desirable to use government
purchases to “fill the output gap,” at least partially, even at the price of distorting
to some extent the composition of expenditure in the economy.
As an example, let us consider the welfare effects of fiscal stimulus in the twostate example of section 4.1. Suppose that the central bank maintains a strict zero
inflation target whenever this is possible, and a nominal interest rate of zero whenever
deflation is unavoidable;42 and let us consider only fiscal policies under which Gt is
equal to some constant GL for all t < T , and equal to Ḡ for all t ≥ T, where Ḡ is
the optimal level of government purchases under “normal” conditions, that is, the
value that satisfies (5.2) when Yt = Ȳ . The analysis is simplified if we again assume
the existence of a subsidy such that the flexible-price equilibrium allocation would
be optimal. In this case, the steady state with Yt = Ȳ and Gt = Ḡ represents an
optimal allocation of resources, and the assumed monetary policy would be optimal
in the event that credit spreads were to remain always modest in size, so that the
zero bound were never a binding constraint. I wish to consider the welfare effects of
increasing GL above the normal level Ḡ, and the way in which the optimal choice of
GL depends on the size and expected duration of the financial disturbance.
One can show that a quadratic approximation to the expected value of (5.1)43
varies inversely with
E0

∞
X

h
i
β t π 2t + λy (Ŷt − ΓĜt )2 + λg Ĝ2t ,

(5.4)

t=0
42

This corresponds to a limiting case of the policy considered in section 4.1, in which φπ is made
unboundedly large.
43
See Woodford (2003, chap. 6, sec. 2) for the derivation.

34

where

·

¸
ηg
+ 1 − Γ Γ λy > 0,
λg ≡
ηu

κ
λy ≡ > 0,
θ

and η g ≥ 0 is (the negative of) the elasticity of g 0 with respect to G, a measure of the
degree to which there are diminishing returns to additional government expenditure.
Here the final two terms inside the square brackets represent a quadratic approximation to u(Yt − Gt ) + g(Gt ) − ṽ(Yt ), which would be the period contribution to utility
if the prices of all goods were the same, as would occur with flexible prices or in
an environment with complete price stability; the additional π 2t term represents the
additional welfare loss owing to an inefficient composition of the economy’s aggregate
product as a result of price dispersion.
If the zero bound were never a binding constraint on monetary policy, the only
constraint on feasible paths for the inflation rate and the output gap Ŷt −ΓĜt would be
(3.10), regardless of the path of {Ĝt }; hence optimal monetary policy would maintain
a zero inflation rate and output gap at all times, reducing each of the first two terms
inside the square brackets in (5.4) to their minimum possible values each period. The
optimal path of government purchases would then be chosen simply to minimize the
remaining term, by setting Ĝt = 0 each period. (This would achieve an optimal
composition of expenditure, as it would result in Yt = Ȳ , Gt = Ḡ each period.)
In the case considered here, however, the zero lower bound on interest rates precludes this first-best outcome. Under a policy in the family proposed above, the
equilibrium is of the kind characterized in section 4.1. In any equilibrium of this
kind, the objective (5.4) takes the value
i
1 h 2
π L + λy (ŶL − ΓĜL )2 + λg Ĝ2L .
(5.5)
1 − βµ
The optimal policy within this family is therefore obtained by minimizing (5.5) with
respect to ĜL , taking into account the dependence of (π L , ŶL ) on ĜL implied by (4.4)
and (4.9). The first-order conditions for the minimization of this quadratic objective
subject to the two linear constraints can be uniquely solved for a linear solution,
ĜL = −
where

ξ(ϑG − Γ)ϑr
rL > 0,
ξ(ϑG − Γ)2 + λg

µ
ξ≡

κ
1 − βµ
35

¶2
+ λy > 0.

(5.6)

4.5
Zero Gap
Optimal (A)
Optimal (B)

4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

µ

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 4: The optimal value of ĜL /|rL |, for alternative values of µ, under two different
assumptions about the size of η g . (Case A: η g = 0. Case B: η g = 4η u .) The solid line
shows the value of ĜL /|rL | required to maintain a zero output gap.
(This solution for the optimal value of ĜL is necessarily positive, because ϑG > Γ and
rL < 0.)
Figure 4 plots the optimal value of ĜL /|rL | defined by (5.6), for alternative values
of µ, assuming the values for the model parameters β, κ, σ, Γ and θ proposed by
Eggertsson (2009).44 For a given financial disturbance parameterized by (rL , µ), the
optimal size of the increase in government purchases can be determined from the
figure by observing the optimal ratio for that value of µ, and then multiplying by
the value of |rL |. Thus a value of 2 on the vertical axis means that if rL is equal to
-4 percent per annum, it would be optimal to increase government purchases by an
amount equal to 8 percent of GDP.
The optimal value is plotted under two different assumptions about the degree of
44

In addition to the parameter values reported in footnote 29 above, it is now also assumed that
θ = 12.77.

36

diminishing returns to additional government expenditure. In case A, it is assumed
that utility is linear in government purchases (η g = 0); this provides an upper bound
for the degree to which it can be cost-effective to increase government purchases. In
case B, it is instead assumed that η g = 4η u ; this corresponds to the case in which the
marginal utility of government purchases decreases at the same rate (per percentage
point increase in spending) as the marginal utility of private purchases, and private
expenditure is 4 times as large as government purchases in the steady state. In this
case, because of the diminishing returns to additional government purchases, the
optimal increase in government spending is less for any given financial disturbance.
For purposes of comparison, the solid line in Figure 4 also plots the level of government
purchases that would be required to fully eliminate the output gap (i.e., keep output
at the flexible-price equilibrium level) and prevent any decline in inflation as a result
of the financial disturbance. (This line also indicates the critical level of government
purchases at which the zero lower bound ceases to bind, given the central bank’s
assumed policy.)
The figure shows that it is optimal to use discretionary (state-dependent) government purchases to partially offset the decline in output and inflation that would
otherwise occur as a result of the financial disturbance. It should be noted, however, that it is not optimal to fully stabilize inflation and the output gap, despite
the feasibility of doing so, because of the inefficient composition of expenditure that
this would involve. In the case that the financial disturbance is not too persistent
(µ = 0.5 or less), the optimal increase in government purchases is only a small fraction of the increase that would be required to eliminate the output gap, if we assume
diminishing returns to additional public expenditure similar to those that exist for
private expenditure. (The optimal fiscal stimulus would be even smaller if one were
to assume even more sharply diminishing returns to public expenditure, or if one were
to take into account the distortions involved in raising government revenues.) At the
same time, the optimal size of fiscal stimulus can be quite substantial, and a large
fraction of the size required for full stabilization of both inflation and the output gap,
in the case that µ is large. In this case — when there is believed to be a substantial
probability that the financial disruption will persist for years, and when a serious
depression could result in the absence of fiscal stimulus — welfare is maximized by
an aggressive increase in government purchases, of nearly the size required to fully
stabilize inflation and the output gap.
37

6

Consequences of Distortionary Taxation

The analyses above have for simplicity assumed lump-sum taxation. This is clearly
unrealistic, but because there is no necessary connection between a path of government purchases and the path of distorting taxes (of various types) used to finance it,
a full analysis of the complications raised by taking into account tax distortions is
not possible here. If increased government purchases are financed by an increase in
a proportional tax on wage income or on consumption purchases (for example), the
increased tax wedge will increase the real marginal cost of supplying a given level of
output (assuming flexible wages). In a neoclassical model (where real marginal cost
can never differ from 1 in equilibrium), the increased tax distortion will lower equilibrium output, and may even negate the increase in equilibrium output that would
occur with lump-sum taxation for the reason explained in section 1.
For example, in the case of financing entirely through a proportional tax τ t on
sales revenues, condition (1.6) becomes instead
(1 − τ t )u0 (Yt − Gt ) = ṽ 0 (Yt ),

(6.1)

from which it follows that Yt is a decreasing function of τ t , for a given level of Gt . If
u(C) = log C and a balanced budget is maintained each period (so that τ t Yt = Gt ),
equation (6.1) reduces to
Yt−1 = ṽ 0 (Yt ),
and it is easily seen that the solution for Yt is independent of Gt (so that the multiplier
is zero). If the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of private expenditure is even
smaller, the multiplier will even be negative. Thus it might seem a serious omission
to discuss the plausibility of a substantial government expenditure multiplier without
taking into account the effects of distorting taxes.
But here again, the stickiness of prices and/or wages, and the nature of the assumed monetary policy response, makes an important difference. In the benchmark
case considered in section 2, where monetary policy is assumed to maintain a constant
path for the real interest rate, taking account of tax distortions would not change the
conclusion that the government expenditure multiplier is equal to 1, as long as the
change in fiscal policy is assumed not to change the long run level of tax distortions
(which would matter for the determination of Ȳ and hence of C̄). If a temporary
increase in government purchases requires a corresponding temporary increase in the
38

tax rate applied to wage income, the increase in real marginal cost will imply that
the monetary policy required to keep the real interest rate constant will be even more
inflationary than in the case of lump-sum taxation.
For example, in the case of Calvo pricing, and again assuming a proportional sales
tax and a balanced budget each period as in the above example, inflation will again be
determined by (3.10), where now Γ will be the balanced-budget neoclassical multiplier
implied by (6.1). Under the constant-real-interest-rate policy, the multiplier will still
equal 1, so that Ŷt = Ĝt each period; but since the tax distortions reduce the size of
Γ (for given preferences, technology, and steady-state level of government purchases),
the implied increase in Ŷt −ΓĜt will be greater than in the case of lump-sum taxation,
and so the implied increase in inflation will be greater. (The multipliers implied by
the hypothesis of a strict inflation target, or by monetary policy following a Taylor
rule, will instead be lower in the case of the distorting tax, just as in the neoclassical
model.)
In the case of an increase in government purchases while monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound, the multiplier would actually be increased if we
assume that the increased government purchases are financed by a balanced-budget
increase in the tax rate on wage income. The reason is that the increase in the tax
wedge makes the policy even more inflationary, for the reason just explained. But
an increase in expected inflation during the period while the nominal interest rate is
constrained to equal zero will mean that real interest rates fall even more than in the
analysis in section 4, resulting in an even greater increase in output.45
Thus the main conclusions of the simple analysis above have not been exaggerated
by abstracting from the effects of tax distortions. Even if the increase in government
purchases must be financed entirely by an increase in a wage income tax, it remains
the case that sticky prices and/or wages make multipliers greater than or equal to
one possible; that a monetary policy that maintains the real interest rate constant
is sufficient to ensure a multiplier of one; and that a multiplier greater than one
(under certain circumstances, substantially greater) should be expected in the case
of an increase in government purchases while monetary policy is constrained by the
zero lower bound — though in the last case, an additional proviso is now required,
that the increase in the wage income tax must also occur while interest rates remain
45

See Eggertsson (2009) for a detailed analysis of the expansionary effects of certain kinds of tax
increases when monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound.

39

at zero. Taking account of tax distortions also further underlines the importance of
the expected duration of “fiscal stimulus” in response to an economic crisis, already
emphasized in the analysis above. To the extent that tax distortions (such as increased
tax on wage income) are expected to continue to be higher even after the zero lower
bound ceases to be a binding constraint, then — assuming that monetary policy is
subsequently determined by a strict inflation target or by a Taylor rule, as above —
this fact will further reduce expected output after credit spreads normalize, further
increase the expected marginal utility of income at that time, and so give households
a motive to save more during the crisis. Policy expectations of this kind can therefore
be highly counter-productive, as Drautzburg and Uhlig (2010) find in the context of
a more complex, empirical New Keynesian model.46

7

Conclusion

We may summarize our conclusions as follows. Under circumstances like those of
a Great Depression — that is, when a disturbance to the financial sector results in
insufficient aggregate demand even with the central bank’s policy rate at the lower
bound of zero, and when there is feared to be a substantial probability of the constraint continuing to bind for years to come — standard models of the kind widely
used in analyses of monetary stabilization policy imply that the government expenditure multiplier should be larger than one, and may be well above one. Moreover,
in the case of the kind of (purely forward-looking) monetary policy assumed in the
analysis above, we have found that not only is there a large effect on output of an
increase in government expenditure under Depression-like circumstances, but up to
a certain point an increase in government purchases will increase welfare as well; in
the case of a sufficiently persistent disturbance (the case in which the zero bound
can lead to a serious output collapse), the optimal increase in government purchases
can be nearly as large as the increase that would be required to completely eliminate
the “output gap,” i.e., to raise output to its flexible-price equilibrium level (which
will itself be higher due to the temporary increase in government purchases). Hence
a case can be made for quite an aggressive increase in government purchases under
such circumstances, even taking account of the increased tax distortions required in
46

See also the discussion of the consequences of delayed financing through labor income taxation
in Erceg and Lindé (2009).

40

order to finance the increase in government purchases.
Nonetheless, under less extreme circumstances, the case for using variations in
government purchases for stabilization purposes is much weaker. Even when the
zero lower bound is a binding constraint, if the disturbance that causes it to bind
is not expected to be too persistent, then even though the multiplier for increased
purchases while the constraint still binds will be at least slightly greater than one, it
need not be much greater than one; and the optimal increase in government purchases
is probably only a small fraction of what would be required to “fill the output gap.”
When monetary policy is not constrained by the zero lower bound, there is a good case
for leaving output-gap stabilization largely to monetary policy, and basing decisions
about government purchases primarily, if not entirely, on the principle of efficient
composition of aggregate expenditure.
And finally, even when the zero lower bound is a temporarily binding constraint
on monetary policy, the case just made for fiscal stimulus while the constraint binds
applies only to the case in which the increased government purchases will be terminated as soon as the constraint ceases to bind, and in which the tax increases required
to finance them also occur while the constraint binds. Either an increase in government purchases that continues after monetary policy ceases to be constrained, or tax
increases thereafter that may be required to pay off debt issued during the crisis, is
likely — to the extent such a change in future fiscal policy is correctly forecasted, and
intertemporal expenditure decisions are forward-looking — to significantly reduce the
stimulative effects of increased government purchases during the crisis, and a fortiori
to reduce the net welfare gains from the policy. Hence while a case for aggressive fiscal
stimulus can be made under certain circumstances, such a policy must be designed
with care if it is to have the desired effect. And, as is now widely understood in the
context of monetary stabilization policy, careful signalling about the likely direction
of future policy is likely to be as important as current actions.

41

References
[1] Aiyagari, S. Rao, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum, “The Output, Employment and Interest Rate Effects of Government Consumption,” Journal of Monetary Economics 30: 73-86 (1992).
[2] Almunia, Miguel, Agustı́n Bénétrix, Barry Eichengreen, Kevin H. O’Rourke,
and Gisela Rua, “From Great Depression to Great Credit Crisis: Similarities,
Differences and Lessons,” Economic Policy 25: 219-265 (2010).
[3] Barro, Robert J., “The Neoclassical Approach to Fiscal Policy,” in R.J. Barro,
ed., Modern Business Cycle Theory, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1989.
[4] Barro, Robert J., and Robert G. King, “Time-Separable Preferences and
Intertemporal-Substitution Models of Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 99: 817-839 (1984).
[5] Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King, “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium,”
American Economic Review 83: 315-334 (1993).
[6] Bilbiie, Florin O., “Non-Separable Preferences and Frisch Labor Supply: One
Solution to a Fiscal Policy Puzzle,” unpublished, HEC Paris, September 2009.
[7] Braun, R. Anton, and Yuichiro Waki, “On the Size of the Fiscal Multiplier
When the Nominal Interest Rate is Zero,” unpublished, University of Tokyo,
March 2010.
[8] Christiano, Lawrence J., “The Zero Bound, Zero Inflation Targeting, and Output
Collapse,” unpublished, Northwestern University, March 2004.
[9] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “When Is the
Government Spending Multiplier Large?” NBER Working Paper no. 15394,
October 2009.
[10] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115: 147-180 (2000).
42

[11] Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland, “New Keynesian Versus Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34: 281-295 (2010).
[12] Corsetti, Giancarlo, André Meier, and Gernot J. Müller, “Fiscal Stimulus with
Spending Reversals,” CEPR Discussion Paper no. 7302, May 2009.
[13] Cúrdia, Vasco, and Michael Woodford, “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary
Policy,” unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2009.
[14] Denes, Matthew, and Gauti B. Eggertsson, “A Bayesian Approach to Estimating
Tax and Spending Multipliers,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report
no. 403, November 2009.
[15] Drautzburg, Thorsten, and Harald Uhlig, “Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary
Taxation,” unpublished, University of Chicago, January 2010.
[16] Eggertsson, Gauti B., “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 402, November 2009.
[17] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest
Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2003:1, pp. 139-211.
[18] Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin, “Optimal
Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics 46: 281-313 (2000).
[19] Erceg, Christopher J., and Jesper Lindé, “Is There a Fiscal Free Lunch in a
Liquidity Trap?” unpublished, Federal Reserve Board, April 2009.
[20] Gordon, Robert J., and Robert Krenn, “The End of the Great Depression 193941: VAR Insight on Policy Contributions and Fiscal Multipliers,” unpublished,
Northwestern University, March 2010.
[21] Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money, New York: Macmillan, 1936.

43

[22] Hall, Robert E., “By How Much Does GDP Rise if the Government Buys More
Output?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009:2, pp. 183-249.
[23] Monacelli, Tommaso, and Roberto Perotti, “Fiscal Policy, Wealth Effects, and
Markups,” unpublished, Università Bocconi, February 2010.
[24] Nekarda, Christopher J., and Valerie A. Ramey, “The Cyclical Behavior of the
Price-Cost Markup,” unpublished, Federal Reserve Board, March 2010.
[25] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, “Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity,” Journal of Political Economy
100: 1153-1207 (1992).
[26] Taylor, John B., “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39: 195-214 (1993).
[27] Taylor, John B., “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in J.B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1999.
[28] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

44

