NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WOMEN'S EDUCATION AND FAMILY BEHAVIOR:
TRENDS IN MARRIAGE, DIVORCE AND FERTILITY
Adam Isen
Betsey Stevenson
Working Paper 15725
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15725

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

The authors would like to thank Stephanie Coontz, Paula England, Jerry Jacobs, Enrico Moretti, Sam
Preston, Robert Pollak, Michele Tertilt, and Justin Wolfers for useful discussions and seminar participants
at Washington University, St. Louis and NBER’s Topics in Demography and the Economy conference.
Betsey Stevenson would like to thank Sloan for support through a Work-Family Early Career Development
Grant and the National Institutes of Health-National Institute on Aging (grant P30 AG12836), the
Boettner Center for Pensions and Retirement Security at the University of Pennsylvania, and National
Institutes of Health–National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Population Research
Infrastructure Program (grant R24 HD-044964) at the University of Pennsylvania for funding. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Adam Isen and Betsey Stevenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Women's Education and Family Behavior: Trends in Marriage, Divorce and Fertility
Adam Isen and Betsey Stevenson
NBER Working Paper No. 15725
February 2010
JEL No. I20,J1,J11,J12,J13,J15,J16
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how marital and fertility patterns have changed along racial and educational lines
for men and women. Historically, women with more education have been the least likely to marry
and have children, but this marriage gap has eroded as the returns to marriage have changed. Marriage
and remarriage rates have risen for women with a college degree relative to women with fewer years
of education. However, the patterns of, and reasons for, marriage have changed. College educated
women marry later, have fewer children, are less likely to view marriage as “financial security”, are
happier in their marriages and with their family life, and are not only the least likely to divorce, but
have had the biggest decrease in divorce since the 1970s compared to women without a college degree.
In contrast, there have been fewer changes in marital patterns by education for men.

Adam Isen
University of Pennsylvania
Steinberg-Dietrich Hall #1400
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
isen@wharton.upenn.edu
Betsey Stevenson
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1454 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
betseys@wharton.upenn.edu

I.

Introduction
The family is a constantly changing institution. In the last half century, marriage and

fertility rates have fallen, divorce rates have risen (and subsequently fallen), and the character of
marriage has changed. These developments have occurred in the wake of widespread social,
legal, and technological changes that have impacted the incentives for individuals to form and
invest in marriages and children. These changes have not impacted all families equally, and in
this article, we investigate how family behavior has changed for men and women of different
educational backgrounds.
To understand how these changes have impacted the incentives for people to form
families, it is useful to start by understanding the gains from forming a family. Gary Becker’s
1981 Treatise on the Family proposed an economic theory of families based on “production
complementarities,” in which husband and wife specialize in the market and domestic spheres,
respectively, and hence, are more productive together than apart.

Becker emphasized that

families are production units that produce both goods in the house (like clean laundry and wellcared for children) and in the marketplace.

By having one person specialize in domestic

responsibilities (most often a wife as homemaker), while the other supports the spouse and
children financially (typically a husband as breadwinner), couples are more efficient than singles.
This view of the family as a source of production efficiencies has become less relevant
over time.

The twentieth century brought the development of labor and skill saving

technological progress in the home.2 This technological change simplified clothes washing and
drying, cooking (through the development of pre-processed foods and microwaves),
dishwashing, and housecleaning. Technological progress also encouraged the shift from home
production to purchasing items in the market through the development of cheaper mass-produced
items like ready-made clothes. These changes have impacted home production through three
channels: by making home production more efficient; by reducing the returns to specialized
domestic skills as these technologies substitute capital for skilled labor; and by making marketproduced goods a closer substitute for home-produced goods, which in turn makes market work
a closer substitute for domestic work. While some of the effect of these changes was likely an
increase in the amount and/or quality of home produced goods and services (such as investing
2

For an overview of the research on these changes see Stevenson and Wolfers (2007).

1

more in the care of children), overall time spent in home production fell. Moreover, there was a
shift in home production away from specialists toward non-specialists. Between 1965 and 2003,
home production by women fell by 12 hours a week on average, while home production by men
rose by 4.5 hours (Aguiar and Hurst 2007). In the wake of these changes, the production
efficiencies realized by families have been eroded.
During this period the costs of having such a specialist also rose. Women’s increased
control over fertility (allowing them to better time and plan pregnancies), their improved access
to education, and a decline in labor market discrimination all led to higher market wages for
women (Goldin and Katz 2002; Blau and Kahn 1997, 2000). These higher wages represent a
greater opportunity cost for a couple contemplating a stay-at-home spouse. Further, changes in
divorce law have made specialization in the home riskier (Stevenson 2007).
The declining value of production efficiencies from marriage decreases the value of
marriage and, if this is the only relevant margin along which the value of family life is changing,
it should lead to a decline in marriage rates overall. Indeed, Greenwood and Guner (2008)
develop a model in which technological change in household production is used to explain the
fall in marriage rates since World War II. However, the recent technological changes should not
impact all women equally.

The Beckerian model of the family suggests that those best

positioned to benefit from household specialization will gain the most from marriage and,
therefore, be the most likely to marry. When many of the benefits of marriage arise from the
greater efficiency achieved through household specialization women who are uninterested in, or
not well-suited for, specializing in home production will have fewer gains from marriage. Thus,
these women will be less likely to find it in their interest to marry. This prediction is consistent
with an empirical fact: college-educated women have historically been the least likely group of
women to marry. The declining value of household specialization affects these women less, as
they were less likely to enjoy the benefits in the past.
While the past several decades have witnessed a decline in marriage rates, it has been
small relative to the large decline in specialized homemakers. In 1970, among women with
children under the age of 5, the majority, 70%, were out of the labor force, presumably full-time
homemakers. In the ensuing decades, labor market participation became the norm for mothers
with young children and only 36% were out of the labor force in 2007. In contrast, the decline in

2

marriage was less dramatic: in 1970 94% of women had married by age 40, declining to 84% by
2007.3
One explanation for why marriage rates have not fallen further is that other dimensions of
family life have become relatively more important and have also changed in absolute terms.
Families have experienced an increase in leisure and consumption that has likely increased the
benefits of shared public goods (Aguiar and Hurst 2007). Housing and health insurance costs,
both important family public goods, have increased (Newhouse 1992; Glaeser, Gyourko and
Saks 2005). Moreover, there may be consumption and leisure complementarities that become
more valuable as the time and money available to pursue consumption and leisure has risen.
These changes in family life offer increased benefits from marriage, partly offsetting some of the
decrease in the returns to specialization. Such changes in the returns to married life—from
production efficiencies to consumption complementarities—should impact not only the
probability that matches form, but the type of matches that form.
A shift from production-based marriage to consumption-based marriage should make
marriage more appealing to those with more disposable income relative to those with less. Since
personal and household income within a marriage is a bargained outcome reflecting the skills of
each spouse and the preferences for home production and leisure, one would prefer to measure
potential earnings, rather than actual earnings (Pollak 2005). A reasonable proxy for potential
earnings is education and, as such, one would similarly predict that marriage should become
more appealing to those with more education relative to those with less education among both
men and women. In addition, there is an important gender shift occurring. While woman with
more education are less likely to find the old specialization model of marriage useful, a modern
marriage based on consumption complementarities is likely more enticing for educated women
as the new model of marriage thrives when households have the time and resources to enjoy their
lives. In contrast, less educated women have less to gain through household specialization in
marriage today than in the past.
In addition to differences in the probability of ever marrying, there are differences by
education in the optimal timing of first marriage. As Becker (1981) argued, those who plan to be
specialist homemakers have an incentive to enter marriage early to begin to invest in their skills
3

Sharper decreases in marriage rates are seen when one looks at younger women due to the rising age of first
marriage. In 1970, 84% of 25 year olds had married compared to 42% of 25 year olds in 2007.

3

as a homemaker and reap the returns to specialization. Among women who do not plan to be
household specialists, this incentive is not present. Indeed, it is likely that these women face an
opposite incentive, to invest in their career before finding a spouse and children.
The hypothesis that the benefits of marriage is shifting from production efficiencies to
consumption complementarities has a number of testable implications. The first implication is
that marriage should become more common among those with more disposable income and/or
more leisure time, relative to those with less. The second is that in a consumption-based model
of marriage people will be more likely to marry someone with similar preferences, which will
likely manifest itself as an increase in positive assortative mating along dimensions such as age,
educational background, occupation, as well as consumption, and leisure preferences. The third
is that, among couples without kids, their hours of work should become increasingly similar as
the value of an hour of leisure is greater when it is coordinated with one’s spouse. Childcare
makes this coordination more complicated for those with children.

Finally, similar (albeit

oppositely signed) patterns should be seen for divorce, with divorce being less common among
those who work similar hours, have more shared interests, and more disposable income (with
which to enjoy consumption complementarities).
This paper focuses on the two of these implications by carefully documenting the
changes over recent decades in family formation, dissolution, and expansion by education. 4 We
show that while college-educated women used to be the least likely to marry, today they are
about as likely as those without a college degree to marry. There are large racial differences in
this trend: college-educated white women remain less likely to marry than those with less
education, while college-educated non-white women are the most likely to marry among nonwhites. This difference is due to the larger shift away from marriage among blacks, particularly
among those with less education. College-educated whites and blacks have also become less
likely to marry in recent decades; however, the downward shift has been less than that
experienced by women with less education.

Women of all educational backgrounds have

delayed marriage, although the delay has been longer among the more highly educated.

4

With regards to the second implication, see Schwartz and Mare (2005), who find an increase in educational
assortative mating since 1960. See also Sweeney and Cancian (2004) documenting an increase in earnings
homogamy.

4

Turning to the divorce rate, we show that it initially rose for all groups but has, in recent
decades, dropped off more sharply among college graduates. Remarriage rates have fallen for
everyone, and while the drop has been larger for those with less education, college educated
white women are still less likely to remarry than those with less education. Lastly, while trends
in the average number of children ever born have been similar across groups, the delay in
fertility is concentrated almost exclusively among women who have attended college.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II examines trends from the 1950s
through to 2007 in the timing and propensity to enter marriage by education. The patterns of
marriage and the differences by education differ significantly by race, and thus, we will examine
white and black women separately and will compare the patterns for both to the experiences of
men. Section III turns to marital stability, examining divorce and remarriage rates for women
and men, separately by race and education, while Section IV focuses on changes in fertility.
Section V explores subjective well-being data and finds that there are important differences in
marital and family happiness by education. Section VI concludes with a discussion of the
interpretation of the results, noting that many of the changes over time in family behavior by
women’s educational attainment may simply reflect the shift of many women into higher
educational categories.

II.

Marriage Patterns
In Figure 1 we examine the proportion of women who have ever married, by age, among

those with and without a college degree. Examining the most recent large-scale data—the 2007
American Community Survey—we see in the first panel of Figure 1 that among white women,
those with a college-degree are less likely to have ever married and that this holds at every age.
A very different pattern is seen for black women in the second panel, for whom marriage rates
are highest for those with the most education after the early 20s. While previous research
(Goldstein and Kenney 2001) had forecasted a demographic shift in marriage with collegeeducated women more likely to marry today than non-college graduates, the gap has not closed

5

as fast as predicted and the higher rates of marriage for college-educated women born in 19501965 that they forecasted had not occurred by the time these women were 40 years old.5
At the turn of the last century, women attended college at rates similar to that of men, yet
few of these women ever married (Goldin, Katz and Kuziemko, 2006). Thirty percent of collegeeducated women born in the last 20 years of the 19th century remained unmarried at age 50, a
rate four times that of women without a college degree (Goldin, 2004). While the marriage gap
has clearly closed, the data in Figure 1 point to the fact that for no generation of women have we
witnessed a cross-over in which college-educated white women are marrying at higher rates
compared to white women with less education. Among 46-to-60-year-old white women there is
a fairly stable gap in which college-educated women are around 3 percentage points less likely to
have married compared to women with less education. The stability of this gap among older
women illustrates that the lower likelihood of college-educated women ever-marrying persisted
for some time, even as the number of women completing college was rising.
Among older women, the differences in ever-married rates are indicative of changing
behavior across cohorts. Ever-married rates were falling slightly for all women in the birth
cohorts from 1937 to 1961, while education was increasing rapidly.6 Differences in the gap in
marriage rates by education at younger ages reflect both changing behavior across cohorts and
differences in the life-cycle pattern of marriage by educational attainment.
Examining life-cycle patterns of marriage by cohort reveals that the “marriage gap”
between college-educated women and their less-educated counterparts has been shrinking for
many generations. Figure 2 uses the decennial censuses of population from 1950 through to
2000 to show the evolution over time in both the marriage gap and the timing of first marriage by
education for white women. For each decade, the percent of white women who have evermarried is shown at each age for those with a high school degree or less and separately for those
who attended some college, but did not receive a four-year college degree, and college graduates.
In each decade white female college graduates are clearly less likely to ever marry compared to
women with no or some college. The graphs show that between 1950 and 2000 marital behavior

5

Martin (2004a)(2004), using more recent data also finds that the shift is taking longer than earlier forecasts had
suggested but predicts that the crossover may occur for women born after 1965.
6
Goldin (2006) notes that the increase in women’s college attendance and completion relative to men began with
the birth cohorts of the late 1940s and that this is also the cohort for whom an inflection point in the growth in
female enrollment in graduate programs is seen.

6

has changed for all groups both in terms of the timing of marriage in the life cycle and in the
probability of ever marrying.
Women with a college degree increasingly delayed marriage to older ages both earlier,
and to a greater extent, than women with either a high school degree or some college. The age at
first marriage of female college graduates began to rise with those graduating in the late 1960s
(Goldin, 2004). In 1970, 74% of 25 year old college graduates had ever-married; this compares
to 53%, 43%, and 36% in 1980, 1990, and 2007 respectively. In contrast, the percent of 25 year
old high school graduates who had ever-married was 90%, 83%, 73%, and 52% in 1970, 1980,
1990, and 2007 respectively. Indeed, in the last 17 years there has been a larger decrease in
marriage among women in their early 20s with no college compared with previous decades,
while the largest shift away from early marriage among college-educated women occurred
between 1970 and 1980.7 The pattern among women with some college has been similar to that
of those with no college, although the shift toward later marriage happened a decade earlier for
these women.
Overall, the increased delay in marriage is consistent with the changing incentives
affecting individuals. Goldin and Katz (2002) demonstrate that the availability of the birth
control pill enabled later marriages and greater labor force participation among college-educated
women.

The technological advance of the birth control pill was complemented by other

technological changes that lowered the relative cost of maintaining a household as a single
(Greenwood and Guner 2008) and reduced the value of specialization in the home. More recent
increases in marital postponement among college-educated women likely reflect increasing
returns to education and experience, both of which increase the incentives to postpone potential
career disruptions.

Finally, a shift toward spousal matching on consumption and leisure

preferences may lead to greater heterogeneity in matching and thus an increased benefit of time
spent searching.
The large gaps in marriage rates by education seen among women in their 20s dissipate
by their 30s. To get a better understanding of marital outcomes it is useful to look at evermarried rates for women at older ages; as such, we turn to the end data points in Figure 2, when

7

Goldin 2006 finds similar movement in those years for college educated women using the CPS Marital and
Fertility Supplements.

7

the women are age 50. For white women born in 1900, 76% of those who were college-educated
women had ever-married by age 50.8 In contrast, 90% of high school graduates in this cohort
had married by age 50.9 Marriage rates for college-educated women grew rapidly for women
born between 1900 and 1930 and by the 1980 Census, 91% of college-educated 50-year old
women had married. During this period, marriage rates were also growing for women in this
cohort with less education and ever-married rates hit 97% for those with a high school degree or
less. Thus, between the 1950 and 1980 Censuses, the closing of the educational marriage gap for
white women was driven by large increases in the marriage rates of college-educated women,
much of which occurred at older ages.10
Since 1980, there has been little change in the likelihood that college graduates ultimately
marry. Between 1980 and 2007 the percent ever-married fell by 4 and 2 percentage points
among 40 and 50 year old college graduates, respectively. The fall in marriage among high
school graduates was somewhat greater, with ever-married rates falling by 8 and 4 percentage
points among 40 and 50 year olds, respectively. The ever-married rates of those with some
college are similar to high school graduates. In sum, those with less education had larger relative
declines in marriage between 1980 and 2007 and it is this relatively larger decline in marriage
rates among those with less education that led to further decreases in the educational marriage
gap since 1980.
Two facts seen in Figure 2 are worth noting: among white women, while marriage rates
have fallen overall in recent decades, they are still similar to that seen in the 1950s. Indeed,
among those with a high school degree, by age 40, a greater percentage had entered into
marriage in 2007 than had done so in 1950. A similar increase was also seen among women
with some college and, as has already been noted, a large increase in marriage rates has occurred
among women with a college degree. Marriage rates immediately following World War II were
at a historic high, leading to historically high ever-married rates for women who were of
marrying age during this period, and thus, high ever-married rates in the 1960 and 1970

8

This comes from the 1950 census. By examining women at age 50 in each of the Censuses from 1950 to 2000, we
are presenting ever-married rates (by age 50) for the 1900-1950 birth cohorts.
9
As previously noted, women born two decades before were even less likely to marry and the gap between collegeeducated women and those without a college degree shrunk in the decades before the turn of the 20th century (Goldin
1997).
10
These facts are similar to those presented in Goldin (1997) and Goldin (2004).

8

Censuses (Stevenson and Wolfers 2007). The second fact is that between 1950 and 1980 the
percent ever-married plateaued, and did so at a relatively early age. In contrast, between 1990
and 2007 ever-married rates continue to increase among women over the age of 40. While some
of the upward age slope at older ages seen in Figure 2 reflects the decline in marriage among
more recent cohorts, marriage rates among older adults have risen in recent decades. For
example, 93% of 40 year old white women had married in 1990 and this had risen to 94% by age
50 in 2000 for this cohort. Thus, in the decade after age 40, 15% of those who had never married
did so.
As previously discussed, the age of first marriage has risen for all white women, but
markedly more for those with a college degree. In 2000, by age 22, 50% of white women with
less than a high school degree had married. In comparison, the 50% threshold was crossed at age
23, 24, and 27 for those with a high school degree, some college, and a college-degree,
respectively. While some education may occur later, an examination of marital history data
suggests that these patterns hold even when education is measured at a later point in life.11
While white women with a college education are increasingly postponing marriage, as
previously noted, they have also increased their likelihood of ever marrying. In contrast, women
with less education are postponing marriage, albeit to a lesser extent, and, in recent decades, they
have also become somewhat less likely to ever marry. What is less known is how much of this
shift reflects the changes in the composition of women in each of the educational categories, a
change in how educational attainment may impact the desire or value of marriage for these
women, or a change in how educational attainment affects the attractiveness of women to men in
the marriage market. We will return to these issues in section VI.
A different picture emerges when we examine marital trends among black women by
education. Figure 3 shows, by education, the percent of black women who have married by each
age across the decades.12 The most striking fact is the large declines in marriage rates among
black women of all educational backgrounds. While the ever-married rates of 40 year old white
11

Since most people who will complete college have done so by their late 20s, we examine 28-30 year old women
in the 2004 SIPP, an age group that allows the most comparability with those in the 2000 Census. For these women,
the age at which 50% had entered a first marriage was 23, 23, 24, and 26 for women with less than high school, high
school, some college, and college, respectively.
12
The panel begins in 1960 for blacks because there are too few African-Americans with education beyond high
school in 1950 to generate meaningful estimates. In the 1950 Census only 2% of 18 to 50 year old black women had
any education beyond high school; by 1960, the proportion had tripled to 6%.

9

female college graduates fell only 4 percentage points between 1980 and 2007, the fall among
black female college graduates was 19 percentage points. Among high school graduates the
ever-married rates of black women fell by 25 percentage points, compared to a fall of 8
percentage points among whites. Moreover, black women, who have not married by age 40,
have a smaller probability of marrying in the ensuing decade compared to white women in their
cohort. In 1990, 82% of black women had married by age 40. Ten years later, we see that 83%
of 50 year old black women have married—a closure of the never-married rate of about 10%.
In the 1960s through to the 1980s, black women with any college married later than those
with no college. However, after accounting for differences in the age of first marriage, black
female college graduates have historically been as likely to marry as black women with less
education. By 1990, black women with any college education had become more likely to ever
marry compared with those with no college and this trend has continued. As with white women,
the decrease in marriage rates was lower among college-educated black women. These shifts
have led to a positive gap in which college-educated black women are more likely to marry
compared to black women with less education.
Turning to men, we see smaller differences in marital formation behavior by educational
backgrounds than is seen for women. Figures 4 and 5 show ever-married rates by age and
education for white and black men, respectively, from 1960 through to 2007. As with women,
men with more education tend to marry at later ages and the age of first marriage has been rising
for all men. Among white men, there have historically been few differences in the eventual
likelihood of marrying by educational attainment. However, between 1990 and 2007, male
college graduates became slightly more likely than those with less education to ever marry and,
as with women, this change has arisen because of overall declines in marriage that have been
sharpest for those with the least education.
A similar pattern is seen among black men, although the timing differs by several
decades and, as with black women, there have been much steeper declines in marriage among
blacks regardless of education. Starting in 1980, black male college graduates became more
likely than black high school graduates to ever marry. This gap widened in the ensuing decades,
a pattern that, as with whites, largely reflects larger declines in marriage among those with less
education. In 2007, college-educated black men in their forties were 5 percentage points less
likely to have ever-married compared with college-educated white men, yet they were more
10

likely to have married compared to black men with less education or compared to black women
of any educational background. Thus, college-educated men remain the most likely to marry
among blacks.
In summary, for both men and women, marriage rates have declined since the 1980s
among people of all educational backgrounds.

However, these declines have been steeper

among those with less education. Because college-educated white women had historically been
less likely to marry, these shifts in marital behavior have led to a closing of the education gap in
marriage for white women and there has been little difference by education in the likelihood of a
woman marrying during her lifetime for recent generations. Among white men, a small gap has
emerged in recent years in which those who attend college are more likely to marry than are
those who do not.
Among blacks, the decline in the proportion marrying began in the 1950s. Between 1950
and 1980, the proportion of blacks who had married by the end of their 30s fell for all education
groups, while the marriage rate rose for all whites. These different trends reversed the racial
trends in marriage, opening a new gap in which whites were more likely to marry than were
blacks. In the ensuing period the declines in marriage have been most stark among blacks and a
wide gap has opened in marriage rates by race. Additionally, there are now large differences in
marriage by education among both black men and women in which those with more education
have become more likely to marry.

III.

Marital Stability
Divorce rates rose for much of the 20th century, reaching a peak in 1979 and falling

thereafter (Stevenson and Wolfers 2007). One explanation for the high divorce rates of the
1970s may be that this period reflected a transition, with many having married the right partner
for the old specialization model of marriage, only to find that pairing inadequate for the modern
consumption-based marriage (Stevenson and Wolfers 2008b).

As such, it is perhaps not

surprising that current divorce rates are similar to those witnessed at the end of the 1960s. This
fall in divorce rates is seen whether divorces are measured relative to the population or the stock
of married people. Moreover, examining individual marriages, those who have married in recent

11

years have been more likely to stay together than their parents’ generation (Stevenson and
Wolfers 2008a).
These patterns have not, however, occurred equally among those with more and less
education. We examine the trends in divorce using the marital histories collected in the 2004
Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). In general, divorce rates are lowest among
those with a college-degree, are the highest for those with some college, while those with a high
school degree or below have divorce rates that fall in-between the two groups.13 The fact that it
is those with “some college” that are the most at risk of divorce illustrates the potential role of
selection in explaining why marital and divorce outcomes differ by educational attainment.
Those with “some college” have either attended a 2 year program or have failed to complete a 4year program.14 As such, those with some college disproportionately represent those without the
stamina or resources to complete their education. It is perhaps not surprising that this group
would have similar difficulties maintaining their marriage.15
The inverted u-pattern of divorce rates by educational attainment is seen for both men
and women and for both blacks and whites, across most decades. However, the magnitude of the
differences in divorce by education has changed over time. Divorce rates rose during the 1960s
and 1970s and couples who married during this time period experienced more marital
dissolutions when compared to the men and women who married in the 1950s. The rise in
divorce culminated in smaller differences by education in divorce rates 25 years post-marriage
for those marrying in the 1970s. Among white men and women with a high school degree or
less, 43% and 42%, respectively, of their marriages had ended within 25 years. For those with a
college degree, 41% of women and 37% of men had divorced, and for those with some college,
the percent divorcing hit the 50% mark for women and was just below—48%—for men.
These patterns can be seen in Figures 6 and 7 which show the proportion of women’s and
men’s first marriages, respectively, ending in divorce by cohort, educational attainment, and
race.16 The top row of each figure shows the divorce hazard for blacks, while the bottom row
13

Several recent papers using different data sets have examined marital dissolution by education and also find a
trend in lower divorce rates among college graduates. (Raley and Bumpass 2003, Sweeney and Phillips 2004, and
Martin 2006).
14
Among adults in the 2000 census, around 78% of those with some college had received no degree.
15
For a similar argument, see Glick (1957)
16
Divorce is measured using retrospective marital histories from the 2004 SIPP in which individuals report the year
of their first marriage and, if that marriage has ended by divorce, the year that the divorce occurred. In addition,

12

shows the divorce hazard for whites.17 In addition, Table 1 reports the percent of women and
men who have divorced following 10 and 20 years of marriage.
The divorce experience subsequent to the overall rise in divorce among those marrying in
the 1970s has differed by education. For college graduates, the cohort marrying in the 1970s was
the most likely to divorce. Subsequent cohorts of college graduates have had greater stability in
their marriages. Marriages of college-graduates that began in the 1980s have been less likely to
end in divorce than those that began in the 1970s and those that began in the 1990s were even
less likely to do so.
Table 1 illustrates these trends by showing the percent divorcing within 10 and 20 years
of marriage. Among those marrying in the 1950s, only 12% of the marriages of white female
college-graduates and 17% of those of white male college-graduates ended by divorce within the
first 20 years of marriage. For those marrying in the 1960s, the dissolution rates had roughly
doubled. They rose even further for those marrying in the 1970s, with 37% and 34% of the
marriages of female and male college graduates ending within 20 years. The trend reversed after
the 1970s cohort, and, among those marrying in the 1980s, the divorce rates of this marriage
cohort had fallen back to rates similar to those experienced by the 1960s marriage cohort. For
more recent cohorts, it is only possible to assess their marital dissolution rates earlier in
marriage, but, in the first decade of marriage, divorce rates for those marrying in the 1990s were
lower than those experienced by the previous cohort.
The experience of black college-graduates is similar; however, the estimated divorce
hazards for black college-graduates are higher.

Indeed, among all educational groups the

estimated divorce rates are often higher among blacks. Yet, it is important to note that the much
smaller sample size yields imprecise estimates. In nearly all cases the divorce rates of blacks are
not statistically significantly different from those of whites.

individuals report the year of death if their marriage ended via their spouse’s death (deaths that occur after a divorce
are not reported). Marriages that end through the death of a spouse, and for which no divorce occurred, are included
in the denominator. Excluding these marriages from the analysis has little effect on divorce rates in the first 20
years of marriage and raises divorce rates at 25 years post-marriage by a few percentage points. The reason for
including these marriages is that excluding them mechanically raises the divorce rate as people age, since all
marriages must end either through death or divorce.
17
We concentrate on first marriages so that the divorce hazards reflect the average person’s experience rather than
the average marital experience. The patterns are similar for second marriage, although second marriages are more
likely to end in divorce.

13

Turning to those without a college degree we see that the high divorce rates experienced
by those marrying in the 1970s continued for those marrying in the 1980s. Examining those
marrying in the 1990s, it appears as if the divorce rates for those with less than a college degree
have begun to fall with this most recent marriage cohort, particularly among those with a high
school degree or less. Those with no college who married in the 1990s were about as likely to
have made it to their 10th anniversary as were those who married in the 1960s. In contrast,
among those with only some college, a statistically significant fall in divorce rates by the 10th
anniversary occurred only among African-American males.
While forecasting divorce rates is tricky, the data point to divorce happening earlier in
marriage among more recent cohorts. Across all education groups, the divorce rate in the first 5
years has been little changed since the 1970s, even when the divorce rate at 10 or 20 years has
fallen. This pattern suggests that divorces that do happen are increasingly happening earlier in
the marriage. This shift toward divorce earlier in marriage has been even more pronounced
among those with a high school degree or less.

Thus, differences in marital survival by

education in recent decades are more extreme when looking at only the first decade of a
marriage. Therefore, the early signs of further falls in divorce for those marrying in the 1990s
are suggestive of greater declines in divorce rates in the coming decade for this group.
In sum, both men and women with a college degree have been consistently less likely to
divorce and have also experienced a larger decline in divorce probabilities in the last few
decades.

IV.

Remarriage
The high divorce rates of the 1970s and the increasing age of first marriage both

contribute to thicker remarriage markets. As such, one might suspect that remarriage rates would
have risen over time. What we see instead is that remarriage rates have fallen over time for all
groups of women. Figure 8 and 9 show remarriage hazards among divorced white and black
women, respectively.18 The percent who have remarried is shown for each year post-divorce for
women by their educational attainment.

18

Remarriage rates are calculated from marital histories collected in 1971, 1980, and 1995 from the Current
Population Survey (CPS) and in 2004 from the SIPP.

14

In 1971, the majority of divorced women had remarried within 5 years following a
divorce. Among whites, college-educated women were the least likely to remarry with only twothirds remarried 10 years post-divorce, compared with three-quarters of those with a high school
degree or less. In contrast, there was little difference in remarriage rates among black women of
differing educational backgrounds, with around 70% of all black women having remarried within
10 years of a divorce. The 1980 sample shows a retreat from remarriage that is most pronounced
among black women with a high school degree or less and among white women with a college
degree. Ten years post-marriage, only 55% and 58% of these two groups had remarried. The
percent of white women with a high school degree or less who had remarried after 10 years was
only 2 percentage points lower than that seen in the 1971 sample, while the percent of collegeeducated white women had fallen 7 percentage points.
In 1995, remarriage rates are somewhat higher among whites and are similar to those
seen in 1971. Remarriage rates for all educational groups of white women are, however, lower
in the 2004 sample. Turning to black women, a different picture emerges. The fall in remarriage
among black women has been greater and was most pronounced in the 1980 sample among those
with a high school degree or below. As such, in 1980 these less educated black women were the
least likely to remarry. The fall in remarriage among black women has continued in the 1995
and 2004 samples and the differences by education have largely been eroded. By the 2004
sample, it is 10 years post-marriage before the majority of black women have remarried.
Figure 10 shows that a similar decrease in remarriage has occurred among both white and
black men of all educational groups. However, remarriage is more common among men than
among women and, unlike women, remarriage rates rise with education among both black and
white men.19 In 1971, 85% of white, and 87% of black, college-educated men had remarried
within 10 years following a divorce.

In 2004, these rates had fallen to 76% and 61%

respectively. Remarriage rates for those with a high school degree or below also fell, but to a
lesser extent, thereby eroding some of the remarriage gap by education.

19

See also Bumpass, Sweet, and Martin (1990), who note this phenomenon when examining the 1980 and 1985
CPS.

15

Table 2 shows the decline over time in the likelihood of remarriage in a regression

context, using alternative data sources.20 The first column shows that remarriage rates have been
lower in each survey wave we examine. In the second column we add controls for changes in
first marriage behavior as measured by cohort and age of first marriage. These controls suggest
that remarriage has fallen even more steeply over time. The next four columns examine the
trends separately by race and sex. Since 1980, white men, the group most likely to remarry, have
experienced sharper declines in remarriage compared to white women. However, the largest
declines in remarriage have occurred among blacks. Both black men and women have become
substantially less likely to remarry.
Some of the decline in remarriage may reflect couples cohabiting rather than remarrying.
Remarriages are more likely than first marriages to be preceded by a period of cohabtation. In
the 2000s, 75% of those entering a second or higher order marriage had cohabited prior to the
marriage, while 59% of those entering a first marriage had done so (Stevenson and Wolfers,
2007). Additionally, the thicker matching market may lead to an increased duration of search by
increasing the option value of continued search and/or by increasing one’s utility while single
(aside from the potential to meet mates, being single may be more enjoyable when there are lots
of singles in one’s age bracket).
While remarriage rates have fallen overall, the pattern of remarriage by education has not
changed. Remarriage among white women falls with educational attainment, while there are
little differences in remarriage by education among black women. Among men, remarriage rises
with education. These patterns are similar to what we see when examining first marriages, with
the exception that college-educated white women remain much less likely to remarry compared
to those with less education. Unlike the education gap in first marriages, the remarriage gap by
education has not closed in recent years.
One explanation for this may lie in the changing patterns of first marriage. Table 2
shows that a college degree is associated with a lower likelihood of having remarried among
white women in the 2004 SIPP. However, adding controls for length of marriage and years since
the divorce reduces the coefficient on the college indicator variable and adding a control for the
age at marriage attenuates the coefficient further. In recent years more highly educated women
20

The regression analysis uses data from the 1970 and 1980 decennial Censuses and the 1991, 1992, 1993 and 2004
Panels of the SIPP. We turn to the SIPP beginning in 1991 as questions used to infer remarriage from the Census
were discontinued after 1980.

16

have tended to marry later and have longer duration marriages. It is these differences in the
patterns of first marriage that explain much of the recent differences in remarriage rates by
education among white women. However, this is not the case in earlier periods. Examining
remarriage in the 1971, 1980, and 1995 CPS marital history supplements, columns 4-6 show that
college-educated women in the 1971 and 1980 samples were less likely to remarry even once
controls are added for timing of their first marriage. In 1995, however, this difference by
education was, as in 2004, explained by the patterns of first marriage. Remarriage has thus
largely followed the patterns seen in first marriage, with remarriage rates falling over time and a
closing over time of the education gap among white women.

V.

Fertility
Fertility declines starkly as maternal education rises and the educational differences have

not changed despite enormous increases in the educational attainment of women. Figure 11
shows the number of children in the household from 1950-2007 for white women by age and
level of education. As with marriage, these graphs show both differences in fertility timing and
changes in fertility across cohorts. In 1950, college graduates had the fewest number of children
in the household at every point in the life cycle. However, in subsequent decades, the number of
children in the homes of older women became greatest for college graduates—illustrating a shift
towards later fertility that has continued through to the present time.21 In each successive Census
there is a steady decrease in the probability that college-educated women have children in the
home in their 20s and 30s. Since the 1970s, college graduates in their 30s have become more
likely than they were in the past, and more likely than other women, to have children (Martin
2000). This rise in maternal age is also illustrated by the fact that the median age at which
mothers with a college degree have an infant in the household has risen by 4 years over this
period.
In contrast, there has been little increase in the likelihood that those with less education
have children later in life and the age distribution of women with children in the home among

21

Completed fertility by birth cohort was calculated from the 1980 and 1990 Censuses. In the 1980 and 1990
Censuses children ever born peaked for 47 and 57 year old women, respectively, or those born in 1933. Among
college educated women, the peak occurred a few years earlier with the 1930 birth cohort (women who were ages 50
and 60 in the 1980 and 1990 Censuses respectively).

17

those with a high school degree or less is little changed. This is further illustrated by the fact that
there has been no change in the median age at which mothers without any college-education
have an infant in the household. Thus, the well-publicized delay in fertility has been occurring
almost exclusively among women with more education. 22
Figure 12 shows a similar pattern among black women. Ellwood and Jencks (2002)
highlighted the fact that black women with less education have increasingly delayed marriage,
yet have not delayed or reduced childbearing to the same extent. The result is a rise in out-ofwedlock births which has happened for both black and white women with less education. As the
ever-married rates of black women with no college fell by three times as much as the fall among
white women with no college, the rise in out-of-wedlock childbirths has been greatest among
black women with less education. Thus changes in marriage, not fertility, account for the rise in
out-of-wedlock childbirth.
Greater access to education and higher potential wages, combined with improved control
over fertility, has altered the incentives that women face. Birth control has lowered the cost of
postponing pregnancy, while better human capital and market options and the rising returns to
work experience have increased the opportunity cost of career disruptions, particularly in the
early stages of one’s career. That the delay has occurred most strongly among women at the top
of the educational ladder point to the fact that these developments have most sharply affected
those with more education. Although only suggestive evidence has been provided that the costs
to fertility have risen over time (Loughran and Zissimopoulos 2007), Miller (2007) shows in a
cross section of women that delaying fertility increases lifetime earnings, and the gains are
highest for college graduates. Further evidence comes from Goldin and Katz (2008), who
examine the family and work behavior of multiple cohorts from Harvard/Radcliffe. Patterns for
women from this selective institution, who tend to be more strongly tied to the labor market,
indicate a much larger increase in fertility delay relative to other college graduates.
In addition to changes in the timing of fertility, total fertility has fallen steadily since the
baby boom for white and black women of all educational backgrounds. Table 4 shows the
number of children ever born to 45-50 year old women (a reasonable proxy for completed

22

Rindfuss, Morgan, Offut (1996), Martin (2004b), and Yang and Morgan (2004) examine the issue through the
early 1990s and similarly find a larger delay for more educated women.

18

fertility) over the past five decades.23 Despite changes in total fertility across the decades, the
pattern of falling fertility with education is similar in all time periods for all women, and this is
seen when examining the National Survey of Family Growth as well (Preston and Sten 2008)

24

College graduates have the fewest children, followed by those with some college, high school
graduates, and finally high school dropouts have the greatest number of children. Fertility for all
groups of 45-50 year olds rose between the 1950 and 1980 Censuses, and has decreased
thereafter such that fertility rates in 2004 are similar, albeit slightly higher, to those seen in 1960
for each education group.

However, total fertility has dropped throughout the period, as

women’s educational attainment has risen enormously with no subsequent erosion of the
negative relationship between fertility and education.

VI.

Marital Happiness
Families have clearly changed their behavior in terms of formation, expansion (through

children), and dissolution in a way that is correlated with education. Subjective well-being data
can perhaps help us better understand more subtle differences in the family experience between
people with differing educational backgrounds. Data from the General Social Survey (GSS) asks
individuals how satisfied they are with their family life and how happy they are with their
marriage as well as other attitudinal questions such as whether married people are happier than
unmarried people. The GSS is a nationally representative sample of about 1,500 respondents
each year from 1972-1993 (except 1992), and continues with around 3,000 respondents every
second year from 1994 through to 2004, rising to 4,500 respondents in 2006. Analyzing these
data, we quickly see that the perceived benefits of marriage differ by education. Nearly four
times as many non-college graduates as college graduates agree that “financial security is the
main benefit of marriage,” and are slightly more likely to agree that “children are the main
purpose of marriage.” Not surprisingly, those with a college degree are less likely to see
“production complementarities” as the main benefit of marriage.
Turning to expectations of marital happiness, we see in Table 5 that when people are
asked generally whether they would agree with the statement that married people are happier
23

The Census stopped asking about children ever born after the 1990 Census and thus the most recent data come
from the 2004 SIPP.
24
Goldin (2004) shows a similar pattern by education in the percent that never have children.

19

than unmarried people (1988, 1994, and 2002), there is a clear trend with fewer people agreeing
over time. Consistent with the changing marital behavior patterns, college-educated women
have become slightly more likely to believe that married people are happier; while women
without a college degree have become substantially less likely to agree that married people are
happier. Moreover, in 1988, women without a college degree were more likely than college
graduates to agree that married people are happier and, by 2002, they were much less likely than
college graduates to agree. A similar pattern has not occurred among men, rather both those with
and without college degrees became less likely to agree over time. Despite this fall, men remain
more likely than women to believe that married people are happier than unmarried people.
Turning to actual happiness in their marriage, Tables 6 and 7 show that people with more
education are happier in their marriages and with their family life, just as they are more likely to
think that married people are happier than unmarried people.

The college-non-college

differential is particularly stark for women. And as with expectations regarding the happiness of
married people, the marital happiness data reveal that men are typically happier in their
marriages than are women.
In Table 6 we run ordered probits by gender on how happy respondents are with their
marriage. College-educated white women have been consistently happier in their marriages with
no apparent time trend in these differences. However, the coefficient is reduced by forty percent
when we add controls, a reduction which is being driven by differences in the number of
children, income, and parents’ education. College-educated white men are also more likely to be
happier in their marriage compared with non-college educated white men, and this difference
increases over time. On the other hand, college-educated black men and women appear to be no
happier in their marriages than are those without college degrees.
Table 7 explores how much satisfaction respondents get from their family life by
education again using ordered probits.

We find that, as with marital satisfaction, college-

educated white women consistently get more satisfaction from their family life, although the
relationship is being driven solely by college-educated white women who were married at the
time of their interview.

Black college educated women do not appear to get any more

satisfaction than those with no college, and we can reject that the black-white college estimates
are the same when controls are added. However, college educated black and white men get more

20

satisfaction at a marginally significant level without covariates although no difference is found
for men of either group when controls are added.

VII.

Discussion
This paper has documented changes in the family experience for women and men at the

bottom and top of the educational distribution by race. College-educated women born at the
beginning of the last century were the women least likely to marry. As we enter the 21st century
these women are poised to become the most likely to ever marry. This shift occurred in two
stages. In the first stage, college-educated women had rapid increases in the probability of
marrying. In the second stage, college-educated women had smaller falls in marriage compared
to those with less education. Both of these stages have contributed to a closing of the marriage
gap by education. Like women, male college-graduates in the latter period had smaller falls in
marriage compared to men with less education, opening a small marriage gap in which men with
the most education have the greatest likelihood of marriage.
Since 1950 the percent of women earning college degrees has increased tremendously.
This substantial increase in educational attainment, shown in Table 8, might mean that
compositional shifts explain the trends in family behavior by women’s education. That is, it
might be that the family behavior of the women who would have been in each educational group
in an earlier period has not changed, but rather that recent cohorts of college graduates have
expanded to include those with greater preferences for marriage.

To look at the role of

compositional changes we divided college graduates in 2007 into two groups.

The first

represents the proportion of women in 1950 who went to college—roughly 6% of women. This
group was assigned the marriage rates of women who went to college in 1950. The second
group—the remaining quarter of women who were college graduates in 2007—was assigned the
marriage rates of women who didn’t go to college in 1950. For 45-to-50 year old women in
2007, this exercise replicates almost perfectly the actually percent that have ever married. A
similar exercise shows that simple compositional shifts cannot, however, explain the trends in
fertility.
However, Goldin (2004) notes that many of the trends in marital behavior among collegeeducated women can be seen when the group is limited to a particular college. For example,

21

(Goldin and Katz, 2008) find that men and women attending Harvard in the late 1960s and early
1970s experienced a divorce rate that was nearly twice that of those graduating two decades
later. The divorce patterns seen among the Harvard graduates are similar to those seen when one
examines college graduates in general.
The differences in marital behavior that we have documented yield very different marital
experiences over the lifecycle. The growing difference in the patterns of marriage entry for
women of different educational backgrounds and race combined with different patterns in
divorce and remarriage rates has led to stark differences in the probability of being married at
specific ages. In Figure 13, we show the percent of white and black women who are currently
married by education. In 1960, college educated women were less likely to be married at every
age. Today, those without a college degree are the most likely to be married in their 20s, while
those with a college degree are more likely to be married in their 30s and 40s. These differences
reflect the different patterns of age at marriage and the likelihood of divorce.
What is missing from our analysis is cohabitation. Unfortunately cohabitation data is
relatively sparse and so does not lend itself easily to the long-run analysis that we pursue here.
Yet, it is likely that such an analysis would reveal that cohabitation cannot explain the entire
decline in marriage and remarriage. Adults today are spending more time as singles. For
college-graduates those years tend to occur early in the lifecycle with most spending much of
their 20s outside marriage, while those with less education are more likely to spend some of their
30s and 40s outside of a marital relationship.
In 1981 Andrew Cherlin described the new typical life course as “marriage, divorce,
remarriage.” Today, marriage is happening later, divorce is less likely, and remarriage is less
common. Moreover, the typical life pattern differs by race and education. Among college
graduates the typical life pattern now involves a prolonged period of being single before entering
marriage and having children. Divorce and remarriage are now experienced by a shrinking
minority of the college-educated. Among those with no college, the typical life experience
remains marriage, children, divorce, remarriage, but is quickly shifting toward children,
marriage, divorce, and a prolonged period of being single or cohabiting before remarriage.

22

VIII.

References

Aguiar, Erik, and Mike Hurst. "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five
Decades." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007: 969-1006.
Becker, Gary. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Blau, Francine, and Lawrence Kahn. "Gender Differences in Pay." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
2000: 75-99.
Blau, Francine, and Lawrence Kahn. "Swimming upstream: Trends in the gender wage differential in the
1980s." Journal of Labor Economics, 1997: 1-42.
Bumpass, Larry, James Sweet, and Teresa Castro Martin. "Changing Patterns of Remarriage." Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 1990: 747-756.
Cherlin, Andrew. Marriage, Divorce, Remarriage. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Ellwood, David, and Christopher Jencks. The Spread of Single-Parent Families in the United States since
1960. Kennedy School of Government Harvard University: Unpublished manuscript, 2002.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. "Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up?" NBER
Working Paper, 2005.
Glick, Paul. American families. New York: Wiley, 1957.
Goldin, Claudia. "Career and Family: College Women Look to the Past." In Gender and Family Issues in
the Workplace, by Francine Blau and Ronald Ehrenberg, 20-58. New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
1997.
Goldin, Claudia. "The Long Road to the Fast Track." AAPSS Annals, 2004: 20-35.
Goldin, Claudia. "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and
Family." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96, no. 2 (2006): 1-21.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz. "The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career
and Marriage Decisions." Journal of Political Economy, 2002: 730-770.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence Katz. "Transitions: Career and Family Life Cycles of the Educational
Elite." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2008: 363-369.
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. "The Homecoming of American College
Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap." Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, no. 4 (2006):
133-156.
Goldstein, Joshua, and Catherine Kenney. "Marriage Delayed or Marriage Forgone? New Cohort
Forecasts of First Marriage for U.S. Women." American Sociological Review, 2001: 506-519.

References—1

Greenwood, Jeremy, and Nizah Guner. "Marriage and Divorce since World War II: Analyzing the Role of
Technological Progress on the Formation of Households." NBER Macro Annual. Cambridge: NBER,
2008.
Loughran, David, and Julie Zissimopoulos. "Why Wait? The Effect of Marriage and Childbearing on the
Wage Growth of Men and Women." RAND Working Paper, 2007.
Martin, Steven. "Trends in marital dissolution by women’s education in the United States." Demographic
Research, 2006: 537-560.
Martin, Steven. "Reassessing delayed and forgone marriage in the United States." 2004a.
Martin, Steven. "Delayed Marriage and Childbearing: Implications and Measurement of Diverging
Trends in Family Timing." In Social Inequality, by Kathryn Neckerman, 79 - 119. New York: Russell
Sage, 2004b.
Martin, Steven. "Diverging Fertility among U.S. Women Who Delay Childbearing Past Age 30."
Demography, 2000: 523-533.
Miller, Amelia. "The Effects of Motherhood Timing on Career Path." unpublished mimeo, University. of
Virginia, 2007.
Newhouse, Joseph. "Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?" Journal of Economic Perspectives,
1992: 3-21.
Pollak, Robert. "Bargaining Power in Marriage: Earnings, Wage Rates and Household Production."
NBER Working Paper, no. No. 11239 (2005).
Preston, Samuel, and Caroline Sten Harnett. "The Future of American Fertility." NBER Working Paper,
2008.
Raley, R. Kelly, and Bumpass, Larry. "The topography of the divorce plateau: Levels and trends in union
stability in the United States after 1980." Demographic Research, 2003: 245 - 259.
Rindfuss, Ron, S. Philip Morga, and Kate Offutt. "Education and the Changing Age Pattern of American
Fertility: 1963-1989." Demography, 1996: 277-290.
Schwartz, Christine, and Mare, Robert. "Trends in Educational Assortative Marriage from 1940 to 2003."
Demography, 2005: 621-646.
Stevenson, Betsey. "The Impact of Divorce Laws on Marriage-Specific Capital ." Journal of Labor
Economics, 2007: 75-94.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. "Marriage and Divorce: Changes and Their Driving Forces."
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2007: 27-52.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. "Trends in Marital Stability." unpublished mimeo, University of
Pennsylvania, 2008a.

References—2

Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. "Marriage and Market." Cato Unbound, January 8, 2008b.
Sweeney, Megan and Philips, Julie. "Understanding Racial Differences in Marital Disruption: Recent
Trends and Explanations." Journal of Marriage and Family, 2004: 639–650.
Sweeney, Megan, and Maria Cancian. "The Changing Importance of Economic Prospects for Assortative
Mating." Journal of Marriage and the Family, 2004: 1015-1028.
Yang, Yang, and S. Philip Morgan. "How Big Are Educational and Racial Fertility Differentials in the
U.S.?" Social Biology, 2004.

References—3

Table 1: Percent of Marriages Ending in Divorce within 10 & 20 Years of Marriage

Year: Education:
1950

College
Some College

1960

High School
or less
College
Some College

1970

High School
or less
College
Some College

1980

High School
or less
College
Some College

1990

High School
or less
College
Some College
High School
or less

Divorced by 10 years following
marriage
White
Black
Women
Men
Women
Men
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
4
5
11
8
(1.2)
(1.1)
(4.7)
(7.6)
11
9
13
9
(1.1)
(1.2)
(4.0)
(5.4)
9
9
4
6
(.7)
(.9)
(1.2)
(2.4)
15
13
13
16
(1.4)
(1.2)
(4.4)
(6.5)
25
20
27
31
(1.3)
(1.3)
(4.2)
(5.3)
18
20
11
14
(1.0)
(1.2)
(2.1)
(2.9)
23
18
25
19
(1.4)
(1.2)
(5.2)
(5.4)
30
29
38
29
(1.2)
(1.3)
(3.4)
(4.1)
26
25
22
26
(1.1)
(1.1)
(2.9)
(3.5)
20
15
29
17
(1.2)
(1.1)
(5.7)
(4.9)
30
27
33
30
(1.1)
(1.2)
(3.2)
(3.7)
25
27
31
23
(1.1)
(1.2)
(3.6)
(3.1)
16
13
19
14
(1.5)
(1.4)
(5.0)
(5.6)
31
25
28
17
(1.7)
(1.7)
(3.9)
(4.0)
19
23
23
21
(1.5)
(1.6)
(4.4)
(5.1)

Divorced by 20 years following
marriage
White
Black
Women Men Women Men
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
12
17
28
22
(1.8)
(1.8)
(7.5)
(11)
23
20
31
26
(1.6)
(1.8)
(5.4)
(7.4)
18
19
22
25
(1.0)
(1.3)
(3.1)
(4.2)
29
26
32
34
(1.7)
(1.6)
(6.4)
(9.5)
41
37
48
44
(1.5)
(1.6)
(4.6)
(5.5)
30
34
27
36
(1.2)
(1.5)
(3.1)
(4.0)
37
34
44
36
(1.6)
(1.5)
(5.9)
(6.9)
46
44
54
50
(1.3)
(1.4)
(3.5)
(4.4)
39
39
38
45
(1.3)
(1.4)
(3.5)
(3.9)
31
25
39
33
(2.0)
(1.9)
(8.5)
(8.5)
46
44
45
67
(1.7)
(2.0)
(4.8)
(5.3)
38
44
51
45
(1.8)
(1.9)
(5.8)
(5.4)

Notes: 2004 Survey of Income and Program Participation. Divorce rates are measured from marital history
reports and include all marriages that formed during the decade under consideration. Marriages that end by
the death of one spouse are included in the denominator. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Tables—1

Table 2: Trends in Remarriage
Probit Regression
Dependent
Variable:
Remarried
Regression
Coefficients:
1980 Dummy
1990s Dummy
2004 Dummy

Full sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

-.074***
(.001)
-.086***
(.004)
-.105***
(.004)

-.062***
(.002)
-.094***
(.004)
-.135***
(.004)
-.012***
(.001)
.007***
(.001)
1503866

-.054***
(.002)
-.068***
(.005)
-.087***
(.006)
-.017***
(.000)
.006***
(.001)
698836

Age at marriage
Age
Sample size

White
Women

1503866

Black
Women

(4)
-.139***
(.005)
-.220***
(.015)
-.256***
(.016)
-.010***
(.001)
.011***
(.001)
96519

White
Men

Black
Men

(5)

(6)

-.050***
(.002)
-.105***
(006)
-.167***
(.007)
-.016***
(.001)
.009***
(.001)
590483

-.104***
(.005)
-.159***
(.021)
-.261***
(.021)
-.009***
(.001)
.009***
(.001)
71772

Notes: ***, ** and * denote statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. (Robust standard errors in
parentheses). Census of Population 1970 and 1980. Survey of Income and Program Participation 1991, 1992, 1993
and 2004. Marginal effects reported.

Table 3: Education and Remarriage
Probit Regression
Dependent
Variable:
Remarried
Regression
Coefficients:
College dummy

2004 SIPP

1980 CPS

1971 CPS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-.078***
(0.015)**

-.032**
(.015)
.016***
(.001)
-.015***
(.001)

8319

8319

0.025
(0.015)
.014***
(0.001)
-.016***
(.001)
-.028***
(.002)
8319

0.005
(.016)
.023***
(.001)
-.014***
(.001)
-.028***
(0.002)
8851

-0.039*
(.023)
0.016***
(.001)
-.008***
(.002)
-.028***
(.002)
7303

-.095***
(.030)
.013***
(.001)
-.009***
(.001)
-0.012***
(.003)
5252

Yrs since divorce
Length of marriage
Age at marriage
Sample size

1995 CPS

Notes: ***, ** and * denote statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. (Robust standard errors in
parentheses). Marginal effects reported. The 1971 CPS survey only asked about the first and most recent marriage.
If individuals are married three or more times, their second marriage is assumed to begin halfway between the end
of their first marriage and the beginning of their latest marriage.

Tables—2

Table 4: Children Ever Born Among 45 to 50 Year Old Women
College
Some College HS Graduates HS
All
Graduates
Dropouts
White Women
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2004
Black Women
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2004

1.22
1.50
2.22
2.40
1.85
1.56

1.75
1.81
2.49
2.90
2.33
1.90

1.74
1.84
2.46
2.92
2.49
1.97

2.69
2.50
2.92
3.39
2.99
2.86

2.33
2.18
2.63
2.99
2.40
1.91

1.73
1.37
1.80
2.10
1.89
1.50

1.99
1.69
2.32
3.23
2.54
2.22

2.13
1.96
2.64
3.45
2.85
2.22

2.76
2.84
3.49
4.37
3.63
2.78

2.67
2.62
3.19
3.80
2.92
2.13

Notes: Census of Population (1950-1990) and Survey of Income and Program Participation (2004)
The “Children Ever Born” question was asked in 1950 and 1960 only of women who had ever married. To provide
numbers that are representative of all women, the above statistics are constructed from the ever married women of
1950 and 1960, and the never married women aged 65-70 and 55-60, respectively, from the 1970 Census. The
number of never married 45-50 yr olds in 1950 and 1960 that had married by 1970 is negligible.

Table 5: Trends in Expectations Regarding Marriage and Happiness: “Married
people are generally happier than unmarried people?”

1988:
College Graduate
Non-College Graduate
1994:
College Graduate
Non-College Graduate
2002:
College Graduate
Non-College Graduate

Women
Men
Agree
Disagree Neither Agree

Disagree Neither

47.4
53.7

11.1
14.7

41.6
31.6

62.2
57.8

5.6
12.5

32.2
29.7

46.6
45.2

17.8
19.0

35.6
35.8

57.8
48.5

8.0
22.2

34.2
29.3

50.7
37.4

19.5
24.9

29.9
37.8

47.9
49.2

18.8
17.5

33.3
33.3

Notes: Data are from the General Social Survey. In 1988, 1994, and 2002. The Agree category includes those that
“strongly agree” and “agree” while the Disagree category includes those that “strongly disagree” and “disagree.”
The Neither category includes those who “can’t choose” and those who “neither agree nor disagree.”

Tables—3

Table 6: Trends in Marital Happiness
Ordered Probit
Regression
Regression Coefficients:

(1)

College*white

.222 ***
(.032)
.004
(.114)
-0.004
(.005)
-.005**
(.002)
-.379***
(.046)

College*black
College*Time Trend
Time Trend
Black
Sample

Dependent Variable: “Taking things all together how
would you describe your marriage?”
[3] Very Happy [2] Pretty Happy [1]Not Too Happy
(2)
(3)
(4)
.132***
(.037)
-.105
(.117)
-.001
(.005)
-.009***
(.003)
-.329***
(.048)
Women

Controls:
White Women
Percent Very Happy:
College
74
1970’s
67
2000’s
Non-College
66
1970’s
59
2000’s

.106***
(.032)
-.015
(.121)
.014***
(.004)
-.009***
(.002)
-.364***
(.049)



.094***
(.035)
-.034
(.121)
.014***
(.004)
-.010***
(.003)
-.388***
(.051)
Men


Black Women

White Men

Black Men

59
55

70
74

49
51

46
55

70
63

55
54

Notes: ***, ** and * denote statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Sample size for women is
11228 and for men is 10111. Data are from the General Social Survey from 1973-2006. (Robust standard errors in
parentheses)
(a) Employment status includes indicators for full-time, part-time, temporary illness/vacation/strike, unemployed,
retired, in school, keeping house, and other; Income is based on imputations of real family income, collapsed into
indicator variables, one for each decile; Children includes indicator variables for the number of children ever born,
up to eight; Education variables are coded the highest degree earned by the respondent, respondent’s father, and
respondent’s mother, including separate variables for <high school, high school, associates/junior college,
bachelor’s, or graduate degrees; Religion includes separate indicators for Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, None and
Other; Region includes indicator variables for each of 9 regions. Separate dummy variables are also included for
missing values of each control variable.

Tables—4

Table 7: Trends in Family Satisfaction
Ordered Probit
Regression

Dependent
Variable:

Regression Coefficients:

(1)

College*white

.155***
(.034)
.150
(.099)
-.005
(.007)
-.336***
(.036)
.002
(.003)

College*black
College*Time Trend
Black
Time Trend
College*Married*white
College*Married*black
Married
Sample

-.064
(.058)
.129
(.131)
-.003
(.007)
-.207***
(.040)
-.003
(.004)
.258***
(.070)
-.250
(.193)
.403***
(.030)
Women

.052*
(.031)
.221*
(.126)
.003
(.006)
-.258***
(.046)
-.003
(.006)

-.082
(.061)
.227
(.166)
-.003
(.006)
-.106**
(.051)
.000
(.004)
.073
(.070)
-.277
(.229)
.933***
(.038)
Men



Controls:
Percent Very Great Deal:
College
1970’s
1990’s
Non-College
1970’s
1990’s

“How much satisfaction do you get from your family
life?” [7] A very great deal [6] A great deal [5] quite a bit
[4] A fair amount [3] Some [2] A little [1] None
(2)
(3)
(4)

White Women Black Women


White Men

Black Men

53
53

33
24

44
47

44
39

45
46

32
28

41
40

32
31

Notes: ***, ** and * denote statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Sample size for women is
11321and for men is 8699. Data are from the General Social Survey from 1973-1994. (Robust standard errors in
parentheses)
(a) Employment status includes indicators for full-time, part-time, temporary illness/vacation/strike, unemployed,
retired, in school, keeping house, and other; Income is based on imputations of real family income, collapsed into
indicator variables, one for each decile; Children includes indicator variables for the number of children ever born,
up to eight; Education variables are coded the highest degree earned by the respondent, respondent’s father, and
respondent’s mother, including separate variables for <high school, high school, associates/junior college,
bachelor’s, or graduate degrees; Religion includes separate indicators for Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, None and
Other; Region includes indicator variables for each of 9 regions. Separate dummy variables are also included for
missing values of each control variable.

Tables—5

Table 8: Educational Attainment of Women Ages 45-50 by decade
College
Some College HS Graduates HS
Graduates
Dropouts
White Women
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2007
Black Women
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2007

6
7
7
11
20
30
30

10
11
13
16
27
33
32

20
27
41
44
36
28
30

65
56
39
29
17
9
8

2
3
4
8
13
18
19

2
4
6
13
23
33
33

4
9
19
29
31
30
34

92
84
71
51
33
20
14

Notes: 1950-2000 data are from the Censuses of Population. 2007 data are from the American Community
Survey. Each cell represents the percent of white or black 45-50 year old women with that level of educational
attainment.

Tables—6

Figure 1: Proportion of White and Black Women Ever Married by Age in 2007
Black Women

.5
0

Ever Married

1

White Women

20

40

60

80

20

40

No college

60

80

College or more

Source: 2007 American Community Survey
Notes: The percent who have ever married at each age are shown in the left and right panels for white and black
women, respectively. Each panel shows ever-married rates separately for those with and without a college degree.

Figure 2: Proportion of White Women Ever-Married by Age, 1950-2000
1960

197 0

1980

1990

200 0

0
1
0

.5

E ve r Ma rrie d

.5

1

1950

20

30

40

50

20

30

High School and Below
College or more

40

50

20

30

40

50

Some College

Source: 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses of Population
Notes: Each panel shows the percent who have ever married at each age in a specific decade for those with high
school or below, some college, or a college degree for white women.

Figures—1

Figure 3: Proportion of Black Women Ever-Married by Age, 1960-2007
1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

0
1
0

.5

Ever Married

.5

1

1960

20

30

40

50

20

30

40

50

High School and Below
College or more

20

30

40

50

Some College

Source: 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses of Population and the 2007 American Community Survey
Notes: Each panel shows the percent who have ever married at each age in a specific year for black women with
high school or below, some college, or a college degree. Because of small sample sizes a three-year moving average
centered at each age is used for 1960 and 1970.

Figure 4: Proportion of White Men Ever-Married by Age, 1960-2007
1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

0
1
0

.5

Ever Married

.5

1

1960

20

30

40

50

20

30

High School and Below
College or more

40

50

20

30

40

50

Some College

Source: 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses of Population and the 2007 American Community Survey
Notes: Each panel shows the percent who have ever married at each age in a specific year for white men with high
school or below, some college, or a college degree.

Figures—2

Figure 5: Proportion of Black Men Ever-Married by Age, 1960-2007
1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

0
1
0

.5

Ever Married

.5

1

1960

20

30

40

50

20

30

40

50

High School and Below
College or more

20

30

40

50

Some College

Source: 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses of Population and the 2007 American Community Survey
Notes: Each panel shows the percent who have ever married at each age in a specific year for black men with high
school or below, some college, or a college degree. Because of small sample sizes a three-year moving average
centered at each age is used in 1960 and 1970.

Figure 6: First Marriages of Women Ending in Divorce, by Year of Marriage
Blacks, College Graduates

Whites, Some College

Whites, College Graduates

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Blacks, Some College

.2

.4

.6

.8

Whites, High School and Below

0

Proportion of Marriage Ending in Divorce

Blacks, High School and Below

0

10

20

30

0

10

1950
1970
1990

20

30

0

10

20

30

1960
1980
2000

Source: 2004 Survey of Income and Program Participation. Data are from marital histories in which
respondents report the year a marriage began and, if it ended by divorce, the year the divorce occurred.
Notes: Each panel reports the proportion of women’s first marriages ending in divorce at each year since the
marriage occurred for six decadal cohorts. Cohorts are formed based on the year of marriage.

Figures—3

Figure 7: First Marriages of Men Ending in Divorce, by Year of Marriage
Blacks, College Graduates

Whites, Some College

Whites, College Graduates

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Blacks, Some College

.2

.4

.6

.8

Whites, High School and Below

0

Proportion of Marriage Ending in Divorce

Blacks, High School and Below

0

10

20

30

0

10

20

30

1950
1970
1990

0

10

20

30

1960
1980
2000

Source: 2004 Survey of Income and Program Participation. Data are from marital histories in which
respondents report the year a marriage began and, if it ended by divorce, the year the divorce occurred
Notes: Each panel reports the proportion of men’s first marriages ending in divorce at each year since the
marriage occurred for six decadal cohorts. Cohorts are formed based on the year of marriage.

Figure 8: Proportion of White Women Remarried by Years since Divorce 1971-2004
1980

1995

2004

0
1
0

.5

Percent Remarried

.5

1

1971

0

5

10

15

20

High School and Below
College or more

0

5

10

15

20

Some College

Source: Current Population Survey (June 1971, 1980, and 1995) and Survey of Income and Program
Participation (2004). Data are based on reports of marital history.
Notes: Each panel reports the proportion of white women who experienced a divorce who had remarried for
each year since divorce separately by education.

Figures—4

Figure 9: Proportion of Black Women Remarried by Years since Divorce 1971-2004
1980

1995

2004

0
1
0

.5

Percent Remarried

.5

1

1971

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

High School and Below
College or more

10

15

20

Some College

Source: Current Population Survey (June 1971, 1980, 1995) and Survey of Income & Program Participation (2004)
Notes: Each panel reports the proportion of white women who experienced a divorce who had remarried for each
year since divorce separately by education.

Figure 10: Proportion of Men Remarried by Years since Divorce 1971-2004
Blacks, 2004

Whites, 1971

Whites, 2004

0
1
0

.5

Percent Remarried

.5

1

Blacks, 1971

0

5

10

15

20

High School and Below
College or more

0

5

10

15

20

Some College

Source: Current Population Survey (June 1971) and Survey of Income and Program Participation (2004)
Notes: Each panel reports the proportion of white or black men who experienced a divorce who had
remarried for each year since divorce separately by education.

Figures—5

1960

1970

1990

2000

2007

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

1950

0

Average Number of Children in the Household

Figure 11: Average Number of Children in the Household by Age (White Women)

20

30

40

50

20

30

40

50

High School and Below
College or more

20

30

40

50

Some College

Source: 1950, 1960, 1970, 1990, and 2000 Censuses of Population and 2007 American Community Survey
Notes: Each panel shows the percent of white women with children in the household at each age in a specific
decade for those with high school or below, some college, or a college degree for white women.

1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

1960

0

Average Number of Children in the Household

Figure 12: Average Number of Children in the Household by Age (Black Women)

20

30

40

50

20

30

High School and Below
College or more

40

50

20

30

40

50

Some College

Source: 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses of Population and 2007 American Community Survey
Notes: Each panel shows the percent of black women with children in the household at each age in a specific
decade for those with high school or below, some college, or a college degree for white women. Because of small
sample sizes a three-year moving average centered at each age is used in 1960 and 1970.

Figures—6

Figure 13: Proportion of White and Black Women Currently Married
Blacks, 1980

Blacks, 2007

Whites, 1960

Whites, 1980

Whites, 2007

.5
0
1
.5
0

Percent Currently Married

1

Blacks, 1960

20

40

60

80

20

40

60

80

20

40

60

80

var1
High School and Below
College or more

Some College

Source: 1960 and 1980 Censuses of Population and 2007 American Community Survey
Notes: Each panel shows the percent of white and black women who are currently married at each age in a specific
decade for those with high school or below, some college, or a college degree for white women. Because of small
sample sizes a three-year moving average centered at each age is used in 1960 for Black Women. The samples size
for black college graduates aged 70 and older in 1960 is too small to warrant any form of inference and hence are
excluded.

Figures—7

