NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GREAT INFLATION AND CENTRAL BANK INDEPENDENCE IN JAPAN
Takatoshi Ito
Working Paper 15726
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15726

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

This paper was written for the conference on “Great Inflation.” The author is grateful to comments
on earlier versions by editors, a discussant, and anonymous referees, Michael Bordo, Frederic Mishkin,
and Athanasios Orphanides. The author has also benefited from detailed comments by Shigenori Shiratsuka,
Masato Shizume, and other participants of a seminar at the Bank of Japan in July 2009. In addition,
the author is grateful to many economists and executives, currently and in the past, of the Bank of
Japan over the past three decades. Any remaining errors are mine. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Takatoshi Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Great Inflation and Central Bank Independence in Japan
Takatoshi Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 15726
February 2010
JEL No. E02,E31,E58,N15
ABSTRACT
Japan suffered a very high inflation rate in 1973-74. The CPI inflation rate rose to near 30% in 1974,
the highest rate in the postwar Japanese history after the chaotic hyperinflation following the end of
the Second World War. Traditionally, the oil crisis is blamed for the 1973-74 high inflation. However,
due to monetary policy decisions in 1972-73, the inflation rate had already exceeded 10% before the
onset of the oil crisis in October 1973. These decisions include the interest rate cut of June 1972 and
the interest rate hike of April 1973, which in retrospect proved too small. Concern about the rapid
yen appreciation produced political pressure on the Bank of Japan to continue easing. The Bank of
Japan came out of the Great Inflation of 1973 with a stronger voice. The Bank successfully argued
that its recommendation to tighten monetary policy should not be overruled or the high inflation would
be repeated. By this logic, the Bank of Japan obtained /de facto/ independence after 1975. When
faced with the next economic recovery in 1979, again accompanied by oil price increases, the Bank
of Japan was able to tighten monetary policy and to contain the inflation rate under 10 percent. The
interest rate in the 1972-75 period was well below, by as much as 25 percentage points in 1973, the
interest rate suggested by a modified monthly Taylor rule regression.

Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033
JAPAN
and NBER
ITOINTOKYO@aol.com

1. Introduction
When the new Meiji government was established in 1868, after overturning 260 years
of the Tokugawa Shogun rule, it had to quickly build many legal institutions, such as
Constitution, Democracy, the Diet (parliament), Commercial law and Criminal Law, as
well as modern economic and social infrastructure, such as a banking system, railways,
and a postal system.
The Bank of Japan was born in 1882, only after the new Meiji government
experimented unsuccessfully a transplanting of the national banking system (without a
central bank) from the United States. The government, after some unpleasant inflation
under the national banking system, decided to adopt the central banking system
modeled after the Belgium central bank. During more than 125 years of its
uninterrupted history, the Bank of Japan saw three episodes of high inflation, defined by
more than 20 percent of CPI inflation rate: (1) 1917-1919, the WW I years; (2) 1945-49,
immediately after the end of WW II; and (3) 1973-74, the first oil crisis. 2 The first
episode reflected the export boom during WW I. 3 The second episode, when prices
increased more than 200 times in a few years, was a result of the devastation of
productive capacity and deficit financing cum monetization, which followed the end of
WW II. So the 1973-74 was the only example of high inflation unrelated to a war that
Japan was involved.
The main focus of this paper is to examine the third episode of high inflation,
when the CPI inflation rate remained above 10 percent from May 1973 to September
1975, with a spike up to 23 percent in 1974. (The inflation rate is defined as the
percentage increase of CPI over the same month of the preceding year.)
It is commonly argued that the oil crisis was the culprit to blame for the
1973-75 high inflation. However, the inflation rate has reached already 10% several
months before the Middle East crisis, which occurred in October 1973. 4 The oil crisis
only aggravated, though very badly, an inflationary spiral that had been already in
progress.
Reasons for the great inflation of 1973-74 are the followings. First, in late
This can be taken as support to a view that, in the very long run, monetary discipline
has been maintained in Japan since 1880s, except for a few episodes. A more direct test
of monetary neutrality in the long run was carried out by Oi et al. (2004).
3
Shizume (2002) examines monetary policy in the interwar period, using the Taylor rule. He
concludes that monetary policy was amplifying rather than mitigating domestic cycles due to
consideration to the stability of the exchange rate, throughout the periods under the gold standard,
1897-1913 and 1930-31, and managed exchange rate regime, 1913-1929, and after 1932.
4 Seminal work that pointed out that monetary easing, or excess liquidity, existed
before the oil price jump of October 1973 were Komiya (1976), Komiya (1988, Ch.8) and
Komiya and Yasui (1984).
2

3

1972, the Bank of Japan underestimated the strength of the economy and potential of
prices to rise quickly.
Second, there was a strong resistance against yen
revaluation/appreciation. This was particularly true between December 1971, when
the Smithsonian Agreement was reached, and February 1973, when the yen was finally
floated. The pressure for appreciation prompted interventions by the monetary
authorities in terms of selling yen, which added yen liquidity to the market, promoting
inflation. Politicians also voiced their dislike of yen appreciation, and some of them
were calling for stopping yen appreciation at any cost. The Bank lowered the official
discount rate (ODR)—that was the policy rate then—in June 1972, when recovery in
output had already become obvious. Third, Mr. Kakuei Tanaka became Prime Minister
(PM) in July 1972, advocating large fiscal spending. There was strong pressure from
his government to keep the interest rate from rising. It was a regular practice in the
1960s and 1970s that any interest rate change was subject to preliminary discussion
with and a tacit approval of the government and Prime Minister, before actually being
decided in the Policy Board (in charge of monetary policy). The Monetary Policy
Committee was not functioning as an independent decision making body at all. (Details
of pressure from politicians will be explained in later sections.)
With political pressure, it was not until April 1973 that the ODR was raised. By
that time, the CPI inflation rate was exceeding 9%. The first three, out of five, interest
rate hikes in 1973 were too little and too late. By the time of the oil price hike of
October 1973, the fight against inflation had been already lost. Both headline and core
CPI inflation rates rose above 20% by the beginning of 1974.
A panic-like chaos resulting from high inflation in 1974 finally convinced the
Bank and politicians to apply strong tightening. 5 The ODR was raised from 4.25% to
9%, in five steps, in 1973. However, the interest rate level stayed well below the
inflation rate throughout this episode. The real interest rate, measured by the difference
between ODR and CPI headline inflation rate, was on average minus 5.6% in 1973, and
minus 14.1% in 1974. 6 Disinflation in 1974 was accompanied by a sharp output
decline, a great sacrifice. The negative growth rate of 1974 was the first since 1950.
There are three possible hypotheses to explain the Bank’s soft stance toward
inflation. The first hypothesis is that the Bank of Japan did not know that the
5

Wholesalers were believed to have bought and hoarded goods. Consumers also bought in bulk to
guard themselves from future inflation. These actions shrank supply quickly and contributed to
further price increases. One widely reported story was that toilet papers would be missing from
store shelves, and that consumers in a panic rushed to supermarkets to purchase toilet
paper—clearing the store selves indeed.
6
Even when the overnight call rate was used instead of ODR, the real interest rate was minus 4.4%
in 1973 and minus 10.6% in 1974.
4

inflationary pressure was building in the economy. Examination of a memoire
(Nakagawa (1981)) and the Bank historical archives (Bank of Japan (1986)) reveal that
this was probably not the case. 7 The second hypothesis is that the Bank of Japan knew
that the inflationary risk was rising, but did not seek tightening in time because of a fear
of being turned down. The third hypothesis is that although the Bank of Japan knew of
the risk and attempted to tighten, the tightening proposal was rejected by the
government. The relationship with the government (esp. Prime Ministers as well as
Finance Ministers) in 1972-73 holds a clue. A close examination of the events reveals
that the truth is somewhere between the second and third hypothesis.
After the 1973-74 episode of high inflation that at least partly was due to a
mistake of the Bank of Japan, one might think that the Bank of Japan would have been
discredited. On the contrary, the Bank came out of the episode with a stronger voice.
The Bank has argued that if its recommendation to tighten monetary policy was to be
overruled, the tragic experiences of 1972-73 would be repeated. With this logic, the
Bank of Japan obtained de facto independence. The ODR was raised much earlier in
1979-80, the second oil crisis, than in 1973. Even more remarkable here was that the
ODR was raised during the months of a budget debate in the Diet—between January
and March—which up to that time was politically inconceivable. 8 The real interest
rate remained positive in 1979-80, in contrast to being hugely negative, in 1973-74. The
real interest rate measured by the difference between the ODR and CPI headline
inflation rate was on average 1% in 1979 and 0.4% in 1980; while the real interest rate
of the call rate was 2.2% in 1979 and 3.2% in 1980. As a result, even with sharp oil
price increases in 1979-80, the inflation rate in Japan remained moderate, peaking at
8.7%.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the 120
year history of inflation in Japan. Section 3 describes the economic events and
political developments as well as monetary policy actions, which resulted in Great
Inflation of 1972-74. The monetary policy during this period is considered to be a
mistake. 9 Section 4 describes why the Bank of Japan gained monetarist rhetoric and de
facto independence after the mistake of 1972-73. Section 5 reviews no-inflation
experience during the second oil crisis, 1978-80. Section 6 will be devoted to some
econometric analysis to substantiate the arguments in the preceding sections. Section
Nelson (2007), relying on Newspaper articles, described the policy debate in the
1970s.
8
The reason for the hesitation of ODR changes during the budget process was that it would make
budget assumptions outdated, while a budget bill could not be changed easily.
9
See Ito (1992; pp. 125-127) for an earlier description of the “mistake.”
7

5

7 concludes the paper.
2. Long History
The yen, as the currency of Japan, was introduced in 1871, and the Bank of Japan was
established in 1882. There have been three episodes of very high inflation, the
inflation rate exceeding 20 percent. Figure 1 shows the CPI inflation rate from 1880 to
2007 for Japan. The highest inflation rate during the 125 year history was recorded
immediately after the WW II. During the WW I, a very high inflation rate was also
observed. Except for these two World War-related inflation episodes, the inflation rate
in Japan has been below 10 percent, except the high inflation of 1973-74. Table 1
shows the WPI and CPI inflation rates in the three episodes. Since the two earlier
episodes are directly related to the World Wars, many factors that defined the inflation
rates in those years are beyond control of the central bank. The only interesting
episode from the viewpoint of monetary policy is the third episode, namely in 1973-74.
This period will be analyzed in detail in the next section.
The rest of this section is devoted to an overview of the long history of
inflation dynamics and the associated exchange rate movement. Most of the
discussion follows Ito (1997) who examined the yen/dollar exchange rate as well as the
inflation dynamics of the two countries. When the yen was introduced in 1871, one yen
had the same gold value as the US dollar. Hence, the exchange rate was 1 yen for 1
dollar. Legally it was a gold-pegged currency, but in reality, it was convertible to silver.
Hence, over the following twenty-five years, the yen depreciated steadily against the US
dollar, mainly reflecting the depreciation of silver against gold. By 1895, 1 US dollar
was worth 2 yen. During the de facto silver convertible years, Japanese prices—both
CPI and WPI—were oscillating between inflation and deflation, the average inflation
rates of Japan from 1880 to 1896 were 1.1% in terms of the CPI and 2.1% in terms of
the WPI. The highest inflation rates were 14.5% for CPI in 1880 (in the wake of the
Seinan War), 9.0% in WPI in 1896 (in the wake of the Sino-Japan War). In 1880, the
inflation rate was high due to the government paying for its deficits that had been
caused by fighting and defeating the rebel in the South (an episode known as the Seinan
War). This inflation pushed the move toward establishing the Bank of Japan in 1882.
The WPI inflation rate of Japan in 1896 was high in the wake of the Sino-Japan war of
1894-95. The inflation rates in the US were slightly lower than Japan, -0.4% for CPI
and -1.5% for WPI. The highest rate was 7.5% for CPI and 11.1% for WPI, both in
1880. Although as a silver standard country, Japan experienced a higher inflation rate
than the United States, the inflation difference was more or less offset by the nominal

6

depreciation of the yen vis-à-vis the US dollar, so that the real bilateral exchange rate
was stable.
Once Japan joined the gold standard club in 1897, it was maintained until WW
I. The gold standard then was a significant discipline device against inflation, just as
theory would suggest. Japan maintained the gold standard at the rate roughly two yen
to one dollar. Since the inflation rate during WW I in Japan was higher than the US,
attempting to get back to the gold standard at the old parity meant deflationary policy,
similar to experiences among European countries. Indeed, the inflation rate was
mostly negative during the 1920s through 1931. The CPI declined by 19% from 1920 to
1929, and by 20% from 1929 to 1931. With unfortunate events like the Great Kanto Earth
Quake of 1923 and the banking crisis of 1927, the timing of getting back to the gold
standard was put off until January 1930. The timing of restoring gold standard turned
out to be the worst, as the world economy, especially the US economy, was heading
toward the Great Depression. Japan got off the gold standard only after 22 months in
December 1931, following many European countries. The yen/dollar exchange rate
depreciated quickly as the United States maintained the gold standard until 1933. It
did not take too long that the value of the yen in terms of one dollar to became half of
the gold standard rats, that is, four yen per US dollar. The rapid depreciation is partly
due to a rapid adjustment to the level that would restore export competitiveness in the
wake of European devaluation that preceded Japan’s devaluation by several months, and
partly due to large fiscal stimulus and an increase in imports. (See Ito, Okina, and
Teranishi (1993) for events in detail for the fast depreciation period in 1931-33.)
Before the WW II, the nominal yen depreciated vis-à-vis the US dollar
continuously, except for the gold standard periods. However, between 1880 and 1930,
the changes of the nominal yen/dollar rate were matched with the inflation differentials
between the two countries, resulting in relatively stable real bilateral exchange rate.
Much of productive capacity in Japan was destroyed at the last phase of WW II.
Hyper inflation followed as the country was occupied by the Allied Forces. Within
several years, the price level reached almost one hundred times its prewar level. The
new yen/dollar rate was fixed in 1949 at 360 yen per dollar. With it, a strong fiscal and
monetary tightening, known as the Dodge Plan, was introduced by the order of the
Allied Forces. The hyper inflation stopped suddenly. This may be an early example
of an exchange rate based stabilization policy—later reinvented by the IMF.
During the Bretton-Woods era, monetary policy was operated to maintain the
fixed exchange rate. Since significant capital controls existed, monetary policy did have
some degree of freedom (that is, the interest rate in Japan could be different from that in

7

the U.S.). The balance of payments had to be maintained, so that the Bank of Japan
applied monetary restraints whenever the booming economy increased imports far
exceeding exports, depleting foreign reserves. However, Japan was a diligent student
of the Bretton-Woods regime. The rate of 360 yen/dollar was maintained from 1949
until August 1971.
During the Bretton-Woods years, the Japanese CPI inflation rate was higher
than the US CPI, while the Japanese WPI inflation rate was much more comparable to a
US counterpart. Comparing the CPI inflation rate, the Japanese rate was almost
double the US rate for each of the 1950s (4.1% in Japan vs. 2.1% in the US) and 1960s
(5.7% in Japan vs. 2.8% in the US). For the WPI inflation rate the Japanese rate was
rather close to the US rate: it was higher in Japan in the 1950s (4.2% in Japan vs. 1.7%
in the US) but reversed in the 1960s (1.3% in Japan vs. 1.7% in the US). This is a
strong indication that the Balassa-Samuelson effect was working through the CPI
inflation differential. See also Ito (1997) for the discussion and the data source.
From the 1950s to 1970s, the main monetary policy instrument was the official
discount rate (ODR), supplemented by reserve ratios (ratios were different for different
kinds of deposits). The monetary aggregate growth rate was monitored but not
emphasized. All deposit rates were under strict controls (until the mid-1980s) and linked
to the official discount rate. The bank lending rates to corporations were also
indirectly controlled. Total lending amounts were also controlled by the Bank of Japan.
Commercial banks had to submit lending plans every quarter and results were
monitored carefully. The total amount of lending (increases) was controlled for each
bank. This practice is called “window guidance.” Private-sector corporations were
not allowed to borrow from abroad or had deposits abroad. All export earning in US
dollar and other foreign currencies had to be converted into yen and importers had to
obtain foreign currencies from the Bank of Japan. Individuals were also under strict
approvals for obtaining foreign currencies. No foreign currency deposits were allowed.
See Ito (1992: Ch. 5) for more detailed description of the transformation of the financial
markets from a controlled system to a liberalized system gradually in the 1970s and the
1980s. (See Ito (1992: p.320) for chronology of capital control deregulations,
1979-1986; and finally almost all controls were lifted in the “Big Bang” of 1996.)
3. Great Inflation of 1973-74
3.1. Transition from the Bretton Woods to Free Floating
The collapse of the Bretton-Woods regime in August 1971 suddenly freed the Bank of
Japan from conducting monetary policy solely to maintain the balance of payments by

8

controlling domestic demands. Theoretically the exchange rate could move freely to
adjust imports and exports, and the Bank of Japan could concentrate its policy
objectives to domestic prices. But, this did not happen, at least, until February 1973.
After some chaotic trading in the yen/dollar market and gradual appreciation of
the yen after the collapse of the Bretton-Woods regime, the G10 countries agreed in
December 1971 to a new parity with a narrow band with fluctuation plus/minus 2.25%.
The yen had appreciated gradually from 360 yen to 315 yen per dollar by the
mid-December 1971. Under the Smithsonian Agreement of December 18, 1971, the
central rate for the yen/dollar rate was determined, after tough negotiation, to be 308
yen/dollar, a 16.88% revaluation (according to the IMF definition) from the
Bretton-Woods rate of 360 yen/dollar.
The Smithsonian rate of 308 yen/dollar was regarded by many in Japan as a
dangerously appreciated yen level. The export industries, particularly shipbuilding, were
considered to be vulnerable. Guarding against further appreciation became a new
national objective. As the yen had stuck at the most appreciated level (ceiling) of the
Smithsonian band in 1972, monetary policy and fiscal policy were conducted to
stimulate the domestic economy so that imports would increase and the trade surpluses
would come down. Even if inflation would result from increasing domestic demand,
that would not be a problem, politicians insisted. Political pressure to keep monetary
policy relaxed was strong, but no dissenting voice from the Bank of Japan was heard in
public.
3.2.

The “mistake”: Overview

Movements of the inflation rates, CPI and WPI, and the interest rates, ODR and call rate,
from 1971 to 1975 are shown in Figure 2 where inflation variables are defined as a
change over the same month of one year earlier. Table 2 shows Industrial production,
M2 growth rate, and yen/dollar rate as well as CPI and WPI inflation. There were little
cautionary signs of inflation until the summer of 1972, the CPI inflation rate being at
around 5%, and slightly declining, and the WPI inflation rate close to zero. However,
the WPI started to increase in the summer of 1972, and quickly reached 5%, the level of
CPI inflation rate, by November 1972. The sharp increase in the WPI was considered to
be an indication of future inflation in the CPI.
In June 1972, the interest rate was cut to stimulate the economy. According to
Nakagawa (1981), this rate cut was first planned in April, but delayed for political
reasons. This will be explained in detail below. By the time of implementation, it was
way behind the curve, since the WPI inflation rate started to increase and industrial

9

production started to show signs of recovery.
The WPI inflation rate continued to accelerate, and reached a 11 percent by
April 1973, while the CPI inflation rate reached 9.4% by April 1973. In April 1973,
the Bank of Japan raised its policy interest rate (ODR) for the first time since the
collapse of the Bretton-Woods system.
The fact that the inflation rate rose sharply and exceeded 10% by summer 1973
and there were some signs already a year earlier, the interest rate cut of June 1972 was a
“mistake.” 10 By the same reasoning, the absence of monetary tightening until the CPI
inflation rate nearing 10% in April 1973 showed that the Bank was too slow to respond.
Reasons for this mistake based on political economy are presented below.
Figure 2 (above) also shows that after the Middle East Crisis of October 1973,
both the CPI and WPI inflation rates increased sharply. The WPI inflation rate rose to
near 35%, and CPI near 25% by spring 1974. This was the greatest peace time
inflation for Japan. Due to a very high inflation rate, wages rose sharply in 1974 as well
as 1973, in order to compensate for an increase in living costs. Companies were
enjoying profits from the demand stimulation of 1972 and 1973 (until the oil price
shock, starting in October 1973). The inflation spiral was in place from mid-1973 to
1974. Oil prices tripled from July 1973 to January 1974, with the selective embargo
by OPEC countries. The sharp increase in imported oil prices aggravated the
Hetzel (1999) provides the overview of Japanese monetary policy during the period
from 1970 to 1998. He argues that the Bank of Japan had little room to make decisions
until the fixed exchange rate was abandoned. It is true that under the Bretton-Woods
regime (which ended in August 1971), there could not be totally autonomous monetary
policy—independent from the US monetary policy—but since substantial capital
controls were in place, so that the interest rate could be deviated from the United States.
However, Japanese monetary policy could not be totally autonomous due to the balance
of payment (BOP) constraints (see Ito (1992, Ch. 5)). In sum, monetary policy had a
room to maneuver due to capital controls, but there was an overall BOP constraint.
After August 1971, there were substantial policy options, including how much
appreciation and fluctuation of the yen to be tolerated, how much inflation rate to be
tolerated, how much capital liberalization to be allowed. Before the Smithsonian
agreement—an attempt to fix the exchange rates at new rates with wider bands—the
major countries were struggling how much appreciation vis-à-vis the US dollar to be
tolerated, and Japan was not an exception. The Smithsonian agreement, December
1971 was a result of hard negotiation groping for new constellation of fixed exchange
rates. Japan accepted more than 16% appreciation, but probably that was too little.
Since there was a wide band, theoretically, monetary policy had room to maneuver
under the Smithsonian regime. However, the yen had stuck at the ceiling, before Japan
decided to abandon the Smithsonian regime in February 1973, one month ahead of
European countries. Hence, including the choice of abandoning the Smithsonian
regime, there were policy choices between December 1971 and February 1973. It was
certainly true that monetary policy was freed from US monetary policy after February
1973.
10

10

already-high-and-increasing inflation rate.
While the CPI inflation rate above 20% was very high, the industrial
production growth rate turned negative in 1974, as shown in Figure 3. The real GDP
growth rate became negative for the first time since 1955, when GDP statistics became
available. Table 3 shows GDP changes, quarter to quarter annualized rates, and
year-on-year growth rates. Table 4 shows the GDP growth rates. The year 1974 was
typical of stagflation—with a very high inflation rate with negative growth in output.
Table 3 (above) and vertical lines in Figure 2 (above) show the timing of the
monetary policy actions. The interest rate (ODR) was raised five times in the nine
month period starting April 1973. However, there was no action in 1974. Obvious
questions are why tightening did not come earlier and why there was not more
tightening in 1974. We will answer these questions below
Figure 4 shows movements of the CPI headline, CPI Core (excluding fresh
food), CPI Core-Core (excluding food and energy-related), Since all three CPIs move
together, it shows the role of energy was relatively small, in the run up to the high
inflation period of 1974. There are at a maximum a 5% point difference between Core
and Core-Core, which is roughly the contribution of energy prices.
Negative growth in 1974 and quite depressed wage increase in 1975 were the
reason that the inflation rate came down in the second half of 1974 and throughout 1975.
The WPI inflation rate fell below 5% in the spring of 1975, and by the end of 1975, the
CPI inflation rate fell below 10%. The great inflation of 1973-74 was over, with a
heavy sacrifice in output activities in 1974.
3.3. Why easing went too far: the Mistake of June 1972
As explained above, the necessity of lowering the ODR by 50 basis points on June 24,
1972 is highly questionable since the output had shown signs of recovery, and prices,
particularly the WPI, also showed the sign of recovery.
Bank of Japan (1986) and Nakagawa (1981), a former Bank senior official,
describes what really went on behind the scene over this period.
In April 1972, lowering the ODR was considered as a part of an anti-yen
appreciation package of the government. Inside the BOJ, opinions were divided into
two camps, one favoring lowering the ODR and the other considering the rate cut
unnecessary. Governor Sasaki maintained to the press that it was not necessary. On
May 10, Governor Sasaki met Prime Minister Sato, and the Governor was asked to
consider lowering the ODR. On May 11, Governor Sasaki mentioned that the ODR
would be lowered on the condition that the bank deposit rates will be lowered. Inside

11

the Bank, the proposal by the Governor to lower the rate, although with one technical
condition, was considered to be a surprise turnaround of his position. (See BOJ (1986,
p.381) for events on May 10 and 11.)
It took more than a month to decide on the deposit rate, because the Ministry of
Posts and Communication, which oversaw the Postal Saving System, was opposed to
the deposit rate cut. Finally, on June 23, the Postal saving deposit rates were lowered,
and the Bank decided to lower the ODR.
This episode reveals three problems. First, the Governor apparently was
persuaded by Prime Minister on the interest rate decision. Second, as all the
private-sector interest rates were effectively linked to ODR, the ODR decision should
seep into the system automatically. However, bank deposit taking and Postal Saving
deposit taking competed for household deposits. Thus, the Ministry of Posts and
Communication could effectively block the timely implementation. Third, between
the government plan of April and the actual implementation, two months had passed.
The wisdom of lowering the interest rate should have been reassessed by the Bank of
Japan as well as by the government in June.
Nakagawa (1981) regrets that the Bank (including himself) had not been
courageous enough to scrap the plan for the interest rate cut, since between April and
June, economic activity picked up considerably. He, however, thinks that once the
political process—forcing the Postal Saving System to lower the deposit rate—had gone
through the cycle, it was difficult to scrap it (Nakagawa (1981)).
3.4. Why tightening did not come earlier
With the government and the Bank of Japan pressing for domestic demand
stimulation—again to avoid appreciation of the yen—in the first half of 1972, the wish
was granted. In the second half of 1972, the economy was growing full steam. The
GDP growth rate was increasing in the 9% to 10% range in the second half of 1972, and
rose above 10% in 1973 (recall Table 3); industrial production was increasing in the 10
to 15 percent range from mid-1972 to end-1972. The CPI inflation rate was above
5.7% and WPI inflation rate was 6.3% in December 1972. It seems very natural that the
Bank of Japan would react to raise the interest rate as early as October 1972, and at
latest in December 1972. Why was the ODR not raised until April 1973?
The simple answer for a delayed reaction to inflation signals was again actual
and potential political pressure. The economy indeed became strong and inflation
pressure mounted by end-1972. The ODR was not raised until April 1973.
The government decided to have a fiscal expansion package for the 1972 fiscal

12

year budget (April 1972-March 1973) under Prime Minister Sato. The 1973 fiscal
year was also intended to maintain fiscal stimulus. On July 7, 1972, Mr. Tanaka
became Prime Minister.
He won the Presidency of the Liberal Democratic
Party—hence automatically guaranteed to become Prime Minister—on the platform of
“Reconstruction of the Japanese Archipelago”—large public works to build a network
of road and railroad infrastructure. He announced an additional fiscal spending program
in August. In October a supplementary budget and a second additional plan for a fiscal
investment program was announced. He was very popular among the voters. It was
clear that he would be opposed to the rate hike. The Bank of Japan felt that it would not
be possible to seek a rate hike. On November 9, PM Tanaka reiterated a strong
opposition to yen revaluation (BoJ, 1986, p.403)
On November 13, the House of Representatives was dissolved, and on
December 11, 1972, the general election took place. According to Bank of Japan (1986)
and Nakagawa (1981), the Ministry of Finance told the Bank of Japan not to consider
even the appearance of a policy change, during the election period.
Right after the election, the budget discussion started in the Diet and the budget
debate and votes continued until March 13, 1973. Traditionally no monetary policy
changes were made during the budget process, because that would affect the assumption
of budget. This time, tradition was kept.
On February 14, 1973, the yen was floated (earlier than the European
currencies) as a result of heavy pressure for yen appreciation.. In March 1973,
currency speculation became wide spread among the European currencies, resulting in
free floating (the end of the Smithsonian).
When the budget process was over, and the fixed-exchange rate fetter was
broken, the Bank of Japan got an approval for a rate hike. On March 31, 1973, the
approval was given (and implemented in two days later) in a chat between the Finance
Minister and Governor in the corridor of the Diet. (Bank of Japan (1986).)
Eight months of selecting a pro-spending Prime Minister, the dissolution of the
Diet, and the budget process in the Diet explains the tardy implementation of the rate
hike. There was an explicit approval of inflation if it would contribute to keep the
nominal exchange rate within the approved range under the Smithsonian rate. On
August 9, 1972, MITI Minister Nakasone mentioned that he preferred domestic
inflation to yen appreciation. (BoJ, 1986, p. 401) He said, “Japan is forced to choose
between another yen revaluation and adjustment inflation. I think another yen
revaluation should be definitely avoided; hence the economic activities should be
stimulated,,,” The inflation to avoid appreciation was named as “adjustment

13

inflation.” Indeed, one way to achieve real exchange rate appreciation—which may be
required to prevent the trade surplus from increasing—is inflation. Of course, inflation
carries high costs of adjustment and distortions, and is an inferior policy compared to
appreciation of the nominal exchange rate. But, this view was not shared among
politicians at the time.
The step of the April 1973 rate hike, 75 basis point, was unusually high,
probably reflecting the fact that the Bank was behind the curve. Three other rate hikes,
May 30 (+0.50); July 2 (+0.50); Aug 29 (+1.00) followed in a hurry (recall Table 4 and
Figure 3 above). However, the inflation rate continued rising. With the news of the
Middle East War breaking out on October 6, 1973, the inflation rate was already at a
dangerously high level, the CPI at 15%, the WPI at 20%. Inflation rates shot up after
October—some direct result of increasing oil prices, and some indirect, but immediate,
effects of speculative inventory hoarding and panic buying. The Bank of Japan
decided to raise ODR by 200 basis points on December 22, to put maximum pressure
against inflation.
The real interest rate remained negative from October 1972 until the mid-1975.
The period from October 1972 to mid-1974 is characterized as widening the gap (more
negative interest rate) and accelerating growth—a clear sign of being behind the curve.
The real interest rate remained negative until mid-1975. Tightening was too little too
late throughout 1973.
A crucial question is whether the Bank of Japan knew of the danger of
postponing the rate hike and if so, whether the Bank sought after the rate hike even with
risk of clashing with the government. BOJ (1986, pp. 409-411) described the inside
thinking at the time. As the pace of inflation picked up, the Bank of Japan decided to
push for the ODR hike in February 1973. The yen was floated on Feb 14 and
appreciated substantially. This removed one constraint on monetary policy. However,
this produced a political push for stimulus. Again, it was still in the budget process,
which was the politically sensitive time of the year to change the interest rate, so that
the Bank of Japan tried to raise the reserve ratio, rather than the interest rate. The
increase in the reserve ratio was decided on March 2, and implemented on March 16.
the Policy Board Chair noted, “The economy recently has become more active; prices
are rising high; and corporate investment has become strong, …, in order to restrain the
lending of financial institutions and manage aggregate demand appropriately, … the
reserve ratio was decided to be raised, upon approval of the Minister of Finance.” The
budget bill was passed in House of Rep. on March 13, and Prime Minister Tanaka
admitted on March 16 the need for a policy switch to monetary tightening and fiscal

14

adjustment for restraining aggregate demand. This gave an approval for a policy
action toward tightening. The ODR hike was decided on March 31 (Sat) and
implemented on April 2. “in order to restraint aggregate demand, ,,,” In addition,
quantitative restraint on lending from city banks was strengthened.
There is not much of a trace of a struggle between the Bank and the
government prior to February 1973, reading through BOJ (1986). The Bank was
probably too much self-restrained, or gave up on fighting against the Ministry of
Finance as well as inflation.
3.5. Political Economy
Let us have a recap on the Great Inflation episode. There were two kinds of major
mistakes committed in 1972-73: too much easing, especially the June 1972 rate cut;
and too little and too late tightening that started in April 1973. Possible reasons for the
mistake are as follows:
(a) Was the Bank of Japan targeting price stability?
(b) Did the Bank of Japan fail to forecast the inflation rate pick up?
(c) Did the government put pressure on the Bank of Japan to stimulate the
economy?
(d) Did the Bank of Japan have courage to disagree?
Answers in short are as follows based on the documents that examined the decision
makings of the 1970s.
(a) No, the Bank of Japan did not put price stability as priority number one;
(b) Yes, the Bank of Japan knew prices were rising;
(c) Yes, the Bank of Japan was under pressure from the government to lower
and keep low the interest rate; and could not resist the pressure
(d) No, the Bank of Japan did not fight back.
Let us elaborate on these points below.
3.5.1. Lack of clear policy objective under the Managed Float
Recall that the average inflation rate in Japan during the 1960s was 1.3% measured in
WPI and 5.7% measured in CPI, and the economy did fine, growing at more than 10% a
year and current account remaining surplus. Thus, it is not surprising that policy
makers in 1971-72 were not alarmed by the CPI inflation rate at around 6%, especially
when the WPI inflation rate was at around 0%. The ODR was lowered four times
between October 1970 and July 1971, in the hope of stimulating domestic demand

15

further and averting an appreciation of the yen. These actions were under the
Bretton-Woods regime, and quite understandable, if maintaining the exchange rate
regime was the superior objective.
After the Bretton-Woods regime collapsed, the Government and the Bank of
Japan decided to resist pressure for strong yen appreciation pressure by heavy
intervention.
However, they underestimated the strength of the Japanese
manufacturing industries. By putting a policy objective to moderate yen appreciation,
inflation was tolerated.
3.3.2. Lack of political independence
The Bank of Japan law in the 1970s (until 1998) did not give the Bank a policy
objective of price stability or legal independence from the Ministry of Finance. The
objective of the Bank in the Law was to “maximize the potential of the economy” and
the Bank policy was under the direction of the Minister of Finance. On the other hand,
the interest rate was supposed to be decided by the Policy Board (in charge of monetary
policy) of the Bank of Japan that includes appointments from outside the Bank.
Theoretically, the Policy Board can make interest rate decisions which may be opposed
by the government. The Government has the power to replace Policy Board members
as well as the Governor. In reality, the Bank senior executives sought after a tacit prior
approval from the government over interest rate decisions, and the Policy Board had
become just an automatic approving body of the Bank executives. Getting approval of
the interest rate changes was tricky. It often depended on the relationship between
Governor and the Minister of Finance, or between Governor and Prime Minister
Later in 1998, the Bank of Japan Law was revised. Cargill, Hutchison, and
Ito (1997; 2000) describes the history and legal details of the Bank of Japan laws, with a
comparison of scores of legal independence between the old and new laws.
What could the central bank have done in the absence of independence?
Without independence, the Governor could be replaced at will of the government. So
can members of the Policy Board. It was tradition that the change in monetary policy
had to be negotiated with the Ministry of Finance (and Prime Minister), although by law
the Policy Board at the BoJ could decide on its own power. Even lowering the interest
rate was difficult because the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications tended to
oppose lowering the deposit rate. Increasing the interest rate of course was much
harder. Could the Governor put his job on the line to disagree the government?
Maybe that was not the Japanese style.

16

4. Monetarist Rhetoric for Independence
One lesson that the Bank of Japan learned from the mistake of creating high
inflation in 1973–74 was to enhance de facto independence. To develop more
theoretical underpinning for controlling inflation was one, and to assert the danger of
inflation, when met with pressure from the government, was another. If the future
inflation can be credibly warned with some indicators, that would be persuasive.
The Bank of Japan published a study in 1975 on the importance of monetary
aggregate, M2+CDs, in predicting future inflation and output, and announced a new
monetary policy procedure in 1978. 11 Beginning in July 1978, the Bank of Japan had
made it a regular procedure to announce a “forecast” of the growth rate of the average
outstanding balance of money (M2+CDs) relative to the same period in the previous
year, at the beginning of the quarter. For example, the forecast for monetary growth in
the first quarter of 1985 over the first quarter of 1984 was announced at the beginning
of the first quarter of 1985. There are two important features for this procedure. First,
the forecast included the will of the Bank of Japan: “… the policy actions of the Bank
of Japan iself are included in the determination of these forecasts, and in this sense the
forecasts represent increases in the money supply that the Bank of Japan is willing to
permit.” (Suzuki, (1987; p.331)) 12 Second, three quarters, out of four, are already
history in the announced annual growth rate. The forecast represents an average of
three quarters’ realized monetary growth and current quarter’s projected monetary
growth. Therefore, the will to change in money is concentrated on the current quarter.
If the monetary growth rate is an indicator for warning future inflation, monetarism
rhetoric can be used in the debate against those who argue otherwise. Although the
Bank of Japan did not seem to use actively the monetarism rhetoric against political
pressure, the monetary indicator may have contributed to confidence among the Bank
economists internally.
At the time, a monetarist thinking had a strong influence among central bank
researchers as well as academics. The Bank of Japan must have thought that there was a
high correlation between M2＋CDs and future nominal GNP, and that it could relatively
easily control M2＋CDs via monetary policy instruments. Thus, using M2+CDs as an
intermediate target, the Bank could target low inflation rate and full-employment output
at the same time.
The new procedure had rhetoric of distinct monetarism flavor. In fact, Milton
11

See Bank of Japan, (1975, 1988) for their description of the procedure and assessments.
See Ito (1989) for more detailed descriptions and examination of the Bank of Japan “forecasts” of
monetary aggregate growth rates.

12

17

Friedman (1985a) praised that the Bank of Japan followed monetarist rule that he had
advocated. 13 By keeping the monetary growth rate steady, say at k%, then output
would be stabilized and the inflation rate would be kept low (near k%). The Bank of
Japan has been least monetarist central bank in its rhetoric, the most monetarist in its
policy. It has also achieved the best results. However, Suzuki (1985) was more cautious.
He branded Japanese monetary policy of the time as “eclectic gradualism,” which is a
position between Keynesian fine tuning and a monetarist k%-growth rule.
A decade later, Suzuki (1985) observed that the money-supply growth rate was
gradually reduced, so was the nominal-GNP growth rate—but without interfering with
the real-GNP growth rate; moreover, fluctuations in the money supply have decreased. 14
This means that the gradual decrease in the money-supply growth rate reduced inflation
without reducing economic growth, that is, no tradeoff between inflation and potential
growth.
Was the successful Bank of Japan policy a k% rule? According to Ito (1989, 1992),
the Bank of Japan did not practice the k%-growth rule preached by monetarists in the
following details of implementation. If the k% rule had been implemented, then
higher-than-forecasted growth in money should have been followed by lower-than-trend
growth in money, to maintain the long-run growth rate of k% by offsetting the upward
deviation.
However, it was found that when the actual monetary growth rate deviated from its
forecast rate, the target rate of the following period (quarter) was most likely to be
adjusted toward the actual growth rate. That is, if the actual growth rate was higher than
the target rate in quarter T, the target rate of quarter T ＋ 1 was higher than the target
rate in quarter T. In addition, the target was unbiased in the sense that the mean of the
forecast error was zero—the “forecasts” were rational expectations.
The observed facts are not consistent with monetarist practice. If the k% rule had
been taken seriously, the target rate for quarter T ＋ 1 should move in the opposite
direction of the deviation so that k% growth in the money stock could be maintained in
the long run. That is, if the actual rate was higher than the target rate in quarter T, then
the target rate of quarter T ＋ 1 should be lower than the target rate in quarter T, in
order to compensate for the unexpected increase (see Ito (1989)).
Thus, despite praise from monetarists, the monetary policy of the Bank of Japan
cannot be judged to have been practicing monetarism as defined by the k% rule.
13

Milton Friedman (1985b) was very critical of the Federal Reserve under Chairman Paul Volcker
in its implementation of 1979 policy to target the growth rate of monetary aggregate (M1) in an
attempt to fight inflation.
14
See also Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito (1997: ch. 3) for the updated discussion.
18

However, the fact that the inflation rate was brought down gradually without affecting
the trend growth rate was praised as a successful implementation of monetary policy
with monetary aggregate emphasis (see Suzuki (1985, 1987)). It is conceivable that
the monetary growth emphasis from 1978 to mid-1980s gave some weapon of rhetoric
in fighting against pressure from the government (see Ito (1992, chapter 5)).
The emphasis on monetary growth rate was more or less terminated after 1987
when the monetary aggregate growth rate became much higher than forecasts
consistently, most likely from the instability of money demand due to rapid financial
liberalization at the time.
5. No Great Inflation in 1979-80
5.1. Overview
Another oil crisis came at the end of the 1970s. If the oil crisis was a culprit of the
Great Inflation earlier, which I have refuted already, the same would happen. If the
second oil crisis was managed—and indeed it was the case shown below—that would
strengthen the case that the Bank of Japan made a mistake at the first time.
Figure 5 shows the interest rates (ODR and call rate) as well as the inflation
rates (CPI and WPI) for the period from January 1976 to December 1980. The CPI
inflation rate had fallen slowly to the five percent level by end 1979. The economy
was back to normal from 1978 to the beginning of 1979. The economy showed the
sign of a boom by end-1978. The dollar had a confidence crisis in mid-1978. The dollar
decline (yen rise) occurred for several months, but reversed after October 1978. This
time, expansionary monetary policy was not taken. The WPI started to rise in the
spring of 1979. This time, WPI movement was noted as a good forward indicator of
CPI inflation. Although the CPI inflation rate was still stable at 3% range, the ODR
was hiked in April 17, 1979, and again in July 24, 1979, as shown in Table 5. The WPI
continued to rise, although CPI was still lagging behind during the summer of 1979.
The oil prices started to rise in the summer, and accelerated further after the hostage
crisis at the US Embassy in Iran in October 1979.
As CPI inflation rate started to rise after October 1979, the Bank of Japan
decided to raise the ODR further. The ODR was hiked again in November 2, 1979.
The inflation rate continued to rise quickly.
The Bank of Japan sought and obtained an approval from the government to
raise the policy interest rate, ODR, again in February and March of 1980. This was the
first time that the Bank of Japan was able to raise the interest rate during the budget
process. The Bank could not respond quickly due to the moratorium during the budget

19

process during the Great Inflation episode as described in preceding section. So, the
fact it was achieved brought a tremendous joy to the Bank of Japan policy makers.
The reason that enabled the Bank to persuade politicians and the Ministry of Finance
was high inflation experience of 1973-74. The Bank convinced the Ministry and
politicians of the importance of timely monetary policy actions. Many scholars
including Cargill, Hutchison and Ito (1997) describe that the Bank of Japan achieved a
de facto independence from the government by 1979.
The CPI inflation rate was kept under 10 percent a year, and the real interest
rate (call minus CPI inflation rate) remained positive. The effects of the second oil
crisis was over by end-1980.
5.2. Quick start of tightening, April, July, and November 1979
In January 1979, Governor mentioned that no more relaxing of monetary policy would
come, and the policy stance was changed to “neutral.” In March 1979, OPEC raised
oil prices by more than 10 percent. The WPI started to increase sharply from January
to March.
With the first sign of the WPI increase, the Bank sought to raise the interest rate
(Nakagawa, 1981, pp. 111-126). First, on March 20, Governor Morinaga mentioned
that BOJ switched to a cautionary stance. In early April, Governor Morinaga told
Prime Minister Ohira and Finance Minister that the BOJ wish to raise ODR. They were
in favor, but some other cabinet members were not in favor. PM Ohira understood the
BOJ position. The ODR hike was decided on April 16 (implemented on April 17).
Nakagawa (1981: pp. 116-126) also mentioned that the Bank understood that
early actions were needed due to lags in the monetary policy process. The WPI rose
sharply from March to May, 1979, mainly due to energy prices. Business complained
of monetary tightening, arguing that monetary policy was ineffective against imported
inflation. The BOJ rebutted that the imported price increase would raise the CPI
eventually and it will start the process of inflationary spiral, and real activity was strong.
In addition, Germany raised the interest rate at the end of March. The lessons of the
1972-74 episode must have been learned and applied here.
The Economic Planning Agency disagreed with the BOJ judgment, saying
there were differences between the first oil crisis and 1979: the labor market is soft;
money supply growth rate is lower; corporations are cautious; the utilization rate is
lower; the exchange rate is floating; and the government is cautious. BOJ rebutted that it
was worse due to a large amount government bonds that had been issued between 1973
and 1979; and the yen has depreciated; and oil prices started to rise early.

20

In July 1979, another ODR hike was realized. Nakagawa (1981: pp. 126-134)
explained this hike as follows. OPEC raised the oil prices in July. At the Tokyo
summit, restraining demand was agreed. Governor Morinaga met PM Ohira, the day
before flying to the BIS meeting, and proposed a rate hike, and got a nod immediately.
Business activity was considered to be strong. The government, especially the Ministry
of Finance, was cautious, and argued that the timing could be August or September.
However, Governor Morinaga had got a nod from Prime Minister on its personal
relationship, and won the debate against the Ministries.
The government still insisted that “in order to suppress aggregate demand” was
inappropriate for the reason of the rate hike. The BOJ explained the action:
“demand-supply became tight. … Money supply continues to increase and money
tightening is not felt. Hence, in order to avoid making imported inflation into
home-made inflation, it is absolutely necessary to raise the official discount rate.”
(Nakagawa, 1981, p. 129) Upon agreement between MOF and BOJ, the ODR was
decided to be raised on July 23, and implemented July 24.
The ODR was further raised in November 1979. WPI continued to rise (a
large jump in September), the yen depreciated (223 yen/dollar at end-September and
240 yen/dollar in October. The House of Rep. election took place on October 7. The
LDP lost many seats. Mr Ohira remained as Prime Minister, but only after a fierce
fight and split voting in the House of Representatives (the so-called 40-day fight). The
government was in chaos. The BOJ determined to raise ODR early, and this time, there
was no objection from MOF, but the Bank waited until the next PM was to be
determined (since there was no precedent of changing ODR during a general election or
before a new cabinet is formed). The BOJ decided to raise ODR on November 1 and
implemented it on November 2.
5.3. Interest rate hike in February and March 1980
After the Nov 2 ODR hike, inflation worries continued. On Nov 4, 1979 the Iranian
hostage crisis (US Embassy was attacked and diplomats were taken hostage) occurred
(and hostages were not released until Jan 1981), and the oil market conditions continued
to tighten. On December 27, Afghanistan was invaded by the Soviets. As the political
events multiply, the oil prices continue to rise.
Domestic output activity was increasing, and steel and utilities prices were
rising. In February 1980, WPI inflation rate became near 20%. In view of these
developments, newly appointed Governor Maekawa decided to raise the interest rate.
However, this was the time of the budget process in the Diet. The interest rate hike

21

was opposed by the Ministry of Finance on grounds of timing. I conjecture that the BOJ
argued against the MOF with the logic that the missed opportunity would result in a
repeat of the high inflation of 1973-74.
Governor Maekawa met Prime Minister Ohira in early February and requested
an ODR hike. Prime Miniter Ohira promised a reply within a week. Prime Miniter
Ohira gave a go-ahead in the replay. On February 18, 1980, it was decided to raise ODR
by 1%, and implemented the day later.
On March 18, the ODR was hiked again by 175 basis point. Between February
and March, it was observed that CPI started to rise sharply. The government also
changed the priority toward fighting inflation. In the United States, the interest rate was
raised to near 20 percent to fight inflation in early 1980. 15
In the end, Japan fared well in the second oil crisis. The CPI inflation rate
never reached 10%, and the real interest rate measured by call rate over the CPI
inflation rate remained positive. The worst of inflation was over by the summer 1980,
and the ODR was lowered in August and November 1980. By the end of 1980, the
WPI inflation rate came down to 10%, and the CPI inflation rate decelerated to 7%.
“Lessons” of the 1973-74 were fully utilized by the BOJ to persuade MOF and
the Prime Minister for early actions on monetary tightening. Raising ODR, twice,
during the budget process was a strong indication that BOJ had achieved de facto
independence. However, still it relied on the understanding of the Prime Minister, and
the trust between Governor and the Prime Minister, rather than a legal framework.
Credibility and de facto independence seem to be subject to who is Governor and who is
Prime Minister. This precarious relationship would continue until the revision of the
Bank of Japan law in 1998.
6. Econometric Analysis
6.1 Purpose
In the narrative, it was established that the Bank of Japan made a mistake prior to and
during the first oil crisis, while the Bank skillfully managed the second oil crisis. In this
section, econometric analysis will be employed to quantify this narrative. A modified
Taylor rule equation during the period when the Bank of Japan was considered to be
successful will be estimated, and the fitted values with estimated coefficients from
well-run period will be applied to the presumed-mistake periods. 16
15

Paul Volcker took over Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in 1979 to fight inflation with
determined manner.
16
For Taylor rule, see Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999), and Taylor (1999) to name a few. See
Jinushi, Kuroki, and Miyao (2000), Kuttner and Posen (2004), and Ahearn (2002) for application of
22

The Taylor rule (and its variants) should be used with care when it is used more
than a description of the response function of the central bank or for normative
interpretations. 17 If it is to be used in the normative spin, it is absolutely important to
find a time period when conduct and consequences of monetary policy conduct are
impeccable.
In Japan’s case, after the mistake of 1972-74, the Bank of Japan gained de facto
independence by reminding the government of the sorry episode in 1972-73. 18 The
Bank of Japan successfully lowered the inflation rate from 10 percent in 1975 to 2
percent in early-1980s. 19 Once the inflation rate was brought down to the level near 2%,
the monetary policy entered a happy state of maintaining low and stable inflation rate.
Monetary policy during the economic boom toward the end of the 1980s was a bit
controversial in retrospect, because it allowed an asset price bubble to form, which later
burst. However, in the sense of CPI price stability, the second half of the 1980s had a
good performance. In the 1990s, there is some question raised by several authors
whether loosening of monetary policy after the bubble burst, 1991-92, was quick
enough to prevent a sharp decline in output after 1993. 20 However, the Bank of Japan
had controlled the interest rate in an attempt of stabilizing inflation and output until the
financial system falls into a serious crisis, with some failure of medium size regional
bank, and the official discount rate being lowered to 0.5% in September 1995. Soon
after the interest rate was lowered to 0.5% in September 1995, the Bank of Japan lost its
grip on inflation, partly due to the zero bound of the nominal interest rate and partly due
to near deflation.
With the above discussions in mind, I take the period from January 1982 to
December 1995 as a benchmark period that can be regarded as a successful period in
CPI inflation stability. The benchmark Taylor rule will be estimated for this period.
Several provisos should be mentioned at this point. First, the policy rate was
the official discount rate (ODR), and many market interest rates were tied to the ODR.
Second, there were monetary policy measures other than the policy rate. The so-called
“window guidance”—constraints on bank lending by moral suasion—was playing a
major role. The reserve requirement was also used. Hence, the interest rate was not the
the Taylor rule to the Japanese case.
17
Taylor (2009, FAQ section) insists that the Taylor rule is normative from the beginning. Others,
including Orphanides (2003a,b,c), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998, 1999) and Ito and
Mishkin(2006) are rather cautious on the normative interpretation.
18
See Cargill, Hutchison and Ito(1997) for such an interpretation.
19
See, for example, Friedman (1985) and Ito (1992: ch. 5).
20
See Ahearne (2002), Clouse et al. (2000), Ito and Mishkin (2006), Jinushi, et al. (2000), Kuttner
and Posen (2004) for the discussion of Japan’s monetary policy in the early to mid-1990s.
23

only variable that represents monetary policy. Third, many market infrastructures and
economic structures went through changes during the 1970s and 1980s. Financial
liberalization particularly progressed in the second half of the 1980s. Attempts are made
to take into account these issues, but treatment is admittedly far from perfect.
After examining the estimated coefficients and the deviations of fitted value
from actual value within the sample, the out-of-sample backcasting will be conducted to
see whether the Bank of Japan would have behaved differently in the 1970s. In
particular, the mistake of monetary policy creating the Great Inflation of 1972-74 will
be examined in light of the estimated Taylor rule of 1982-95. This exercise will answer
the following question: Suppose that the Bank of Japan in 1972-74 (the “mistake”
years) had reacted to macro variables in the manner they had in 1982-95. How much the
counterfactual interest rate would have been hiked compared to the actual interest rate.
If it could be shown that the counterfactual interest rate would have been much higher
than actual, then the prudent Bank of Japan a la 1982-95 would have mitigated the
inflation problem in 1972-74.
The typical Taylor rule equation is as follows:

it = r f + π t + βπ ⋅ (π t − π *) + β y ⋅ ( yt − y*)
Where it denotes the nominal policy interest rate; r f the natural real interest rate;

π * the target inflation rate; π t is the inflation rate; yt − y * is the output gap. In the
original Taylor (1993), both βwere assumed to be 0.5, and r f .and π * were both
assumed to be 2. Here, as in the literature β will be estimated using data in the
benchmark period. In the implementation of estimating this equation, the following
specification is used.

it − π t = r f + βπ ⋅ (π t − π *) + β y ⋅ ( yt − y*) + ε t

The left hand side becomes the real interest rate at time t. There are several departures
from the usual Taylor rule regression in the literature. First, since the decision making
is done on a monthly basis (rarely two policy rate changes in the same month), a
monthly model is highly recommended. GDP gap will not be available on the monthly
basis, so that the industrial production will be used as a measure of output. The
industrial production gap will be defined and used in place of GDP. Second, efforts
will be made to obtain data that were available at the time of decision making, although
the data used in the regression are not exactly the real time data. Third, since the

24

equilibrium real rate r f is difficult to calculate, the equilibrium nominal rate is to be
estimated as a constant term of in the model.
6.2 Data
Several variables have to be carefully defined for the Taylor-rule type econometric
application. First, the output gap (output deviation from its potential) and inflation gap
(inflation deviation from its target) have to be defined in the spirit of “real time data”,
that is data that were known at the time of policy was decided. The importance of using
real time data are particularly emphasized by Orphanides (2003, a, b, c). For example,
use of the original data at time t should be used instead of later revisions, including base
year change or preliminary to final. Second, any detrending, or estimating and taking
out potential output, should be carried out with the data only up to time t. Third, since
data collection and data disclosure takes time, at the time of monetary policy decision in
month t, available data of Industrial Production and CPI are not those of month t, but
either month t-1 or even t-2. 21 Although official data may be available only for t-2,
various other economic variables can be used to guess what would be announced later. 22
So, we assume that the data that the Bank of Japan knows at month t would be
Industrial Production and CPI of month t-1.
Since we attempt to build a monthly model, GDP cannot be used as a variable
for output gap. In place of GDP, Industrial Production will be used. The base year of
Industrial Production is changed every 5 years. If we had picked up data from the
present data base, it would be a series of current estimation method, and different from
the variable that was known at the time of decision making in the 1970s to the 1990s.
Therefore, the original Industrial Production data set is collected from historical series
that were available at the time of decision making. 23 For the output gap y t − y * , a
deviation of the Industrial Production from its linear trend, which is known at time t, is

The Policy Board Meetings (in charge of monetary policy decisions) became regularly
scheduled meetings (with the meeting dates being pre-announced) under the revised
Bank of Japan law which took effect in April 1998. Earlier, monetary policy meetings
were called upon when needed. However, we assume even without prescheduled
meeting, the Bank staff makes a decision to call a meeting or not at least every month.
22
The CPI of month t becomes available in month t+2. One option is to use the CPI inflation rate
on the right hand side the variable of two months ago. However, with information of CPI of Tokyo
Area which is announced in month t+1, one can guess the national CPI with some accuracy before
their disclosure. Therefore, the CPI on the right hand side is the inflation rate of t-1.
23
Admittedly, this is not “genuine” real time data, since original documents, such as every issue of
Monthly Report, of the Bank of Japan are not checked against the old data base. The minutes of
the monetary policy meetings were not kept before 1998.
21

25

used. 24 Obviously future path of industrial production is not known, the trend has to
be estimated using only the past date at the time of decision making. The industrial
production gap was estimated from January 1971 to December 2008.
For the inflation measure (π), the year on year change of headline-CPI is
25
used.
The base year of the CPI and weights of goods and services in the
consumption basket are revised every five years in Japan. As CPI of a new base year
becomes available, the Bank of Japan and the government starts using the new CPI for
their decision making.
The real-time CPI is constructed with choosing the
headline-CPI of the base year that was in place. 26
The target inflation rate is also difficult to determine. The inflation rate
during the 1960s was much higher than later period. It is assumed that the target
inflation rate, π* was 4% from January 1971 to December 1977. As the Bank of
Japan became serious in lowering the inflation rate in 1978 by adopting the monetary
aggregate “forecast” (see Ito (1989)), it is assumed that the target rate was gradually
(1/24 percentage point a month) lowered from 4 percent in December 1977 to 2 percent
by December 1981. The target inflation rate was again lowered gradually from 2 percent
in December 1992 to 1 percent in December 1998, and has stayed at 1 percent since
then.
6.3 Estimation
Based on the discussion above, the equation to be estimated is the following:
24

The output gap is the residual in the log-linear trend regression using data of the preceding ten
years [t-119, t]. Extract the residual at t. By multiplying by 100, the percentage deviation from
the trend line is stored. Then, repeat the procedure (i.e., rolling regression) from January 1971 to
December 2008.
25
The headline inflation was most often mentioned in the 1970s, 80s and 90s. When the exit
condition from quantitative easing was mentioned in March 2001, it was defined in the CPI
excluding fresh food (but including energy prices). Since the 2000s are not a period for analysis in
this paper, the headline CPI is used throughout this paper. Otherwise the inflation rate to be analyzed
should be switched from headline inflation to CPI excluding food May 2001 with the change in the
base year as well. Another potential adjustment that is ignored in this paper is the introduction of
consumption tax (a form of VAT) in April 1989 and tax rate increase in April 1997. When the 3%
consumption tax was introduced in April 1989, some of excise and other indirect taxes were
abolished, so that the net effect on the consumer prices were much less than 3%. Ito and Mishkin
(2006) argued that the year on year inflation rate due to consumption tax was 1.3% for April 1989 –
March 1990, and 1.6% for April 1997 – March 1998. However, no adjustment is made in this
paper for consumption tax increases, on the assumption that the Bank of Japan was alert on inflation
even due to the consumption tax increases, as inflation due to consumption tax increases may trigger
second round inflation.
26
As in Industrial Production, the what we collected from old-base-year CPI may not be genuine
real-time CPI. Original documents at the time of monetary policy board meeting were not checked
against our data. Minutes were not kept, and often the meeting was called suddenly. In the sense
what we call real-time data here are what we believe to the best approximation of the real time data.
26

(1) it − π t −1 = c + βπ ⋅ (π t −1 − π t *) + β y ⋅ ( yt −1 − yt *) + ε t
Where the constant term c will be interpreted as the long run real interest rate. The
inflation and industrial production are lagged once due to observation lag for the central
bank. Since the inflation rate is defined as year-on-year, there will be serial correlation
in the residuals. Generalized Methods of Moments (GMM) is used to estimate
equation (1). 27
The sample period of estimation is from January 1982 to December 1995. The
choice of this time period is discussed earlier in this section.
Table 6-1 shows the estimation results. Both inflation gap and output gap
have statistically significant estimates with correct sign. The magnitude of coefficients
are smaller than original Taylor assumption of 0.5. If the inflation rate rises 1
percentage point, the nominal interest rate rises 1.34 percentage point, since the “real”
interest rate responds by 0.34 percentage point. If the output gap moves positively
(over heating) by 1 percentage point, then the nominal interest rate rises by 0.127
percent, assuming no change in the inflation rate.
Figure 6-1 shows the actual and fitted values in the sample period, and their
difference, the residual of the equation. Assuming that the fitted value can be
interpreted as a desirable path, the figure suggests the following interpretation: The
monetary policy was too tight (actual>fitted) in 1985 and 1986, while the monetary
policy was too loose in 1988 and 1989. The two years of 1988 and 1989 are known to
be the last stage of the real estate bubble. Several authors have suggested that the
Bank of Japan made a mistake in these years allowing the bubble to form, thus the asset
prices should have been included in deciding monetary policy. (See Okina and
Shiratsuka (2002, 2004)) However, as Figure 6-1 suggests, even a plain CPI
Taylor-rule would have flagged loose monetary policy as being too loose in these two
years.
6.4 Out of Sample Backcasting
Now that we have reasonable estimates of the modified Taylor rule for the period in
which the monetary policy can be regarded as desirable on average, we can evaluate the
monetary policy of other periods in question. We are particularly interested in the
For the instruments, c, πt-2-π*, yt-2-y*, dyent-1, doilt-1 are used, where dyent is the year-on-year
change of the yen/dollar rate in month t and doilt is the year-on-year change of the oil prices in
month t.
27

27

“mistake” in the early 1970s, when the inflation rate rose above 20 percent. Use the
estimated coefficients of Table 6-1, and plug the data of 1972, then we obtain the
counterfactual call rate during the period in question. 28 Figure 6-2 shows the actual
and counterfactual nominal call rate. Obviously, the counterfactual nominal rate, i.e.,
the desirable call rate would have been much higher than the actual call rate. The
desirable interest rate would have been around 36 percent when the actual rate was 12
percent. This exercise shows numerically what we have already established in the
narrative. In the year after the collapse of the Bretton-Woods system, monetary policy
made a mistake. When the first oil crisis came, the inflation rate was already high.
With the additional shock of oil price increases, the inflation rate rose sharply,
exceeding 20 percent. The magnitude of the mistake was more than 20 percentage
points in the call rate.
One should be careful in interpreting these findings. The path of the
counterfactual call rate is not desirable path. If the desirable path of 1972 had been
implemented, then the actual inflation rate would have been lower, so that the interest
rate in 1973 would not have been so high. The desirable rate should be interpreted as
the rate that, given the actual history up to t-1, would have been the desirable call rate in
month t.
Figure 6-3 shows the similarly generated desirable rate for the period of
1978-82, the period that encompasses the second oil crisis. This shows that the
counterfactual interest rate was not much different (up to 1.5 percentage point) from the
actual rate in 1979-1980, the oil crisis years. This confirms the narrative that the
second oil crisis was handled much better than the first one.

7. Concluding Remarks
This paper investigated the great inflation of Japan, 1973-74, when the CPI inflation
rate reached almost 30% a year, and the WPI inflation rate higher than that. The
period coincided with the first oil crisis. Close examinations revealed that the major
mistakes were committed before the oil crisis. Namely, easing in 1971-72 went to far,
stimulating the economy too much, and tightening in 1973 came too little too late. The
CPI inflation rate was already above 10% when the Middle East War broke out in
October 1973. The oil price increase and the sense of panic for not obtaining the
energy resources caused further increases in prices.
28

One obtains counterfactual “real” interest rate by the procedure, and then by adding the inflation
rate, the counterfactual nominal interest rate is obtained.
28

The reasons for the too much easing and too little tightening from 1971 to 1973
include several political economy reasons as well as economic reasons. First, too
much attention and efforts were devoted to prevent the yen appreciation under the
Smithsonian regime. Some politicians openly voiced preference to inflation over
nominal appreciation of the yen. Second, the Bank of Japan was not independent from
the government. The Prime Minister exerts pressure on the Bank to lower the interest
rate or to prevent the interest rate hike. The timing of implementation was also
influenced by the political agenda and schedule. It was commonly thought that the
interest rate cannot be changed during the budget discussion in the Diet, that is,
December to March. Third, the Bank of Japan did not fight the government enough to
push for the right decisions. Self restraints were applied not to cause conflict against
the Ministry of Finance.
The second oil crisis was handled much better than the great inflation
experience. The CPI remained lower than 10%, and the real interest rate was kept
positive. The interest rate was raised as soon as the WPI started to increase in 1978.
The ODR was raised even when the budge was still being discussed in the Diet. The
Bank gained de facto independence using the logic that without swift actions, the
mistake of high inflation would be repeated. Prime Minister Ohira was also quite
respectful to Governor Maekawa for the Bank’s judgment and decisions.
The modified (monthly) Taylor rule was specified and estimated using the data
of the period from January 1982 to December 1995, a period of relative success in
achieving low and stable inflation rate. Then the estimate coefficients of the equation
were applied to the data of the mistake period, 1972-1975. The desirable interest rate
would have been some 20 percentage point higher than the actual rate. When the same
procedure was applied to the second oil crisis period, 1978-82, then it was shown that
the desirable rate would not have been much different from the actual rate. The
exercise confirms the conclusion of the narrative. The mistake of Great Inflation
started well before the onset of the first oil crisis, October 1973. The interest rate was
way too low before October 1973 and after October 1973.

29

References:

Ahearne, Alan; Joseph Gagnon; Jane Haltmaier; and Steve Kamin and others, (2002),
“Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan’s Experience in the 1990s,” Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers,
number 729.
Bank of Japan, (1975), "On the Importance of Money Supply in Japan," [in Japanese]
Monthly Review, Research and Statistics Bureau, July: pp. 1-11.
Bank of Japan (1986), Nihon Ginko Hyakunenshi, [transl. One Hundred Year History of
the Bank of Japan], volume 6, Tokyo: the Bank of Japan.
Bank of Japan, (1988), "On the Recent Behavior of the Money Supply" (in Japanese 3
Monthly Review, Research and Statistics Bureau, February 1988: 1-24.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1998), “Monetary Policy Rules in
Practice: Some International Evidence,” European Economic Review, vol. 42:
1033-1067.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy:
A New-Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature 37, pp. 1661-1707
Clouse, James, Dale Henderson, Athanasios Orphanides, David Small, Peter Orphanides,
and Peter Tinsley (2000), “Monetary Policy When the Nominal short-Term Interest Rate
is Zero,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2000-51, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System.
Cargill, Thomas F., Michael M. Hutchison and Takatoshi Ito, (1997), The Political
Economy of Japanese Monetary Policy , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cargill, Thomas F., Michael M. Hutchison and Takatoshi Ito, (2001), Financial policy
and Central Banking in Japan, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Friedman, Milton, (1985a). “Monetarism in rhetoric and in practice,” in Albert Ando,
Hidekazu Eguchi, Roger Farmer, and Yoshio Suzuki, (eds.) Monetary Policy in Our

30

Times, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Friedman, Milton, (1985b), "The Fed's Monetarism Was Never Anything but Rhetoric,"
Letters to the Editor, Wall Street Journal,December 18, 1985.
Hetzel, Robert L. (1999), “Japanese Monetary Policy: A Quantity Theory Perspective.”
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 85 (Winter 1999): 1-25.
Ito, Takatoshi, 1989. “Is the Bank of Japan a Closet Monetarism? Monetary Targeting in
Japan, 1978-1988” NBER Working Paper 2879.
Ito, Takatoshi (1992), The Japanese Economy, Cambrige, MA: MIT Press.
Ito, Takatoshi (1997), “The Long-Run Purchasing Power Parity for the Yen: Historical
Overview” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 11, 1997,
pp502-521.
Ito, Takatoshi and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006). “Two decades of Japanese Monetary
Policy and the Deflation Problem,” in T. Ito and A. Rose, (eds.) Monetary Policy with
Very Low Inflation in the Pacific Rim, NBER-University of Chicago Press, 2006:
131-193.
Ito, Takatoshi, Kunio Okina, and Juro Teranishi, 1993, "News and the Dollar/Yen
Exchange Rate, 1931-33: The End of the Gold Standard, Imperialism, and the Great
Depression", Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, vol. 7, no. 2, June:
107-131.
Jinushi, Toshiki; Yoshihiro Kuroki, and Ryuzo Miyao (2000). “Monetary Policy in
Japan Since the Late 1980s: Delayed Policy Actions and Some Explanations,” in
Mikitani and Posen (eds.), Japan’s Financial Crisis and Its Parallels to U.S. Experience.
Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics, chapter 6.
Nelson, Edward (2007), “The Great Inflation and Early Disinflation in Japan and
Germany” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 3, no. 4, December:23-76.
Komiya, Ryutaro (1976), “Reasons for Inflation in 1973-74,” [original in Japanese,

31

“The Showa 48-49 Inflation on Genin”, University of Tokyo, Keizaigaku Ronshu, vol.
42, no. 1, 1976：2-40.
Komiya, Ryutaro (1988), The Japanese Economy: Trade, Industry, and Government,
Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Komiya, Ryutaro, and Kazuo Yasui, (1984), "Japan's Macroeconomic Performance
since the First Oil Crisis: Review and Appraisal," Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 20: 69-114.
Kuttner, Kenneth N. and Adam S. Posen (2004). “The Difficulty of Discerning What’s
Too Tight: Taylor Rules and Japanese Monetary Policy,” North American Journal of
Economics and Finance: vol. 15: 53-74.
Nakagawa, Yukitsugu, (1981), “On Monetary Policy: Personal Experience at the Bank
of Japan” [original in Japanese, “Taikenteki Kinyu Seisaku Ron: Nichigin no Mado
kara,”], Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha, 1981.
Oi, Hiroyuki; Shigenori Shiratsuka; and Toyoichiro Shirota, "On Long-Run Monetary
Neutrality in Japan," Monetary and Ecnomic Studies 22(3), Institute for Monetary and
Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 2004.
Okina, Kunio and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2002). “Asset Price Bubbles, Price Stability,
and Monetary Policy: Japan’s experience,” Bank of Japan, Monetary and Economic
Studies, October: 35-76.
Okina, Kunio and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2004). “Policy Commitment and Expectation
Formation: Japan’s Experience under Zero Interest Rates,” North American Journal of
Economics and Finance, vol. 15: 75-100.
Orphanides, Athanasios, 2003a. “Monetary policy evaluation with noisy information”,
Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (2003) 605–631
Orphanides, Athanasios, 2003b, “The quest for prosperity without inflation”, Journal of
Monetary Economics 50 (2003) 633–663.

32

Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003c, “Historical monetary policy analysis and the Taylor
rule”, Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (2003) 983–1022
Shizume, Masato, (2002), “Economic Developments and Monetary Policy Responses in
Interwar Japan: Evaluation Based on the Taylor Rule,” Bank of Japan, Monetary and
Economic Studies, Vol. 20, no. 3, October: 77-116.
Suzuki, Yoshio. 1985. “Japan’s monetary policy over the past 10 years.” Bank of Japan
Monetary and Economic Studies 3, no. 2: 1–10.
Suzuki, Yoshio, ed. (1987), The Japanese Financial System, Clarendon: Oxford
University Press.
Taylor, John B., 1993, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.39: 195-214.
Taylor, John B. (1999), “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in J. B.
Taylor, Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press: 319-344.
Taylor, John B. (2009), Getting Off Track: How Government Actions and Interventions
Caused, Prolonged, and Worsened the Financial Crisis, Stanford, CA: Hoover Press.

33

Figure 1: Three episodes of inflation rate exceeding 20 percent per annum

100.0
CPI Inflation

80.0

After WW II

60.0
During WW I
After 1st Oil

40.0
20.0
0.0

2000

1992

1984

1976

1968

1960

1952

1944

1936

1928

1920

1912

1904

1896

1888

1880

-20.0

1975.10

30.0

1975.07

1st Oil Crisis

1975.04

ODR

1975.01

1974.10

1974.07

WPI inflation

1974.04

1974.01

1973.10

1973.07

-5.0
1973.04

CPI inflation

1973.01

ODR cut

1972.10

1972.07

1972.04

1972.01

1971.10

1971.07

1971.04

1971.01

percent

Figure 2: Great Inflation of 1973-74

Call Rate

35.0

ODR cut

25.0

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0

ODR hike

Figure 3: Industrial Production Index, changes over 12 months

Figure 4: CPI Inflation rates: Headline, Core (Excluding Fresh Food),
CoreCore(Excluding food and energy)

30.0
CPI headline

CPI Core

CPI CoreCore

25.0

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

1975.10

1975.07

1975.04

1975.01

1974.10

1974.07

1974.04

1974.01

1973.10

1973.07

1973.04

1973.01

1972.10

1972.07

1972.04

1972.01

1971.10

1971.07

1971.04

1971.01

0.0

1980.10

1980.07

Iranian
Hostage

1980.04

ODR

1980.01

1979.10

-5.0
1979.07

WPI inflation

1979.04

1979.01

1978.10

1978.07

1978.04

CPI inflation

1978.01

1977.10

1977.07

20.0

1977.04

1977.01

1976.10

1976.07

1976.04

1976.01

percent

Figure 5

Call Rate

ODR cut

ODR cut

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0

ODR hike

Table 1: Three episodes of high inflation

Three episodes of high inflation
CPI (%)

WPI (%)

1917

22.7

25.8

1918

34.6

31.0

1919

33.0

22.5

1945

NA

51.1

1946

NA

364.5

1947

NA

195.9

1948

83.0

165.6

1949

31.7

63.3

1974

23.3

31.4

Notes: Author’s calculation.
Data Source: See Ito (1997)

Table 2:

1 9 72 .0 1
1 9 72 .0 2
1 9 72 .0 3
1 9 72 .0 4
1 9 72 .0 5
1 9 72 .0 6
1 9 72 .0 7
1 9 72 .0 8
1 9 72 .0 9
1 9 72 .1 0
1 9 72 .1 1
1 9 72 .1 2
1 9 73 .0 1
1 9 73 .0 2
1 9 73 .0 3
1 9 73 .0 4

Signs of Inflation by mid-1972
CPI
WPI
In du strial
M2
ye n /dollar
inflation inflation Produ c tion growth
rate
4 .1
- 0 .6
1 .3
2 5 .1
3 12 .2 3
4 .5
0 .0
3 .0
2 5 .3
3 04 .9 8
5 .3
0 .2
3 .9
2 6 .1
3 02 .4 4
5 .0
0 .4
3 .8
2 6 .2
3 03 .5 6
5 .2
0 .4
8 .3
2 5 .5
3 04 .4 4
4 .8
0 .6
6 .5
2 6 .6
3 03 .6 8
5 .0
0 .7
5 .9
2 7 .1
3 01 .1 1
5 .9
0 .9
8 .3
2 6 .4
3 01 .1 0
3 .9
2 .2
8 .1
2 6 .9
3 01 .1 0
4 .4
3 .2
1 0 .6
2 7 .8
3 01 .1 0
5 .1
5 .0
1 1 .4
2 8 .5
3 01 .1 0
5 .7
6 .3
1 4 .7
2 6 .5
3 01 .2 3
6 .7
7 .6
1 7 .1
2 6 .1
3 01 .9 6
7 .0
9 .3
1 6 .9
2 6 .8
2 79 .4 8
8 .7
1 1 .6
1 6 .5
2 6 .9
2 65 .2 6
9 .4
1 1 .8
1 6 .9
2 7 .3
2 65 .5 2

Inflation
acceleration

Output
expands
rapidly

Money growth
had remained
high

mon e tary polic y
ac tion

in te re st rate cu t

The yen/dollar
rate virtually
fixed

in te re st rate hike

Table 3:

Growth Rates, quarter to quarter & year to year
q-q
1971-I
1971-II
1971-III
1971-IV
1972-I
1972-II
1972-III
1972-IV
1973-I
1973-II
1973-III
1973-IV
1974-I
1974-II
1974-III
1974-IV
1975-I
1975-II
1975-III
1975-IV

0.9
1.6
1.2
0.9
3.3
1.9
2.1
2.5
3.3
0.9
0.3
1.2
-3.4
0.7
1.3
-0.5
0.1
2.2
1.1
1.1

y-y
4.8
4.5
3.7
4.6
7.5
7.3
8.8
9.8
10.3
9.3
7.6
5.6
-1.7
-0.9
-0.2
-2.0
1.5
3.4
3.0
4.3

ODR cut;
monetary easing

ODR hike; monetary
tightening

ODR cut;
monetary easing

Table 4:

Monetary Policy Actions and critical questions

Was this necessary? -->
Was this too late? -->
Was this too late? -->

Official Discount Rate %
Date
1970-1975
yyyy.mm.dd Change
new
1970.10.28
-0.25
1971.01.20
-0.25
1971.05.08
-0.25
1971.07.28
-0.25
1971.12.29
-0.50
1972.06.24
-0.50
1973.04.02
0.75
1973.05.30
0.50
1973.07.02
0.50
1973.08.29
1.00
1973.12.22
2.00
1975.04.16
-0.50
1975.06.07
-0.50
1975.08.13
-0.50
1975.10.24
-1.00

level
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
4.75
4.25
5.00
5.50
6.00
7.00
9.00
8.50
8.00
7.50
6.50

Table 5: Monetary Policy 1977-1980

Official Discount Rate (%)
in 1976-1980
Date
yyyy.mm.dd
1977.03.12
1977.04.19
1977.09.05
1978.03.16
1979.04.17
1979.07.24
1979.11.02
1980.02.19
1980.03.19
1980.08.20
1980.11.06

Change New Level
-0.50
6.00
-1.00
5.00
-0.75
4.25
-0.75
3.50
0.75
4.25
1.00
5.25
1.00
6.25
1.00
7.25 ←ODR increase during budget process
1.75
9.00 ←ODR increase during budget process
-0.75
8.25
-1.00
7.25

Table 6-1.

Monthly Taylor Rule, 1982-1995

Equation (1):

Sample: 1982M01 1995M12

Coefficient Std. Error
C

t-Statistic

Prob.

3.723

0.130

28.54

0.000

0.336

0.165

2.03

0.044

yt-yt*

0.127

0.021

5.97

0.000

R-squared

0.366 Mean dependent var

πt-πt

*

3.333851

Figure 6-1: Actual value, Fitted value, and residual: call – πt-1

8
6
4
4
2
2
0
0
-2
-4
1982

1984

1986
Residual

1988

1990
Actual

1992
Fitted

1994

Figure 6-2: Counterfactual 1972-1975

40
36
32
28
24
20
16
12
8
4
1972

1973
CALL

1974
COUNTERCALL

1975

Figure 6-3: Counterfactual 1978-82

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1978

1979
CALL

1980

1981

COUNTERCALL

1982

