NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CONSUMPTION RESPONSE TO INCOME CHANGES
Tullio Jappelli
Luigi Pistaferri
Working Paper 15739
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15739

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

This paper has been written for the 2010 issue of the Annual Reviews in Economics. We thank Itay
Saporta for research assistance and Misha Dworski for comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Tullio Jappelli and Luigi Pistaferri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Consumption Response to Income Changes
Tullio Jappelli and Luigi Pistaferri
NBER Working Paper No. 15739
February 2010
JEL No. D91,E21
ABSTRACT
We review different empirical approaches that researchers have taken to estimate how consumption
responds to income changes. We critically evaluate the empirical evidence on the sensitivity of consumption
to predicted income changes, distinguishing between the traditional excess sensitivity tests, and the
effect of predicted income increases and income declines. We also review studies that attempt to estimate
the marginal propensity to consume out of income shocks, distinguishing between three different approaches:
identifying episodes in which income changes unexpectedly, relying on the covariance restrictions
that the theory imposes on the joint behavior of consumption and income growth, and combining realizations
and expectations of income or consumption in surveys where data on subjective expectations are available.
Tullio Jappelli
Department of Economics
University of Naples Federico II
Via Cinzia 45
80126 Napoli, Italy
tullio.jappelli@unina.it
Luigi Pistaferri
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pista@stanford.edu

1. Introduction

How does household consumption respond to changes in economic resources? Does the
response depend on the nature and duration of the changes? Do anticipated income changes have
a different consumption impact than unanticipated shocks? And do transitory income shocks have
a lower impact than permanent ones? These questions are crucial for understanding consumers’
behavior and to evaluate policy changes that impacts households’ resources. Indeed, in virtually
all countries consumption represents more then two thirds of GDP, and knowledge of how
consumers respond to income shocks is crucial for evaluating the macroeconomic impact of tax
and labor market reforms as well as for the design of stabilization and income maintenance
policies. 1 Indeed, both labor economists, macroeconomists and experts in public finance are
active contributors to this literature.
In this survey we review different empirical approaches that researchers have taken to
estimate these important policy parameters. Our emphasis will be on methods and on the
discussion of the most relevant approaches and empirical results, especially the most recent ones.
Our objective is to critically evaluate evidence on two questions: excess sensitivity tests to
predicted income changes and estimates of the marginal propensity to consume out of income
shocks.
To put matters in perspective, Figure 1 provides a roadmap to the main links between
consumption and income changes, underscoring the different questions that will be examined.
The main distinction that we draw is between the effect of anticipated and unanticipated income
changes. The Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) and Friedman (1957) celebrated life-cycle and

1

A related literature looks at the effect of wealth shocks on consumption (Maki and Palumbo, 2001).

2

permanent income models posit that people use saving to smooth income fluctuations, and that
they should respond little if at all to changes in income that are anticipated. When this important
theoretical prediction is violated, researchers conclude that consumption is excessively sensitive
to anticipated income changes. While this is a clear implication of the theory, providing a clean
test of the theory encounters two types of problems, one empirical and one theoretical. On the
empirical side, it is very hard to identify situations in which income changes in a predictable way.
But even if the empirical problems can be surmounted, there are many plausible explanations
why the implications of the theoretical models may be rejected, ranging from binding liquidity
constraints to non-separabilities between consumption and leisure, home production
considerations, habit persistence, aggregation bias, and durability of goods.

Consumption
response

Anticipated
Income Change

Anticipated
Increase

Small

Unanticipated
Income Change

Anticipated
Decline

Permanent
Shock

Large

Transitory
Shock

Positive

Negative

Figure 1: A Roadmap of the Response of Consumption to Income Changes

More recently, the literature has sought to gain further insights by distinguishing between
situations in which consumers expect an income decline or an income increase. While credit

3

constraints may be responsible for a correlation between consumption and expected income
increases, they cannot explain why consumption reacts to expected income declines, for instance
after retirement. A further distinction that has proven to be useful is between large and small
expected income changes, as consumers might react mostly to the former and neglect the impact
of the latter.
The branch on the right-hand-side of Figure 1 focuses instead on the impact of
unanticipated income shocks. Here the main distinction is between transitory shocks, which
according to the theory should have a small impact on consumption, and permanent shocks,
which should lead to major revisions in consumption. As with anticipated changes, the literature
has sought to pin down the empirical estimates identifying positive and negative shocks. Since
here the econometrician can study how consumption responds to income innovations, the interest
is in estimating structural parameters (in particular, the marginal propensity to consume) as well
as on testing.
The survey proceeds as follow. Section 2 summarizes the theoretical literature, and provides
an organizing framework to study the effect of income changes on consumption. Section 3
focuses on expected income changes, distinguishing between the traditional excess sensitivity
tests, the effect of income increases and of income declines. Section 4 reviews three approaches
to estimate the effect of unexpected income changes on consumption: attempts at identifying
episodes in which income changes unexpectedly, estimates of the marginal propensity to
consume that rely on the covariance restrictions that the theory imposes on the joint behavior of
consumption and income growth, and estimates that combine realizations and expectations of
income or consumption in surveys where data on subjective expectations are available. Section 5
concludes.

4

2. Theoretical predictions

To organize the discussion, consider the standard problem of an agent who maximizes the
expected utility of consumption over a certain time horizon subject to an intertemporal budget
constraint and a terminal condition on wealth. If consumers can borrow and lend at the same
interest rate and if the utility function is state- and time-separable, one obtains the well-known
Euler equation for consumption:

u ' (cit 1 )  (1   ) 1 Et 1 (1  rt )u ' (cit )

(1)

where c is consumption, r the real interest rate,  the intertemporal discount rate, and Et1 the
expectation operator based on information available at time t1. Equation (1) states that in
equilibrium there are no intertemporal consumption reallocations that can increase consumers’
utility at the margin. If the interest rate is constant and equal to the intertemporal discount rate,
one obtains the result that the marginal utility is a martingale:

Et 1u ' (cit )  u ' (cit 1 )

(2)

Ex ante current marginal utility is the best predictor of next period’s marginal utility; ex
post, marginal utility changes only if expectations are not realized, a property of the solution first

5

noted by Hall (1978). Hence, changes in marginal utility are unpredictable on the basis of past
information. For instance, an anticipated income decline (due to retirement or unemployment),
should not affect the marginal utility of consumption at the time it occurs, because consumers
would have already incorporated the expectation of the income decline in their optimal
consumption plan when the information firstly became known. However, as we shall see,
unexpected income changes do affect the marginal utility of consumption to an extent that
depends on the nature and duration of shocks and the structure of credit and insurance markets.

2.1. The response of consumption to predictable income changes

Earlier attempts at testing the implication of the theory that the marginal utility is a
martingale relied on the special case of quadratic preferences. This case is known in the literature
as the permanent income model with certainty equivalence (Flavin, 1981; Campbell, 1987).
Under this assumption, equation (2) rewrites as:

cit  cit 1   it

(3)

where it = citEt1cit is a consumption innovation, i.e., the effect on consumption of all new
information about the sources of uncertainty faced by the consumer. The sources of uncertainty
may be idiosyncratic or aggregate, and include shocks to income, interest rates, health or
demographic variables. Hence, it is consumption itself, and not marginal utility as in the general

6

case of equation (2), to behave as a martingale. Ex ante current consumption is the best predictor
of next period’s consumption; ex post, consumption changes only if expectations are not fulfilled.
Under the null hypothesis that consumption is a martingale, equation (3) gives an
orthogonality condition which can be tested empirically: no variables known in period t1 (and
earlier) should be correlated with changes in consumption between t1 and t. Hence, in the
following regression:

J

cit   xit' 1 j  j   it

(4)

j 0

the permanent income model predicts that j = 0 for all j. The orthogonality condition test does
not require specific assumptions about the sources of uncertainty faced by consumers, but in this
survey we are particularly interested in the case in which the x variable coincides with expected
income changes. Note that rejection of the null hypothesis (j ≠ 0) does not point to specific
reasons why consumption does not follow a martingale, and hence it is intrinsically a weak test of
the theory.

2.2. The response of consumption to unpredictable income shocks

Another important testable implication of the model is that consumption should respond to
unpredictable changes in the variables the consumer is uncertain about. For working-age
individuals, the most important source of uncertainty is labor income. If the latter is the only
source of uncertainty, equation (3) can be rewritten as:

7

1

 T t
r 
1
1 

1  r  Et  Et 1  yit 
cit 
T t 1  

1  r  1  r 
  0



(5)

annuitization factor

Equation (5) offers a structural interpretation for the consumption innovation t of equation
(3). The change in consumption between t-1 and t depends only on revisions in the expectations
of future income between the two periods. If no new information about future income arrives,
consumption is constant. In contrast, new information about future income available in period t
induces the consumer to update the optimal consumption plan. The impact of the income
revisions is proportional to an annuitization factor (which depends on the interest rate and the
consumers’ horizon). When the horizon is infinite this factor collapses to r/(1+r).
The expression (5) is useful because it suggests that different assumptions about the income
process imply very different consumption responses to income shocks. To exemplify, we assume
that the planning horizon is infinite, and consider different income processes. In the first case we
examine, which is often used to characterize macroeconomic series, income follows an
ARMA(1,1) process:

y it  y it 1  vit  vit 1

(with  possibly equal to 1), so that equation (5) rewrites as:

8

cit 

r 1 r 
vit
1 r 1 r  

(6)

In equation (6) consumption changes depend on the degree of persistence of the income
process. The more persistent the process, the more volatile is consumption from one year to the
next. To simplify the discussion, consider the AR(1) case and how the AR coefficient affects the
sensitivity of consumption with respect to income shocks. If  = 0 (the income process is not
serially correlated) the marginal propensity to consume with respect to income shocks is r/(1+r).
This happens because when  all variations in income are transitory and individuals consume
only the annuity value of the income revision. Hence in this case consumption is much less
volatile than income. If instead  = 1 (income follows a martingale process), all changes in
income are permanent, and the marginal propensity to consume with respect to income shocks
equals 1.
Figure 2 plots consumption against time for income processes with different degrees of
persistence (()=(0.95,0.2), (0.8,0.2), (0,0.2), and (0,0.5)) starting from a normalized initial
consumption value of 1 and assuming v=0.1. The figure shows that consumption is much more
variable when the process that generates income is more persistent. Quite clearly, the volatility of
consumption depends heavily on the size of autoregressive coefficient.
The limitation of the ARMA characterization of the income process is that it restricts shocks
to be only of one type. But since the work of Friedman (1957), economists have recognized that
some of the income shocks are transitory (mean reverting) and their effect does not last long, and
others are highly persistent (non-mean reverting) and their effect cumulates over time. Examples
of transitory shocks are fluctuations in overtime labor supply, bonuses, lottery prizes, and

9

bequests. Examples of permanent innovations are generally associated with job mobility,

.95

1

1.05

1.1

1.15

1.2

1.25

promotions, lay-off, and severe health shocks.

25

35

45

55
Age

ρ=0.95, θ=0.2
ρ=0, θ=0.5

65

75

85

ρ=0.8, θ=0.2
ρ=0, θ=0.2

Figure 2: Consumption Response to Income Shocks of Different Persistence

A widely adopted characterization of the income process that allows simultaneously for
both permanent and transitory shocks is:

y it  Pit  vit

where Pit is the permanent component following a martingale process:

10

(7)

Pit  Pit 1  u it

(8)

and vit is an i.i.d. transitory component. The consumption equation (5) in this case depends on
both types of shocks:

cit 

r
vit  u it
1 r

(9)

which implies that consumption responds one-to-one to permanent income shocks but is nearly
insensitive to transitory shocks.
To encompass the effect on consumption of various specifications of the income generating
processes one can write a general expression for consumption changes:

K

cit    k  itk
k 1

where the income process has K different components, and each differs in its degree of
persistence. The coefficient k measures the effect of the innovation of the k-th income
component on consumption changes. Its size depends on the persistence of the income
component itself and (except for the infinite horizon case) on the consumer’s horizon. To
exemplify, in the case of the ARMA(1,1) process of equation (6), K=1, 1=v, and

1=

r 1 r 
. In the case of the process described by equations (7)-(8), K=2, 1=v, 2=u,
1 r 1 r  

11

1=(r/1+r), and 2=1. In the finite horizon case, the consumption sensitivity to income shocks is
adjusted by an annuitization factor that grows as the consumer approaches the end of the planning
horizon. Other cases can be obtained in a similar fashion, allowing for aggregate as well as
idiosyncratic income components, or more complex income processes (such as those including
random trends, unevenly distributed aggregate shocks, etc.).
As shown by Campbell (1987), under the same set of assumptions considered so far (in
particular, quadratic preferences, intertemporal separability, infinite horizon and perfect credit
markets), one can derive the following saving function:



sit  
j 1

Et yit  j

1  r  j

(10)

This equation states that people save when they expect their income to decline, and borrow
when they expect income to increase, an implication of the model that is known as “saving for a
rainy day” and is the mirror image of equation (5). When income follows the process described
by equations (7)-(8), the Campbell equation becomes:

sit 

1
vit
1 r

Since income changes that are not consumed are by definition saved, saving responds
(almost) one-for-one to transitory income shocks and is completely insensitive to permanent
shocks. The effect of income shocks can be studied referring to the consumption equation (5) or

12

to the saving equation (10); the particular specification and test adopted depend mainly on data
quality and availability.

2.3. Precautionary saving

In the quadratic utility model people save only if they expect income to decline, and don’t
change their saving behavior if their income becomes more uncertain. To allow for precautionary
saving, we now assume that preferences are isoelastic, the interest rate is constant and equal to
the intertemporal discount rate, and consumption is log-normally distributed. The first order
condition for utility maximization becomes:

lncit=


2

vart-1(lncit)+it

(11)

where is the coefficient of relative risk aversion and t is as before a forecast error (in
consumption growth rather than consumption changes). The first term on the right-hand side of
equation (11), absent in the quadratic utility case, is always positive and depends on the
coefficient of relative prudence, which in the isoelastic case is (1+). Along the equilibrium path
an increase in uncertainty (reflected in an increase in the conditional variance of consumption
growth) raises consumption growth and therefore current saving.
The model with certainty equivalence and the precautionary saving model share the
common prediction that consumption should not respond to anticipated income changes.
However, the implications of the precautionary saving model about the impact of income shocks

13

are more complex, because with isoleastic preferences there are no closed form solutions for
consumption or consumption growth (no analog of equation (5) linking consumption changes to
income innovations) regardless of the income process. To study the response of consumption to
income shocks one must therefore rely on approximations of the expectation error, such as the
one recently derived by Blundell, Low and Preston (2008):

 ln cit 


2

K

vart 1 ( ln cit )    k  itk   it

(12)

k 1

where it is an approximation error, and we have allowed for a log income process with K
different components. The effect of the innovation on the k-th income component on
consumption growth is measured by the coefficient k, which now depends not only on the
persistence of the income component itself and the planning horizon, but also on preference
parameters. For example, individuals with preferences characterized by high prudence will have a
relatively low value of k because they have accumulated a buffer of precautionary saving, and
therefore an income shock has a lower impact on their consumption.
To evaluate this model, one can rely on the simulation results recently produced by Kaplan
and Violante (2009). They simulate a life-cycle model with preferences characterized by constant
relative risk aversion, an income process that distinguishes between permanent and transitory
income shocks, and a pay-as-you-go pension system. Using realistic assumptions about the
parameters of interest, they show that consumers who can freely borrow and save subject to a
terminal condition on wealth are able to smooth transitory shocks to a large extent (the marginal
propensity to consume out of a transitory income shock is 0.05) and permanent shocks to a much

14

lower extent (the marginal propensity to consume out of a permanent shock is 0.77). 2 When
consumers are unable to borrow, both marginal propensities to consume increase considerably (to
0.18 and 0.93 respectively).
In the buffer stock model also the discount rate affects the sensitivity of consumption to
income shocks. Simulation results produced by Carroll (2001) show that if consumers are
impatient (r) and log income is the sum of a permanent and an i.i.d. transitory component
(and if consumers face a small but positive probability of zero income in each period), the
implication that transitory income shocks have a negligible impact on consumption still holds
true. Permanent shocks, however, have a somewhat lower impact. In fact, in models with prudent
households a positive income shock reduces the ratio of wealth to permanent income, thus
inducing households to spend part of the income increase to raise their buffer of precautionary
saving. Under a wide range of parameter values, Carroll shows that in this class of models the
marginal propensity to consume out of a permanent income shock is about 0.9.

2.4. Credit and insurance markets

The models that we have described so far are based on the assumption that consumers
operate in perfect credit markets: they can borrow and lend at the same interest rate as long as
they don’t violate the intertemporal budget constraint and satisfy the terminal condition on wealth.
At the same time, consumers don’t have access to insurance markets, either formal or informal:
the only way to buffer income shocks is by self-insuring, i.e., saving or borrowing in credit
markets. Both assumptions are subject to extensive debate and research.
2

The authors do not investigate how much of this result is due to the presence of a social security system.

15

The consequences of removing these assumptions on the main predictions of the theory can
be far-reaching. Suppose that consumers don’t have access to credit, or are limited in the amount
of borrowing. In the presence of such liquidity constraints, consumers cannot borrow in
anticipation of an income increase, and therefore consumption will change at the time the income
increase materializes, in contrast to the permanent income model. With liquidity constraints the
orthogonality test fails, in the sense that the coefficient attached to positive expected income
change will be statistically different from zero in equation (4). However, when income is
expected to decline consumers can still save, and the orthogonality condition holds.
In the model with liquidity constraints consumption responds asymmetrically also to
income shocks, because the ability to smooth unexpected and transitory income declines through
borrowing can be seriously affected. Consider for instance an individual who is temporarily laid
off and has no access to credit and no accumulated wealth: the marginal propensity to consume
out of negative and transitory shocks in equation (4) will be higher than predicted by the theory.
On the other hand, consumers will still save when they receive an unexpected and transitory
income increase.
Insurance opportunities also affect consumption allocations and the response to income
shocks. In a benchmark case, known in the literature as the complete markets model, households
can insure ex-ante all income shocks through a system of contingent transfers, which can either
be provided by formal insurance markets, the government (through taxes, transfers and subsidies)
or family networks (through private transfers). It can be shown that in this case consumption
growth is constant for all households:

16

 ln cit  t

(13)

so that individual consumption growth depends only on aggregate components, common to all
individuals, and not on idiosyncratic shocks.
One way of implementing the complete market equilibrium is through a system of transfers
flowing from individuals receiving positive income shocks to those receiving negative shocks.
This benchmark case is clearly unrealistic, for at least two reasons. First, it assumes that all
shocks are publicly observable. However, when individuals are privately informed about the
shocks they receive, those with positive realizations have an incentive to misreport their type
even in the presence of full commitment. Similarly, if information is public but there is only
limited commitment, individuals receiving positive shocks (especially permanent ones) have an
incentive to walk away from their obligations. Either way, the equilibrium becomes unsustainable.
On the other hand, it is well known that self-insurance is inefficient even conditioning on
private information or limited commitment, and that is it is possible to obtain constrained-optimal
equilibriums in which consumers are provided with more insurance than in the self-insurance
case. The literature has focused on plausible cases of incomplete markets providing partial
insurance against income shocks over and above what is warranted by the standard permanent or
self-insurance model; for recent surveys, see Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2009) and
Attanasio and Weber (2009). These models imply that the parameters k in equation (12) reflect
also the degree of market completeness: in general, the more complete markets are, the lower the
response of consumption to income shocks.

17

2.5. An organizing framework

The previous discussion highlights that consumption should not respond to anticipated
income changes, but should react to unexpected income shocks, to an extent that depends on the
characteristics and persistence of the shocks themselves and on the degree of completeness of
credit and insurance markets. As organizing framework we can summarize the discussion by
means of the following expression for consumption growth:

K

 ln cit  z it'   Et 1  ln y it    k  it   it
k

(14)

k 1

where the zit variables capture the effect of preference shifts (such as age and family size) and
precautionary savings on consumption growth, and it is an approximation error (which may also
include measurement error in consumption).
Depending on the purpose of the analysis, equation (14) can be used in two ways. One
could test the hypothesis that expected income growth does not affect consumption growth (the
orthogonality test described above, or =0), possibly distinguishing between positive and
negative expected income growth, without making any specific assumption about the income
K

process (i.e., treating


k 1

k

 it k   it as a composite error term).

Alternatively, one can neglect the expected income term and focus on the estimation of the
marginal propensity to consume with respect to income shocks, i.e., the parameters k. These
parameters may be informative not only about the impact of income shocks, but also about the

18

structure of credit and insurance markets. For example, in the complete market case k for all k,
regardless of the income process. In the precautionary saving model, consumption responds
strongly to permanent income shocks, while transitory shocks have negligible effects.3 The buffer
stock model delivers similar implications. Models that allow for insurance opportunities provided
by governments, firms, family networks or other channels, predict that consumers are able to
insure shocks to a larger extent than in models with only self-insurance, implying lower values
for k.4 In the remaining two sections of the paper we discuss, in turn, how empirical studies have
estimated the  and k parameters. Table 1 summarizes the results from the various approaches,
data used and main findings of the selected papers that we survey in rest of the paper.

3. The response of consumption to predicted income changes

In this section we review empirical strategies for testing the prediction that consumption
does not respond to anticipated income changes. The earlier literature focused on testing if
consumption changes (or consumption growth) is orthogonal to lagged information, an approach
that is directly derived from the consumption Euler equations (3) and (11). Since predicted
income growth was usually estimated on the basis of variables known in previous periods, the
approach placed strong restrictions on the data. A second, more recent generation of studies
attempts to identify episodes in which future income changes in a predictable fashion and to test

In the precautionary saving model one can be pin down the values of k only by simulation analysis with specific
assumptions about preferences and the income generating process, see Kaplan and Violante (2009) for an example.
4
Assuming the provision of public insurance does not crowd out private insurance.
3

19

if consumption reacts to such changes. This literature places much fewer restrictions on the data,
but requires assumptions about what consumers know of their future income.
Even if the test discussed in this section are not designed to explain the channels through
which past income information might affect current consumption, by focusing on the behavior of
particular groups (low-wealth or low-income individuals, renters, borrowers, etc.) and
distinguishing between income declines and income increases, one can gain insights about the
validity of alternative consumption models (for instance about the incidence of borrowing
constraint) or preference characterizations (such as myopia and non-separabilities between
consumption and leisure). See also the discussion in Browning and Crossley (2001).

3.1. The excess sensitivity test

Over the past three decades, many authors have performed excess sensitivity tests with
macro and micro data, and some have documented the failure of the predictions of the theory.
The first such study was Hall (1978) who starts from the Euler equation (1) and tests the
hypothesis that consumption growth between period t1 and period t cannot be explained by
variables dated t1 and earlier, in particular lagged income growth. As remarked by Deaton
(1992), Hall’s test initially attracted some perplexity because most economists had become used
to the idea that consumption growth does depend on lagged income growth, while the
orthogonality test challenged the presence of such link. Ultimately, Hall (1978) found that the
coefficient of lagged income growth was not statistically different from zero, but the
orthogonality restriction was rejected for other lagged variables (such as stock market prices).

20

In a closely related and widely cited paper, Flavin (1981) specified an income process
which she used to decompose statistically income growth into expected and unexpected
components.5 She then estimated jointly the consumption and income equations, finding evidence
of excess sensitivity of consumption to predicted income growth. While popular in the eighties,
excess sensitivity tests that rely on macroeconomic data were soon abandoned, because evidence
for excess sensitivity in macro data is likely to be due to aggregation bias, as shown among others
by Attanasio and Weber (1993) in an influential paper.
Unfortunately, econometricians quickly discovered that problems with microeconomic data
are not less daunting, even disregarding measurement error issues (Altonji and Siow, 1987). In
particular, the empirical literature faces four kinds of problems in testing the restriction =0 in
equation (14). The first problem is that finding viable instruments for income growth that are
truly exogenous and yet have good predictive power is difficult in the extreme, leading empirical
economists to approach the problem using out-of-sample information about consumers’ expected
income changes, rather than a pure statistical procedure. The selected instruments for income
growth might be poor because the econometrician has less information than the individual, who
may be better informed about events such as promotions or unemployment spells. Hence, it may
be more promising to identify episodes of salient, large, expected income changes that are
observable to both the individual and the econometrician. We will discuss this approach in the
next section.
The second problem with excess sensitivity tests based on equation (14) is that the
conditional variance of consumption growth is difficult to observe and is therefore either omitted
5

Predicted income growth is obtained as the predicted value of a regression of income growth on variable assumed
to be uncorrelated with consumption growth (typically, lagged income growth). In other words, the distinction
between anticipated and unanticipated income growth is achieved through an Instrumental Variables procedure.

21

from the estimation or subsumed in observable characteristics (the variables zit). The problem
here is that the conditional variance of consumption growth could be correlated with Et1lnYit,
generating spurious evidence of excess sensitivity.6
Third, excess sensitivity may result from a failure to control properly for non-separable
preferences. If leisure is an argument of the utility function, and if consumption and leisure are
non-separable, today's consumption decisions will be affected by predictable changes in
households' labor supply. This implies that consumption growth is positively correlated with
predictable growth in hours of work. Since predicted growth in hours will almost surely correlate
with predicted income growth, failure to control for labor supply indicators may lead to spurious
evidence of excess sensitivity (that is, it could bias the estimated α coefficient upwards), as
shown by Attanasio and Weber (1995) with panel data drawn from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CEX).
Finally, excess sensitivity may also arise spuriously from the misspecification of the
stochastic structure of the forecast errors. According to the permanent income hypothesis with
rational expectations, the conditional expectation of the forecast errors must be zero, i.e.
Et1(it)=0 in equation (4). The empirical analog of this expectation is an average taken over long
periods of time, not across a large number of households. In fact, as pointed out by Chamberlain
(1984), there is no guarantee that the cross-sectional average of forecast errors will converge to
zero as the dimension of the cross-section gets large. For instance, if the forecast error is the sum
6

Carroll (1992) goes one step further, and points out that even Zeldes' (1989) sample splitting approach described
below may produce spurious evidence in favor of liquidity constraints if one does not control properly for expected
consumption risk. Omitting the conditional variance term creates a spurious correlation between consumption growth
and income that is stronger for low-wealth households. Rich households have greater capacity than poor ones to
buffer income fluctuations by drawing down their assets, so that a finding of excess sensitivity in the group of poor
households only - as in Zeldes - could be rationalized once the assumption of certainty equivalence is dropped by the
theory of intertemporal choices.

22

of an aggregate and an idiosyncratic shock, then in a short panel the orthogonality condition fails
even if the permanent income model is true: aggregate shocks induce a cross-sectional
correlation between expected consumption growth and predicted income growth. The problem is
sometimes handled by including time dummies in the Euler equation. But time dummies don’t
solve the problem either, because aggregate shocks might be unevenly distributed in the
population.
A more general criticism of excess sensitivity tests is that when the test fails, the rejection
does not help to discriminate among alternative consumption models. In the early literature
following Hall, excess sensitivity was generally held to be due to the presence of credit market
imperfections, in the form of interest rate differential or credit rationing. 7 However, later
literature has shown that such dependence would not have to stem from the budget constraint.
Similar dependence could be generated by non-separable preferences between consumption and
leisure, habit formation, home production or durability of goods, see Attanasio (2000) for a
survey. Laibson (1997) shows that excess sensitivity can arise in equilibrium for consumers with
hyperbolic preferences even in the absence of credit constraints. While the empirical implications
for the Euler equation of all these extensions are rather similar to liquidity constraints,
intertemporal dependence originating from the preference side has vastly different policy
implications than credit constraints.
Considerable progress in the study of the impact of credit constraints on consumption was
made incorporating additional information. The most influential and innovative paper in this
7

Excess sensitivity may arise also in models where myopic behavior induces tracking of consumption to income, in
precautionary saving models, or in models with precautionary saving and borrowing constraints, and empirically it is
very hard to distinguish between them. Furthermore, detecting failures of the theory in models with prudence and
borrowing constraints is not easy, because the orthogonality condition may not be violated most of the time, as
households save in the anticipation of future constraints.

23

respect was Zeldes (1989), who relied on an asset-based sample separation rule. Zeldes assumed
that the level of assets separates households that are likely to be liquidity constrained (the lowwealth group) from those that have access to credit markets or no need to borrow (the highwealth group). If the only violation of the model is due to the existence of liquidity constraints,
excess sensitivity should arise only in the low-asset group. If instead excess sensitivity is due to
non-separable preferences or myopia there is no reason to expect that the results for the two
groups should differ. Using panel data on food consumption available in the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) Zeldes indeed found a violation of the theory in the low-asset group.
Since the coefficient of lagged income in the Euler equation was found to be statistically different
from zero and twice as large (in absolute value) as for the high-asset group, he concluded that the
rejection of the theory is due to the effect of credit constraints.
While adding outside information improves the power of the excess sensitivity test and ties
potential rejections more clearly to a specific alternative, splitting the sample on the basis of
wealth has a number of drawbacks. First of all, wealth is a good indicator of liquidity constraints
only if there is a roughly monotonic relation between the two. But poor households are not
necessarily identical to constrained households. For instance, households that are able to borrow
without full collateral have negative wealth but are obviously not credit constrained. Second,
sample splits based on wealth are bound to be highly imperfect because assets and asset income
are often poorly measured.8

8

Jappelli, Pischke and Souleles (1998) attempt to identify the impact of liquidity constraints using direct information
on borrowing constraints obtained from the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). In a first stage they estimate
probabilities of being constrained which are then utilized in a second sample (the PSID) to estimate switching
regression models for the Euler equation. Contrary to Zeldes (1989), their estimates do not indicate much excess
sensitivity associated with the possibility of constraints. However, quantile regressions indicate that the pattern of the
conditional distribution of consumption in the constrained and unconstrained regimes is consistent with the
hypothesis that liquidity constraints affect food consumption allocations. Attanasio, Goldberg, and Kyriazidou (2008)

24

3.2. Distinguishing between income increases and income declines

Variants of the excess sensitivity tests distinguish between positive and negative expected
income changes, an approach first proposed by Shea (1995). He noted that different consumption
models imply different response of consumption to predicted income increases and declines.
Under myopia, consumption tracks income, and consumption should respond equally to
predictable income increases and decreases. In the presence of credit constraints, however,
households can save when income is expected to fall, but cannot borrow when income is
expected to rise. Therefore with credit constraints consumption should be more strongly
correlated with predictable income increases than declines. In his empirical application Shea
(1995) isolates households in the PSID whose heads can be matched to particular long-term union
contracts, and constructs a household-specific measure of expected wage growth. He finds that
consumption responds more strongly to predictable income declines than to predictable income
increases, an asymmetry which is inconsistent with both liquidity constraints and myopia.
Garcia, Lusardi and Ng (1997) use a statistical approach to distinguish between positive and
negative expected income growth. They predict the probability of being liquidity constrained
using a switching regression framework, and find that liquidity constrained consumers are
excessively sensitive to past information (but unconstrained consumers also exhibit behavior that
is inconsistent with the theory). Jappelli and Pistaferri (2000) use subjective quantitative income

use CEX data on car loans (instead of consumption data) to show that particularly for poor households the demand
for loans is more sensitive to the quantity of debt (which they measure with loan maturity) than to the price of debt
(the interest rate). They argue that these results are consistent with the presence of binding credit constraints in the
car loan market.

25

expectations available for a sample of Italian households as an instrument for income growth and
find no evidence for excess sensitivity to both income increases and declines.

3.3. Episodes of income increases

One reason why excess sensitivity tests based on pure statistical procedures provide very
weak tests of the theory might be that the instruments used to predict income growth (such as
lagged income growth and the like) are not be powerful enough. Therefore applied researchers
have tried to identify specific episodes in which predicted income changes are observable by both
the consumer and the econometrician. Such episodes can also be classified into expected income
increases and expected income declines.
Wilcox (1989) examined the response of aggregate consumption to pre-announced social
security benefits increases. He found that consumption increases not when the income increase is
announced, but when it is actually implemented. In particular, he estimated that a 10 percent
increase in social security benefits induces a 1 percent increase in retail sales in the same month,
and a 3 percent increase in durable goods purchase. The limitation of this particular test is that it
is difficult to analyze major changes in tax policy using aggregate data on components of retail
sales.
In a series of papers Shapiro and Slemrod (1995, 2003, 2009) use instant-survey data to
measure individual responses to actual or hypothetical tax policies. For example, in their 1995
paper they examined the effectiveness of President Bush’s temporary reduction in income tax

26

withholding which took place in 1992.9 One month after the implementation of the tax change,
they surveyed about 500 taxpayers and asked them (a) whether they had realized that income tax
withholding had decreased, and (b) what they were planning to do with the extra money in their
paycheck, i.e., mostly save it or mostly spend it. Shapiro and Slemrod found that 40 percent of
people interviewed planned to spend the extra take-home pay, suggesting that even a temporary
tax change could be moderately effective in increasing household spending. Their analysis of the
2001 income tax rebate reports a lower estimate of the marginal propensity to consume (only 22
percent of the interviewed households reported planning to spend the tax rebate), and little
evidence of myopia or liquidity constraints. Their analysis of the 2008 tax stimulus reaches
similar conclusions. A problem of these studies, common to all research using subjective
responses or expectations, is that respondents may have little incentives to answer the questions
correctly, may have trouble understanding the wording of the questions, or may in practice
behave differently from their reported behavior.
Other studies have used actual consumption data to study temporary tax changes that
increase disposable income. Parker (1999) considers the effect on consumption of the anticipated
income increase induced by reaching the social security payroll cap ($106,800 in 2009) at some
point during the calendar year.10 Souleles (1999) studies the anticipated income increase induced
by the receipt of tax refunds, and in a subsequent paper analyzes how consumption responded to
the widely pre-announced tax cuts of the Reagan administration era (Souleles, 2002). All of these
studies use data from the CEX, all find evidence of excess sensitivity, and most of them don’t
attribute the failure of the theory to liquidity constraints.
9

The change was transitory as it was planned to be offset by a smaller tax refund in 1993.
Parker (1999) also exploits the expected decline in income that high-income taxpayers face in January of each year
when the social security payroll tax kicks back in.
10

27

In Parker’s study, a 1 dollar anticipated rise in income increases nondurable consumption by
about 20 cents. This result is unlikely to be due to liquidity constraints, because the sample
includes only high-income taxpayers. Souleles (1999) finds that 10 percent of federal tax refunds
are spent on non-durables, but that the response of total consumption is much larger, or 65
percent of refunds, suggesting that most of the refund is spent on durable goods. Since highwealth individuals are those mostly using the tax refund to spend on durables, he concludes that
borrowing constraints can explain only part of the results.11 Souleles (2002) also points out that
liquidity constraints are unlikely to explain his excess sensitivity finding.
Further insights from tax refunds is provided by Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006), who
study the large income tax rebate program provided by the Economic Growth and Tax Relief
Reconciliation Act of 2001. The program sent tax rebates, typically $300 or $600 in value, to
about two-thirds of U.S. households. According to the permanent income hypothesis a single
rebate would have little effect on spending. Further, the theory predicts that, in the absence of
liquidity constraints, spending should increase as soon as consumers begin to expect some tax cut,
and not increase only after they actually have received the rebate check. Johnson, Parker, and
Souleles’ analysis uses a unique feature of the rebate program. Because it was administratively
difficult to print and mail the rebate checks all at once, they were mailed out over a ten-week
period from late July to the end of September 2001. Most importantly, the particular week in
which a check was mailed depended on the second-to-last digit of the taxpayer's Social Security
number, a number that is effectively randomly assigned (the timing of receipt of the tax rebate

11

Hsieh (2003) studies two episodes affecting the same households: tax refunds (as in Souleles, 1999) and payments
from the Alaska Permanent Fund, which go only to Alaskan residents. His results are puzzling, because he finds
excess sensitivity with respect to tax refunds but not with respect to payments from the Alaska Permanent Fund.

28

was observed in their CEX data thanks to the addition of a special survey module). This
randomization allows the authors to identify the causal effect of the rebate by comparing the
spending of households that received the rebate earlier to the spending of households that
received it later. The authors find that the average household spent 20-40 percent of its 2001 tax
rebate on non-durable goods during the three-month period in which the rebate was received. The
authors also find that the expenditure responses are largest for households with relatively low
liquid wealth and low income, which is consistent with liquidity constraints.
In a related paper, Agarwal, Liu and Souleles (2007) use a panel data set of credit card
accounts to analyze how consumers responded to the same tax rebate analyzed by Johnson,
Parker and Souleles (2006). They estimate the month-by-month response of credit card payments,
spending, and debt to the rebates, exploiting the randomized timing of the rebates’ disbursement
to identify their causal effects. They found that, on average, consumers initially saved some of the
rebate, by increasing their credit card payments and thereby paying down debt and increasing
their liquidity. But soon afterward their spending increased, counter to the implications of the
permanent income model.
A paper that stands in contrast to these is Browning and Collado (2001), who use Spanish
micro data to examine the consumer response to the payment of institutionalized June and
December extra wage payments to full-time workers. Browning and Collado detect no evidence
of excess sensitivity, and argue that the reason why earlier researchers found large response of
consumption to predicted income changes is because of bounded rationality: consumers tend to
smooth consumption and follow the theory when expected income changes are large, but are less

29

likely to do so when the changes are small and the cost of adjusting consumption are not trivial.12
Suppose for example that consumers who want to adjust their consumption upwards in response
to an expected income increase need to face the cost of negotiating a loan with a bank. It is likely
that the utility loss from not adjusting fully to the new equilibrium is relatively small when the
expected income increase is small, which suggests that no adjustment would take place if the
transaction cost associated with negotiating a loan is high enough.13
This “magnitude hypothesis” has been formally tested by Scholnick et al (2009), who use a
large data set provided by a Canadian bank that includes information on both credit cards
spending as well as mortgage payment records. As in Stephens (2008) he argues that the final
mortgage payment represent an expected disposable income shock (that is, income net of precommitted debt service payments). His test of the magnitude hypothesis looks at whether the
response of consumption to expected income increases depends on the relative amount of
mortgage payments.
Overall, the main limitation of the approach discussed in this section is that it offers little
guidance for how consumers would react to different shocks and environments. However, it does
offer ways to evaluate why consumption theories fail. For instance, some of the studies examined
found that low-wealth consumers react more to predictable income changes than high-wealth
consumers, a finding that points to the existence of liquidity constraints.

3.4. Episodes of income declines
12

The magnitude argument could also explain Hsieh’s (1999) puzzling findings. Tax refunds are typically smaller
than payments from the Alaska Permanent fund (although the actual amount of the latter is somewhat more
uncertain).
13
Another element that may matter, but it has been neglected in the literature, is the time distance that separates the
announcement from the actual income change. The smaller the time distance, the lower the utility loss from inaction.

30

The most useful aspect of analyses that consider the effect of expected income declines on
consumption is that any excess sensitivity that is found in the data cannot be attributed to
liquidity constraints, because models with credit constraints predict that consumers don’t borrow
(and rather save) if they expect their income to decline. While borrowing can and does face limits,
saving does not.
The most important predictable decline in one’s income occurs at retirement. A powerful
test of whether consumption is insensitive to predictable changes in income is thus to compare
consumption before and after retirement. The first paper to look at this issue is Banks, Blundell
and Tanner (1998), who used repeated cross-sectional data drawn from the UK Family
Expenditure Survey (FES), and found a remarkable drop in consumption after retirement.
Bernheim, Skinner, and Weinberg (2001) repeated the test for the U.S. using the PSID, and also
found evidence of a substantial consumption drop at retirement (24 percent for the first income
quartile, 15 percent for the second quartile and 9 percent of the third and fourth quartiles). The
main limitation of their study is that the only consumption information available in the PSID is
food consumption.14
How do we explain the finding that consumption drops at retirement? One possibility, of
course, is that the life-cycle theory is not valid, and that consumers are myopic or lack selfcontrol. That is, they fail to anticipate that retirement brings about a steep decline in income.
When they realize it, they are forced to adjust their consumption downward. But other
14

Studies that use more comprehensive consumption measures find little or no consumption drop in the US. Hurd
and Rohwedder (2006), using a special module in the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) find that for the average
household there is no consumption drop. However, their sample size is rather small. Attanasio, Meghir and Aguila
(2008) using panel data from the CEX find that food consumption declines by 6 percent, but detect no decline for
non-food consumption. These papers also provide a detailed survey of the relevant literature.

31

explanations don’t imply a rejection of the theory. Most of the fall in consumption at retirement
may be due to the decline of work-related expenses (such as transportation, canteen meals, etc.),
rather than a decline of all consumption categories. A related argument is that, from equation (2),
the theory predicts that individuals smooth the marginal utility of consumption, and not
necessarily consumption itself. If utility is non-separable between consumption and leisure,
equation (2) rewrites

Et1u(cit,Lit) = u(cit1,lit1)

If consumption and leisure are substitutes in utility, the sudden increase in leisure time from
the period before retirement (l) to the period after retirement (L) requires a corresponding sharp
adjustment in consumption. Another possibility is that retirement may not be that expected after
all, so consumption may legitimately fall because retirement comes as a shock. Haider and
Stephens (2007) emphasize that for most workers the timing of retirement is uncertain, and that it
is sometimes forced upon the individuals by events such as prolonged unemployment or
disabilities.
A further explanation for a decline in consumption at retirement is home production, an issue
stressed in Hurd and Rohwedder (2006) and Aguiar and Hurst (2007). The idea is that
consumption (and in particular food consumption, the only consumption indicator available in the
PSID) is just an input to a home production function, which also uses as other factors leisure time,
shopping, and housework. Retirement brings about a sharp increase in the amount of time
available for shopping and housework, so individuals may choose to substitute, say, tomatoes

32

purchased in a grocery store with tomatoes grown in their own garden. Similarly, they may spend
more of their time looking for cheaper items. Indeed, Aguiar and Hurst (2005) use the Continuing
Survey of Food Intake of Individuals (CSFII), collecting information on food expenditure and
calories intake, and the National Human Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS), a time use survey, to
show that while food expenditure does decline at retirement, food intake does not, consistent with
the home production story. In a follow-up paper, Aguiar and Hurst (2006) use individual scanner
data on grocery expenses from the ACNielsen's Homescan Survey to find that the elderly shop
more frequently and buy cheaper goods (or manage to find the same goods at a lower price) than
younger individuals who have less leisure time available.
Retirement is not the only situation in which households expect future resources to decline.
Souleles (2000) studies the consumption effect of expected disposable income declines induced
by paying for college tuition. Using CEX data, Souleles tests whether households’ non
educational consumption decreases in proportion to their college expenditures. The main finding
is that households appear to do a relatively good job smoothing their consumption into the
academic year, despite large expenses, consistent with the life-cycle hypothesis.
The retirement and college tuition experiments are cases in which income declines in a
predictable way, and therefore the excess sensitivity test is free of complications due to liquidity
constraints. All in all, the evidence appears to be in favor of consumption smoothing and the
basic tenets of the permanent income hypothesis.

33

4. The response of consumption to unanticipated income shocks

In this section we turn to examining tests of the prediction that consumption should respond
to unanticipated income changes and that the response should depend on the persistence of the
shock and on the degree of imperfections of credit and insurance markets. The literature has
considered three approaches. A first method attempts at identifying episodes in which income
changes unexpectedly, and to evaluate in a quasi-experimental setting how consumption reacts to
such changes. A second approach is to estimate the marginal propensity to consume with respect
to income shocks using the covariance restrictions that the theory imposes on the joint behavior
of consumption and income growth. A third approach estimates the impact of shocks combining
realizations and expectations of income or consumption in surveys where data on subjective
expectations are available. Each of these approaches has pros and cons, as we shall discuss below.

4.1. The quasi-experimental approach

The approach we discuss in this section does not require estimation of an income process, or
even observing the individual shocks. Rather, it compares households that are exposed to shocks
with households that are not (or the same households before and after the shock), and assumes
that the difference in consumption arise from the realization of the shocks.
The first of such attempts dates back to a study by Bodkin (1959), who laid down fifty years
ago all the ingredients of the quasi-experimental approach. In this pioneering study the
experiment consists of looking at the consumption behavior of WWII veterans after the receipt of
unexpected dividend payments from the National Service Life Insurance. Bodkin assumes that

34

the dividend payments are unanticipated and represent a windfall source of income, and finds a
point estimate of the marginal propensity to consume non-durables out of this windfall income is
as high as 0.72, a strong violation of the permanent income model.
The subsequent literature has looked at the economic consequences of illness, disability,
unemployment, and, in the context of developing countries, weather shocks and crop losses.
Some of these shocks are transitory (i.e. temporary job loss), and others are permanent (i.e.
disability); some are positive (i.e. dividends pay-outs), others negative (illness). The framework
in Section 2 suggests that it is important to distinguish between the effects of these various types
of shocks because, according to the theory, consumption should change almost one-for-one in
response to permanent shocks (positive or negative), but may react asymmetrically if shocks are
transitory. Indeed, if households are credit constrained (can save but not borrow) they will cut
consumption strongly when hit by a negative transitory shock, but will not react much to a
positive one.
Recent papers in the quasi-experimental framework look at the effect of unemployment
shocks on consumption, and the smoothing benefits provided by unemployment insurance (UI)
schemes. As pointed out by Browning and Crossley (2001) unemployment insurance provides
two benefits to consumers. First, it provides “consumption smoothing benefits” for consumers
that are liquidity constrained. In the absence of credit constraints, individuals who faced a
negative transitory shock such as unemployment would borrow to smooth their consumption. If
they are unable to borrow they would need to adjust their consumption downward considerably.
Unemployment insurance provides some liquidity and hence it has positive welfare effects.
Second, unemployment insurance reduces the conditional variance of consumption growth in
equation (12) and hence the need to accumulate precautionary savings.

35

One of the earlier attempts to estimate the welfare effects of unemployment insurance is
Gruber (1997). Using the PSID, he constructs a sample of workers who lose their job between
period t1 and period t, and regresses the change in food spending over the same time span
against the UI replacement rate an individual is eligible for (i.e., potential benefits).15 Gruber
finds a large smoothing effect of UI, in particular that a 10 percentage point rise in the
replacement rate reduces the fall in consumption upon unemployment by about 3 percent.16 He
also finds that the fall in consumption at zero replacement rates is about 20 percent, suggesting
that consumers face liquidity constraints.17
Browning and Crossley (2001) extend Gruber’s idea to a different country (Canada instead
of the US), using a more comprehensive measure of consumption (instead of just food) and
legislated changes in UI (instead of state-time variation). Moreover, their data are rich enough to
allow them to identify presumably liquidity constrained households (in particular, their data set
provide information on assets at the time of job loss). Browning and Crossley estimate a small
elasticity of expenditures with respect to UI benefit (5 percent). But this small effect masks
substantial heterogeneity, with low-assets households at time of job loss exhibiting elasticities as
high as 20 percent. This is consistent with the presence of liquidity constraints.
A critique of this approach is that the response of consumption to unemployment shocks is
confounded by three set of issues (similar arguments apply to papers that look at unpredictable

15

The use of potential benefits instead of actual benefits is for three reasons: (a) the endogeneity of UI receipts, (b)
the large amount of error in reported UI benefits, and (c) the policy interest in the effect of potential UI benefits
(which can be manipulated by the government) rather than on the effect of received benefits (which cannot).
16
The use of a measure of total consumption (rather than just food) would presumably make the estimated effect
even larger, given that food is only a share of total consumption.
17
Gruber also tests whether anticipated layoffs (measured using “seasonal” and “serial” layoffs) have no impact on
consumption, and finds no rejection of this hypothesis. Given that he is considering anticipated income declines, this
result is not inconsistent with his finding regarding the large impact of an unemployment shock. Moreover, for some
individuals an unemployment shock could be a persistent one (i.e., individuals close to retirement).

36

income changes due to illness or disability, as in Stephens, 2001). First, some of these shocks
may not come as a surprise, and individuals may have saved in their anticipation. For example,
being laid off by Chrysler in 2009 is hardly an unanticipated event. Second, the theory predicts
that consumers smooth marginal utility, not consumption per se. If an unemployment shock
brings more leisure and if consumption is a substitute for leisure, an excess response of
consumption to the transitory shock induced by losing one’s job does not necessarily represent a
violation of the theory. Finally, even if unemployment shocks are truly fully unanticipated, they
may be partially insured through government programs such as unemployment insurance (and
disability insurance in case of disability shocks). An attenuated consumption response to a
permanent income shock due to disability may be explained by the availability of governmentprovided insurance, rather than representing a failure of the theory. Therefore a complete analysis
of the impact of unemployment or disability shocks requires explicit modeling of the type of
insurance available to individuals as well as of the possible interactions between public and
private insurance.18
The above discussion suggests that it might be easier to test the theory in contexts in which
insurance over and above self-insurance is not available, such as in developing countries. 19
Gertler and Gruber (2003) look at the effect of income shocks arising from major illness on
consumption in Indonesia. They find that while people smooth well the effect of minor illnesses
(which could be interpreted as transitory shocks, or anticipated events), they experience

18

Some of these interactions stem from the fact that most welfare programs are means- and asset-tested. For
example, in the US individuals with more than $2,000 in liquid assets are not eligible to receive Food Stamps,
Medicaid and other popular welfare programs even if they have no income. The disincentives to save (self-insure)
induced by the presence of public insurance (which in most cases are not subject to time limits) have been studied by
Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995).
19
On the other hand, there may stronger family networks in these countries.

37

considerable more difficulty in smoothing the impact of major illnesses (which could be
interpreted as permanent shocks).
Wolpin (1982) and Paxson (1993) study the effect of weather shocks in India and Thailand,
respectively. In agricultural economies, weather shocks affect income directly through the
production function and deviations from normal weather conditions are truly unanticipated events.
Wolpin (1982) uses Indian regional time series data on rainfall to construct long run moments as
instruments for current income (which is assumed to measure permanent income with error). The
estimated permanent income elasticity ranges from 0.91 to 1.02 depending on the measure of
consumption, thus supporting strongly the permanent income model. Paxson (1992) uses regional
Thai data on weather to measure transitory shocks and finds that Thai consumers have a high
propensity to save out of transitory weather shocks, in support of the theory. However, she also
finds that they have a propensity to save out of permanent shocks above zero, which rejects a
strong version of the permanent income hypothesis.
Studies using quasi-experimental variation to identify shocks to household income have the
obvious advantage that the identification strategy is clear and easy to explain and understand.
However, these studies’ obvious limitation is that they capture only one type of shocks at a time,
for instance illness, job loss, rainfall, extreme temperatures, or crop loss. One may wonder, for
example, whether the Gruber (1997) and Browning and Crossley (2001) estimates obtained in a
sample of job losers have external validity for examining the effect of other types of shocks
(especially those that are much harder to insure, such as shocks to one’s productivity).
A second limitation of the approach is that some of the income shocks (in particular,
unemployment and disability shocks), cannot be considered as truly exogenous events. For
instance, for some people unemployment is a voluntary choice, and for others disability could be

38

reported just to obtain benefits (a moral hazard issue). For this reason, not all income variability
is necessarily unanticipated, or not acted upon by the agent (Low, Meghir and Pistaferri, 2009).
The lesson of the literature is that identifying episodes of genuine exogenous and unanticipated
income changes is very difficult. One such case is weather conditions, to the extent at least to
which people don’t move to different regions to offset bad weather conditions.

4.2. Statistical decomposition of income shocks

A different approach to identify the consumption response to unanticipated income shocks
makes specific statistical assumptions about the income process, and uses covariance restrictions
to identify the parameters that characterize the joint behavior of consumption and income, and in
particular the response of consumption to shocks.
But how to identify income shocks? Two methods have emerged in the literature. A first
approach, which we discuss in this section, relies on panel data (or pseudo-panel data) and
measures shocks as deviations from observable income determinants. To be valid, this method
requires assuming that each individual conditions on the same set of variables to form
expectations, that the individuals and the econometrician have the same information set and that
the econometrician knows the stochastic process that generates individual income expectations. A
different strategy relies on quantitative subjective expectations, which we discuss in the next
section.
There are several advantages of the statistical decomposition of income shocks. First of all,
it allows estimating simultaneously the marginal propensity to consume with respect to shocks of
various nature and persistence. The main variable of interest in the statistical decomposition is

39

income, and therefore one can estimate the response of consumption to all type of income shocks
rather than to specific episodes (like weather fluctuations or job loss). Finally, there is a sharper
(albeit econometrically derived) distinction between transitory and permanent shocks. There are
also drawbacks, however. Since the approach assumes that income and consumption follow a
particular process, it is structural in nature and may suffer from specification bias for the
consumption rule. The approach is more demanding in terms of data, because it requires repeated
observations on income and consumption, although not necessarily in the same data set, and not
necessarily for the same households. Finally, with this is approach it is more difficult to
distinguish between the effect of positive and negative income shocks.
To explain how the method works, consider again a slightly modified version of the
consumption rule (14), to which we append an equation for income growth:

 ln cit  z it'  c   1 it   2 it   3 it   it
1

2

 ln y it  z it'  y   it   it   it
1

2

3

3

(15)

In this specification 1 represents a permanent shock (the innovation of a martingale
process), and 2 and 3 are i.i.d. components, measuring respectively transitory shocks and
measurement error in income. The parameters 1 and 2 measure the marginal propensities to
consume with respect to permanent and transitory income shocks, respectively. Recall from the
discussion in Sections 2.4 and 2.5 that these parameters can be interpreted as the degree to which
households insure income shocks, and therefore capture the degree of market completeness.
Finally,  is a measurement error in consumption. The literature typically imposes 3=0 because

40

consumption does not respond to noise in income. But note that this assumption has behavioral
content if 3 captures anticipated transitory changes in income that are unobserved to the
econometrician. In the rest of the section we follow the literature and impose 3=0.
The consumption rule (15) states that consumption growth depends on preference shifts z
(such as age and family size), as well as income shocks, and nests many of the models that we
have discussed. For instance, according to the permanent income model, consumption responds
fully to permanent income shocks (1), while transitory shocks have negligible effects (0)
because consumers use accumulated assets to smooth temporary income fluctuations. The buffer
stock model has similar implications, possibly allowing for slightly lower values of . In the
complete markets benchmark model consumption is completely insulated from transitory as well
as permanent shocks (0). Finally, models with precautionary savings or partial insurance
predict that consumers are able to insure also permanent shocks to a larger extent than in the PIH
(0<.
Identification of the model with panel data on income and consumption growth can be
approached considering a set of covariance restrictions. Defining the residual term
 ln ~
xit   ln xit  z it'  x , they are:

 

 

2
2
var ln c~it    1  21   2  2 2  2 2
cov ln c~ ,  ln c~    2
it



it 1

y it    21  2 2 2  2 23
var ln ~
y    2   2
cov ln y ,  ln ~
it

it 1





2

3

y it    1 21   2 2 2
cov ln c~it ,  ln ~
y    2 2
cov ln c~ ,  ln ~
it 1

2

it

41



Note that the model is under-identified because, unless 2 is known, the variance of the
transitory shock  2 2 and the variance of the measurement error in income  2 3 cannot be




identified separately. One way out is to identify  2 3 using outside information, such as results


from income validation studies, as suggested by Meghir and Pistaferri (2004).
The first paper to decompose income shocks to estimate the marginal propensity to
consume is Hall and Mishkin (1982), who work with PSID data on income and food consumption.
Their setup assumes quadratic preferences (and hence looks at consumption and income changes),
imposes 1=1, and leaves only 2 free for estimation. They find that the response of consumption
to innovations in transitory income is 29 percent, which is too high to be consistent with the
theory.
Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008) extend the framework to the CRRA case and
consider also a shock to higher moments of the earnings distribution. In their study they create
panel data on a comprehensive consumption measure for the PSID using an imputation procedure
based on food demand estimates from the CEX. They find that consumption is nearly insensitive
to transitory shocks (the estimated 2 parameter is around 5 percent, but higher among poor
households), while their estimate of 1 is significantly lower than 1 (around 0.65, but lower for
the college educated and those near retirement and higher for poor or less educated households),
suggesting that households are able to insure at least part of the permanent shocks.20

20

Jappelli and Pistaferri (2007) consider the implications that the theory imposes on the mobility matrix of household
consumption and income. Using Italian data from the SHIW, they find considerably less insurance against income
shocks than in US applications (the marginal propensity to consume out of permanent shocks is around 1 and that
with respect to transitory shocks is around 0.3). These results are confirmed in a subsequent paper (Jappelli and
Pistaferri, 2008) using more recent data, which also points out that the marginal propensity to consume out of

42

The results of Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008) can be used to understand why
consumption inequality in the US has grown less than income inequality during the past two
decades. Their findings suggest that the widening gap between consumption and income
inequality is due to the change in the durability of income shocks. In particular, a growth in the
variance of permanent shocks in the early eighties was replaced by a continued growth in the
variance of transitory income shocks in the late eighties. Since they find little evidence that the
degree of insurance with respect to shocks of different durability changes over this period, it is
the relative increase in the variability of more insurable shocks rather than greater insurance
opportunities that explains the disjuncture between income and consumption inequality.
A low response of consumption to permanent shocks may reflect not only insurance
opportunities, but also advance information. To exemplify, suppose that one finds that
consumption responds little to what the econometrician labels a permanent shock. Does this
happen because the income change is not really a surprise from the point of view of the consumer
(i.e., it was anticipated), or is it because it is mostly insured? The variation that is measured in the
data may reflect both information known to the econometrician and superior information held by
the individual. Two recent papers take the information issue seriously. Primiceri and van Rens
(2009) assume that consumers are unable to smooth permanent shocks, and that any attenuated
response measures the amount of advance information that they have about developments in their
(permanent) income. Using CEX data, they find that all of the increase in income inequality over
the 1980-2000 period can be attributed to an increase in the variance of permanent shocks but that
most of the permanent income shocks are anticipated by individuals; hence consumption
transitory income shocks is higher among households with lower education (0.315) than among those who completed
high school (0.121), suggesting that people with higher education have easier access to credit markets to smooth
income fluctuations.

43

inequality remains flat even though income inequality increases. While their results challenge the
common view that permanent shocks were important only in the early 1980s (see Card and Di
Nardo, 2002), they could be explained by the poor quality of income data in the CEX.
In related research, Guvenen and Smith (2009) assume that the income process is the sum of
a random trend consumers must learn about in Bayesian fashion, an AR(1) process with AR
coefficient below 1, and a serially uncorrelated component. They extend the consumption
imputation procedure of Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008) to create a panel data of income
and consumption data in the PSID, and find that consumers know quite a lot about the evolution
of their income process (about 80 percent of the uncertainty about the random trend component is
resolved in the first period).
This discussion suggest that although the approach based on the covariance restrictions
between the income and the consumption processes allows estimation of the sensitivity of
consumption to permanent income shocks, it still does not isolate the reasons why permanent
shocks appear to be smoothed. In particular, the approach cannot distinguish between insurance
mechanisms and differential information between the individual and the econometrician.

4.3. Subjective expectations

As pointed out in Sections 4.1. and 4.2, identifying income shocks is difficult because
people may have information that is not observed by the econometrician. For instance, they may
know in advance that they will face a temporary change in their income (such as a seasonal layoff). When the news is realized, the econometrician will measure as a shock what is in fact an

44

expected event. The literature based on subjective expectations attempts to circumvent the
problem by asking people to report quantitative information on their expectations, an approach
forcefully endorsed by Manski (2004). This literature relies therefore on survey questions, rather
than retrospective data as in Section 4.2, to elicit information on the conditional distribution of
future income, and measures shocks as deviations of actual realizations from elicited expectations.
Hayashi (1985) is the first study to adopt this approach. He uses a four-quarter panel of
Japanese households containing respondents’ expectations about expenditure and income in the
following quarter. Hayashi works with disaggregate consumers’ expenditure, allowing each
component to have a different degree of durability. He specifies a consumption rule, and allowing
for measurement error in expenditures, estimates the covariances between expected and
unexpected changes in consumption and expected and unexpected changes in income. His results
are in line with Hall and Mishkin (1982), suggesting a relatively high sensitivity of consumption
to income shocks.
Pistaferri (2001) combines income realizations and quantitative subjective income
expectations contained in the Italian Survey of Household Income and Wealth (SHIW) to identify
separately the transitory and the permanent income shocks. To see how subjective income
expectations allow estimating transitory and income shocks for each household, consider the
income process of equations (7) and (8). The assumption of rational expectations implies that the
transitory shock at time t can be point identified by:



it   E yit 1  it

45



(16)

where it is the individual’s information set at time t. Using equations (7)-(8) and (16), the
permanent shock at time t is identified by the expression:



 

uit  yit  E yit  it 1  E yit 1  it



e.g., the income innovation at time t adjusted by a factor that takes into account the arrival of new
information concerning the change in income between t and t+1. Thus, the transitory and
permanent shocks can be identified if one observes, for at least two consecutive time periods, the
conditional expectation and the realization of income, a requirement satisfied by the 1989-93
SHIW. Pistaferri estimates equation (10) and finds that consumers save most of the transitory
shocks and very little of the permanent shocks, supporting the saving for a rainy day model of
Section 2.2.
Kaufmann and Pistaferri (2009) use the same Italian survey, but different years (1995-2001)
to distinguish the superior information issue from the insurance issue mentioned in Section 4.2.
Considering the covariance restrictions implied by the theory on the joint behavior of
consumption, income realizations, and subjective quantitative income expectations, they show
that the degree of insurance of income shocks is upward biased. They also find that a large part of
the transitory variation in income is either anticipated or the result of measurement error, while
about two-third of the permanent variation in income can be labeled as a true innovation.
Studies that use subjective expectations are subject to the usual criticisms about the validity
of subjective data, such as their reliability and information content, and in practice it is still the
case that subjective expectations are seldom available alongside consumption and income data or

46

confined to special survey modules. However, there is considerable promise in the use of
subjective expectations to evaluate the validity of various consumption models.

5. Conclusions

Understanding how household consumption responds to changes in income is an important
topic of research, in particular for understanding how consumers would respond to tax or welfare
reforms, which is key for the formulation of effective stabilization policies. In this paper we have
reviewed empirical approaches to two distinct questions. First, does household consumption
respond to changes in income that are anticipated? Second, does consumption respond to
unexpected income changes? While it is difficult to summarize such a vast body of work, some
consensus emerges from the literature, on both methods and substance.
On method, it is clear that distinguishing between negative and positive income changes, and
between transitory and permanent income shocks can help to shed light not only on the response
of consumption to income, but also on the validity of various theories of intertemporal choice.
There are a variety of approaches that can be fruitfully explored to analyze these issues, from
identification of specific episodes of anticipated income declines or increase, to the estimation of
sophisticated income process to distinguish between transitory and permanent shocks, to use of
data with subjective consumption or income expectations. Indeed, in this survey we have
attempted to classify the various studies along each of these dimensions.
On substance, there is by now considerable evidence that consumption appears to respond to
anticipated income increases, over and above by what is implied by standard models of

47

consumption smoothing. Although the reasons for this failure of the theory are not yet well
understood, there is evidence from diverse sources, studies and countries that, at least locally,
liquidity constraints are an important culprit for this failure. Indeed, consumption appears much
less responsive to anticipated income declines (for instance, after retirement), a case in which
liquidity constraints have no bearing. Future work should be directed toward understanding which
type of credit rationing (quantity vs. price rationing) and which model of behavior (adverse
selection vs. moral hazard) best explains the data.21
A second finding that emerges from the literature is that the consumption reaction to
permanent shocks is much higher than that to transitory shocks. There is also evidence, at least in
the US, that consumers do not revise their consumption fully in response to permanent shocks.
Taken together, these finding are consistent with the hypothesis that precautionary savings and
even perhaps insurance over and above self-insurance (achieved through government welfare
programs, family labor supply, or family networks) play an important role in consumption. Here
as well, households’ heterogeneity is important, because liquidity constraints appear to be able to
account for the estimated larger marginal propensities to consume , especially in sub-groups of
the population that are less likely to be able to access credit markets, such as low-income or loweducation households. The main challenge for empirical work is to distinguish between
information (which might be solved with better data or the specification of an income process that
acknowledges the possibility of advance information) and insurance (which may require a better
modeling of the sources of consumption smoothing available to consumers over and above own
savings, see Attanasio and Pavoni, 2007). The large fiscal packages implemented in virtually all

21

Primarily for lack of space, we have not discussed so-called behavioral (or other preference-driven) explanations
for these findings. See recent surveys by Angeletos et al. (2001) and Camerer et al. (2005) for a discussion.

48

countries in response to the recession of 2008 will certainly provide the grounds to gain further
insights into the response of consumption to income changes.

49

Literature Cited

Agarwal L, Souleles NS. 2007. The Reaction of Consumer Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates Evidence from Consumer Credit Data. J. Polit. Econ. 115:986-1019
Aguiar M, Hurst E. 2005. Consumption versus Expenditures. J. Polit. Econ. 113: 919-48
Aguiar M, Hurst E. 2007. Life-Cycle Prices and Production. Am. Econ. Rev. 97: 1533-59
Altonji JG, Siow A. 1987. Testing the Response of Consumption to Income with (Noisy) Panel
Data. Q. J. Econ. 102:293-328
Angeletos GM, Laibson D, Repetto A, Tobacman J, Weinberg S. 2001. The Hyperbolic
Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation. J. Ec. Persp.
15(3):47-68
Attanasio OP. 2000. Consumption. In Handbook of Macroeconomics. Vol. 1B, ed. JB. Taylor, M
Woodford, 11: 741-812. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Attanasio OP, Goldberg PK, Kyriazidou E. 2008. Credit Constraints in the Market for Consumer
Durables: Evidence from Micro Data on Car Loans. Int. Econ. Rev. 49(2): 401-436
Attanasio OP, Meghir C, Aguila E. 2008. Changes in Consumption at Retirement. RAND
Working Paper WR-621
Attanasio OP, Pavoni N. 2007. Risk Sharing in Private Information Models with Asset
Accumulation: Explaining the Excess Smoothness of Consumption. NBER Working
Papers 12994.
Attanasio OP, Weber G. 1993. Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate, and Aggregation. Rev
Econ. Stud. 60:631-49
Attanasio OP, Weber G. 1995. Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. J. Polit. Econ.
103:1121-57.
Attanasio OP, Weber G. 2009. Consumption and Saving: Models of Intertemporal Allocation and
Their Implications for Public Policy. Mimeo. University College London
Banks J, Blundell R, Tanner S. 1998. Is There a Retirement Savings-Puzzle?. Am. Econ. Rev. 88:
769-88
Bernheim BD, Skinner J, Weinberg S. 2001. What Accounts for the Variation in Retirement
Wealth among US Households?. Am. Econ. Rev. 91:832-57
Blundell R, Low H, Preston I. 2008. Decomposing Changes in Income Risk Using Consumption
Data. IFS Working Papers W08/13. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies
Blundell R, Pistaferri L, Preston I. 2008. Consumption inequality and partial insurance. Am. Econ.
Rev. 98:1887-1921
Bodkin R. 1959. Windfall Income and Consumption. Am. Econ. Rev. 49:602-14
Browning M, Collado MF. 2001. The Response of Expenditures to Anticipated Income Changes:
Panel Data Estimates. Am. Econ. Rev. 91:681-692
Browning M, Crossley TF. 2001. The Life-Cycle Model of Consumption and Savings. J. Econ.
Persp. 15(3): 3-22.
Browning M, Crossley TF. 2001. Unemployment insurance benefit levels and consumption
changes. J. Public Econ. 80(1):1-23
Camerer C, Loewenstein G, Prelec D. 2005. Neuroeconomics: How Neuroscience Can Inform
Economics. J. Ec. Lit. 43(1): 9-64

50

Campbell JY. 1987. Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Income? An Alternative Test of the
Permanent Income Hypothesis. Econometrica 55:1249-73
Card D, Di Nardo JE. 2002. Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage Inequality:
Some Problems and Puzzles. J. Labor Econ. 20(4):733-783
Carroll CD. 1992. Buffer-stock Saving and the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis. Q. J.
Econ. 112:1-56
Carroll CD. 2001. Precautionary Saving and the Marginal Propensity to Consume Out of
Permanent Income. NBER Working Paper 8233
Chamberlain G. 1984. Panel data. In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 2 ed. Z Griliches, MD.
Intriligator, 22: 1247–1313. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Deaton AS. 1992. Understanding Consumption. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Flavin M. 1981. The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations about Future Income.
J. Polit. Econ. 89:974-1009
Friedman M. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Garcia R, Lusardi A, Ng S. 1997. Excess Sensitivity and Asymmetries in Consumption: An
Empirical Investigation. J. Money Credit Bank. 29(2):154-176
Gertler P, Gruber J. 2002. Insuring Consumption Against Illness. Am. Econ. Rev. 92(1):51-70
Gruber J. 1997. The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance. Am. Econ.
Rev. 87(1):192-205
Guvenen F, Smith A. 2009. Inferring Labor Income Risk from Economic Choices: An Indirect
Inference Approach. Mimeo. University of Minnesota.
Haider SJ, Stephens Jr. M, .2007. Is There a Retirement-Consumption Puzzle? Evidence Using
Subjective Retirement Expectations. Rev. Econ. Stat. 89:246-64
Hall RE. 1978. Stochastic Implications of the Life-Cycle Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory
and Evidence. J. Polit. Econ. 86:971-87
Hall RE, Mishkin FS. 1982. The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income: Estimates
from Panel Data on Households. Econometrica 50:461-81.
Hayashi F. 1985. The Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consumption Durability: Analysis
Based on Japanese Panel Data. Q. J. Econ. 100:1083-113
Heathcote J, Storesletten K, Violante GL. 2009. Quantitative Macroeconomics for Heterogeneous
Households. Annual Review of Economics (forthcoming)
Hsieh CT. 2003. Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Shocks? Evidence from the Alaska
Permanent Fund. Am. Econ. Rev. 93:397-405
Hubbard GR, Skinner J, Zeldes SP. 1995. Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance. J. Polit.
Econ. 103:360-99
Hurd MD, Rohwedder S. 2006. Some answers to the Retirement Consumption Puzzle. NBER
Working Paper 242.
Jappelli T, Pischke JS, Souleles NS. 1998. Testing for Liquidity Constraints in Euler Equations
with Complementary Data Sources. Rev. Econ. Stat. 80:251-62
Jappelli T, Pistaferri L. 2000. Using Subjective Income Expectations to Test the Excess
Sensitivity of Consumption to Predicted Income Changes. Eur. Econ. Rev. 44:337-358
Jappelli T, Pistaferri L. 2006. Intertemporal Choice and Consumption Mobility. J Eur Econ Assoc
4:75-115
Jappelli T, Pistaferri L. 2008. Financial Integration and Consumption Smoothing, CSEF Working
Papers No. 200.

51

Intertemporal Choice and Consumption Mobility. J Eur Econ Assoc 4:75-115
Johnson DS, Parker JA, Souleles NS. 2006. Household Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates
of 2001. Am. Econ. Rev. 96: 1589-1610
Kaplan G, Violante GL. 2009. How Much Insurance in Bewley Models?. Mimeo. New York
University.
Kaufmann K, Pistaferri L. 2009. Disentangling Insurance and Information in Intertemporal
Consumption Choices. Am. Econ. Rev. Papers and Proceedings 99(2):387-92
Laibson D. 1997. Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Q. J. Econ. 112:443-77
Low H, Meghir C, Pistaferri L. 2009. Wage Risk and Employment Risk over the Life Cycle. Am.
Econ. Rev. (forthcoming)
Maki DM, Palumbo MG. 2001. Disentangling the Wealth Effect: A Cohort Analysis of
Household Saving in the 1990s. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2001-21.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Manski CF. 2004. Measuring Expectations. Econometrica 72:1329-76
Meghir C, Pistaferri L. 2004. Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity. Econometrica 72:
1-32
Modigliani F, Brumberg R. 1954. Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data. In Post-Keynesians Economics, ed. K. Kurihara.
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press
Parker JA. 1999. The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in Social
Security Taxes. Am. Econ. Rev. 89:959-7
Paxson CH. 1993. Consumption and Income Seasonality in Thailand. J. Polit. Econ. 101:39-72
Pistaferri L. 2001. Superior Information, Income Shocks and the Permanent Income Hypothesis.
Rev. Econ. Stat. 83:465-76
Primiceri GE, van Rens T. 2009. Heterogeneous life-cycle profiles, income risk and
consumption inequality. J. of Monetary Econ. 56(1):20-39
Scholnick B, Massoud N, Saunders A, Carbo-Valverde S, Rodríguez-Fernández F. 2008. The
Economics of Credit Cards, Debit Cards and ATMs: A Survey and Some New Evidence.
J. Bank. Financ. 32(8):1468-1483
Shapiro MD, Slemrod J. 1995. Consumer Response to the Timing of Income: Evidence from a
Change in Tax Withholding. Am. Econ. Rev. 85:274-283
Shapiro MD, Slemrod J. 2003. Did the 2001 Tax Rebate Stimulate Spending? Evidence from
Taxpayer Surveys. In Tax Policy and the Economy. Vol.17, ed. JM Poterba, pp. 83-109.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Shapiro MD, Slemrod J. 2009. Did the 2008 Tax Rebates Stimulate Spending?. Am. Econ. Rev.
Papers and Proceedings 99:374-79
Shea J. 1995. Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle Permanent Income Hypothesis. Am. Econ. Rev.
85:186-200
Souleles NS. 1999. The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds. Am. Econ.
Rev. 89(4):947-958
Souleles NS. 2000. College Tuition and Household Savings and Consumption. J. Public Econ.
77(2):185-207
Souleles NS. 2002. Consumer Response to the Reagan Tax Cuts. J. Public Econ. 85(1): 99-120
Stephens Jr. M. 2001. The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks. The Rev. Econ.
Stat.. 83(1):28-36

52

Stephens Jr. M. 2008. The Consumption Response to Predictable Changes in Discretionary
Income: Evidence from the Repayment of Vehicle Loans. The Rev. Econ. Stat. 90:241-52
Wilcox DW. 1989. Social Security Benefits, Consumption Expenditure, and the Life Cycle
Hypothesis. J. Polit. Econ .97:288-304.
Wolpin KI. 1982. A New Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis: The Impact of Weather on
the Income and Consumption of Farm Households in India. Int. Econ. Rev. 23(3):583-594
Zeldes SP. 1989. Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation. J. Polit.
Econ. 97:305-46.

53

Table 1 – Summary of Literature Findings
Authors

Data

Experiment

Findings

Anticipated income changes
Hall (1978)
Flavin (1981)

1948-77 U.S. macro
series
1949-79 U.S. macro
series

Use quadratic preferences
Specify an income process and estimate
jointly the consumption and income
equations
Use various measures of income
determinants to account for measurement
errors in income
Rely on an asset-based sample separation
rule to investigate the impact of credit
constraints on consumption

Altonji & Siow
(1987)

1968-81 PSID

Zeldes (1989)

1968-82 PSID

Attanasio &
Weber (1995)

1980-90 CEX

Shea (1995)

1981-87 PSID

Garcia et at.
(1997)

1980-87 CEX and
PSID

Jappelli et al.
(1998)

1983 SCF and 197187 PSID

Parker (1999)

1980-93 CEX

Used security payroll cap as an anticipated
income increase (in the middle of the year)
and decrease (in January)

Jappelli and
Pistaferri
(2000)

1989-93 Italy
Survey of Household
Income and Wealth
(SHIW)

Used subjective quantitative income
expectations as an instrument for income
growth

Used labor supply variables as determinants
of the marginal utility of consumption to
account for non separable preferences
Exploited union contracts public information
to construct a household-specific measure of
expected wage growth
Predicted the probability of being liquidity
constrained using a switching regression
framework
Estimated probabilities of being constrained
using Survey of Consumer Finances data and
Euler equation for food consumption in the
PSID

Coefficient on lagged income growth statistically insignificant,
but orthogonality restriction rejected for stock market prices
Finds evidence of excess sensitivity

Coefficient on lagged income growth statistically insignificant.

Excess sensitivity was associated to credit constraint due to
violation of the Euler equation for observations for which a
constraint is likely to be binding and not for the remaining
observations.
Failure to control for labor supply indicators may lead to
spurious evidence of excess sensitivity.
Predictable wage movements were significantly correlated with
consumption. Consumption responded more strongly to
predictable income declines than to predictable income
increases (inconsistent with liquidity constraints and myopia)
Liquidity constrained consumers are excessively sensitive to
past information (but unconstrained consumers also exhibit
behavior that is inconsistent with the theory)
No evidence for much excess sensitivity associated with the
possibility of constraints. The pattern of the conditional
distribution of consumption in the constrained and
unconstrained regimes is consistent with the hypothesis that
liquidity constraints affect food consumption allocations
1 dollar anticipated rise in income increased nondurable
consumption by about 20 cents (unlikely to be due to liquidity
constraints, because the sample includes only high-income
taxpayers)
There was no evidence for excess sensitivity to both income
increases and declines

(continued)
Anticipated income increase
Wilcox (1989)

Shapiro &
Slemrod (1995)

1965-85 U.S. macro
series and Social
Security Bulletin
Telephone Survey in
1992

Souleles (1999)

1980-91 CEX

Browning &
Collado (2001)

1985-95 ECPF panel
(Spanish households)

Souleles 2002)

1982-83 CEX

Hsieh (2003)

1980-2001 CEX

Shapiro &
Slemrod (2003)
Johnson et al.
(2006)

Three surveys in 200102
2001 CEX (included
questions about rebates)

Agarwal et al.
(2007)

Proprietary panel from a
large financial
institution that issues
credit cards nationally
1984–2000 CEX

Stephens (2008)

Used pre-announced social security
benefits increases as a measure for
predicted income increase
Exploited s1992’s 10 month reduction in
income tax as a case of predictable
transitory income increase
Exploited the anticipated income increase
induced by the receipt of tax refunds
Used institutionalized June and December
extra wage payments to full-time workers
as a case of anticipated income increase
Exploited the anticipated income increase
induced by pre-announced tax cuts of the
Reagan admin.
Used both annual payments
from the state of Alaska’s Permanent Fund
and tax rebates as cases of predictable
income increase
Used 2001’s tax rebates as a case of
predictable income increase
Used 2001’s exact timing of tax rebates to
identify the causal effect of the rebate

Used 2001’s exact timing of tax rebates to
identify the causal effect of the rebate

Used predictable increases in discretionary
income following the final payment of a
vehicle loan.

55

Consumption increased not when the income increase is
announced, but when it is actually implemented
40% of the people interviewed planned to spend the extra takehome pay
10% of the refunds were spent on non-durables and 65% on
total consumption suggesting that most of the refund was spent
on durable goods
No evidence was found of excess sensitivity, suggesting
bounded rationality as a reason why earlier researchers found
large response of consumption to predicted income changes
Found significant evidence of excess sensitivity in the response
of consumption to the tax cuts
Found evidence for excess sensitivity with respect to tax refunds
but not with respect to payments from the Alaska Permanent
Fund (can be explained using the magnitude argument)
22% of the interviewed households reported planning to spend
the tax rebate. Little evidence of myopia or liquidity constraints
Average household spent 20-40% of the rebate on non-durable
goods during the three-month period in which the rebate was
received. Expenditure responses were largest for low liquid
wealth and low income household (consistent with liquidity
constraints)
Consumers initially saved some of the rebate, but soon
afterward their spending increased, counter to the implications
of the permanent income model
A 10% increase in discretionary income
leads to a 2% to 3% increase in nondurable consumption.
Additional analysis suggests that these findings may be
explained by the presence of borrowing constraints

(continued)
Shapiro &
Slemrod (2009)

A survey in 2008

Used 2008’s tax rebates as a case of
predictable income increase

20% of survey respondents said that the 2008 tax rebates would
lead them to mostly increase spending

Anticipated income decline
Gruber (1997)

1968-1987 PSID

Used unemployment as cases of
unanticipated and anticipated income
shocks

Banks et al.
(1998)

1968 to 1992 FES

Souleles (2000)

1980-93 CEX

Controlled for demographics in
preferences and non separabilities with
respect to labor supply
Used college tuition as a case of
anticipated income decrease

Bernheim et al.
(2001)

1978 -90 PSID and CEX

Investigated testable implications which
explanations for the variation in savings
for retirement has on wealth, consumption
levels and consumption growth rate

Aguiar & Hurst
(2005)

89, 94 Continuing
Survey of Food Intake
of Individuals (CSFII)
and 1992-94 National
Human Activity Pattern
Survey (NHAPS)
HRS and Consumption
and Activities Mail
Survey (CAMS)

Differentiating consumption and
consumption expenditures using calories
intake and time use surveys

1993-95 Denver
CNielsen’s Homescan
Panel and 2003
American Time-U se
Survey (ATUS)

Used price data and detailed data on time
spent in home production to investigate
the home production function

Hurd
Rohwedder
(2006)
Aguiar & Hurst
(2007)

Used data on expected fall in spending and
realized fall after retirement

56

For anticipated layoffs UI did not have a smoothing effect. For
unanticipated layoffs UI had a large smoothing effect. A 10%
rise in the replacement rate reduced the fall in consumption
upon unemployment by about 3%
A life cycle model could not fully explain the fall in
consumption at retirement even when controlling for labormarket participation
Households were smoothing their consumption into the
academic year, despite large expenses, consistent with the lifecycle hypothesis
Evidence was found of a substantial consumption drop at
retirement (24% for the first income quartile, 15% for the
second quartile and 9% of the third and fourth quartiles). The
data are consistent with "rule of thumb," "mental accounting," or
hyperbolic discounting theories rather than with life cycle
models
While food expenditure declined at retirement, food intake did
not decline (this is consistent with home production theory)

Prior to retirement workers anticipated on average a decline of
13.3% in spending and after retirement they recollected a
decline of 12.9% suggesting that there is no income surprise at
retirement
Elderly shop more frequently and buy cheaper goods (or
manage to find the same goods at a lower price) than younger
individuals who have less leisure time available

(continued)
Haider &
Stephens (2007)

Aguila et al.
(2008)

1969-77 RHS
(Retirement History
Survey ) and 1992-2000
HRS (Health and
Retirement
Study)
1980-2000 CEX

Used workers’ subjective beliefs about
their retirement dates as an instrument for
retirement

Estimates of consumption fall were about a third less than those
found when relying on the instrumental variables strategy used
in prior studies

Linear difference-in-difference

Food consumption declined by 6%, no decline for non-food
consumption was detected

Unanticipated income changes
Wolpin (1982)
Hall & Mishkin
(1982)

1968-71 panel of rural
Indian farm households
1969-75 PSID

Hayashi (85)

1981-82 Panel of
Japanese households

Paxson (1993)

1975/76, 1981, and
1986 Thai Socioeconomic Surveys
(SES)
1989-91 panel of the
Italian Survey of
Household Income and
Wealth (SHIW)
1987-95 panel of the
Italian Survey of
Household Income and
Wealth (SHIW)
1978-1992 PSID and
1980-92 CEX (using
imputation)

Pistaferri
(2001)

Jappelli &
Pistaferri
(2006)
Blundell,
Pistaferri and
Preston (2008)

Used weather shocks as a case of
unanticipated income shocks
Specified income process, and used
covariance restrictions to identify the
parameters of the response of consumption
to shocks
Exploited subjective expectations about
consumption and income
Used weather shocks as a case of
unanticipated income shocks

Permanent income elasticity estimates ranged from 0.91 to 1.02,
supporting the permanent income model
The response of consumption to innovations in transitory
income was 29% (too high to be consistent with the theory)

Permanent income applied to about 85% of the population and
income changes explained only a small fraction of the
movements in expenditure
High propensity to save out of transitory weather shocks, but
also a propensity to save out of permanent shocks above zero

Combined income realizations and
subjective expectations to identify
separately transitory and permanent
income shocks
Exploited the implications of the theory on
the transition matrix of consumption

Consumers saved most of the transitory shocks and very little of
the permanent shocks

Specified income process, and used
covariance restrictions to identify the
parameters of the response of consumption
to shocks

Consumption was nearly insensitive to transitory shocks (higher
among poor households), and response to permanent shocks was
significantly lower than 1, suggesting that households are able to
partially insure permanent shocks

57

Rejected simple representations of the consumption decision
rule, and revealed that households smooth income shocks to a
lesser extent than implied by the PIH

(continued)
Guvenen &
Smith (2009)
Kaufman &
Pistaferri
(2009)
Primiceri &
Van Rens
(2009)

1978-1992 PSID and
1972-73, 1980-92 CEX
(using imputation)
1995-2001 panel of the
Italian Survey of
Household Income and
Wealth (SHIW)
1980-2000 CEX

Specified income process with
heterogeneity and advanced information
which is resolved in a Bayesian matter
Used income subjective expectations to
distinguish superior information from
partial insurance
Specified income process with
heterogeneity and advanced information
and used covariance restrictions to identify
sources of consumption and income
inequality

Consumers know a lot about the evolution of their income
process (about 80% of the uncertainty about the random trend
component was resolved in the first period)
A large part of the transitory variation in income was either
anticipated or the result of measurement error, while about twothird of the permanent variation in income could be labeled as a
true innovation
All of the increase in income inequality over the 1980-2000
period was attributed to an increase in the variance of permanent
shocks and most permanent income shocks were anticipated by
individuals, hence consumption inequality remained flat

Positive shocks
Bodkin (1959)

1950 CEX

Used dividends payments for WWII
veterans as an unanticipated income shock

Marginal propensity to consume non-durables out of the shock
was as high as 0.72, a strong violation of the permanent income
model

Negative shocks
Gruber (1997)

1968-1987 PSID

Impact of unemployment as unanticipated
and anticipated income shock on
consumption

Browning &
Crossley (2001)

1993 Canadian
Out of Employment
Panel (COEP)
1968-92 PSID

Impact of unemployment as income shock
on consumption exploiting legislative
changes to Canadian UI system
Impact of job displacement and disability
as permanent income shocks on
consumption

1991, 1993 Panel data
collected as part of
Indonesian Resource
Mobilization Study
(IRMS)

Impact of illness as income shocks on
consumption in developing countries

Stephens (2001)

Gertler &
Gruber (2003)

58

For anticipated layoffs UI did not have a smoothing effect. For
unanticipated layoffs UI had a large smoothing effect. A 10%
rise in the replacement rate reduced the fall in consumption
upon unemployment by about 3%
Elasticity of expenditures with respect to UI benefit was 5%.
Elasticities were as high as 20% for low-asset individuals
(consistent with the presence of liquidity constraints)
The percentage change in consumption was less than that of
income, especially at the time of the shock. Displaced
households responded to an increase in the probability of job
losses by reducing consumption prior to a job loss
People smoothed well the effect of minor illnesses (could be
interpreted as transitory shocks, or anticipated events), but less
the effect of major illnesses (which could be interpreted as
permanent shocks)

