                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




UNIVERSITY-INDUSTRY SPILLOVERS, GOVERNMENT FUNDING, AND INDUSTRIAL
                            CONSULTING

                                            Richard Jensen
                                            Jerry Thursby
                                           Marie C. Thursby

                                         Working Paper 15732
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15732


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2010




The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper by Ajay Agrawal,
Nico Lacetera, Joshua Lerner, Mark Schankerman, Arvids Ziedonis and participants of the EPFL Conference
on Technology Transfer from Universities at the University of Lausanne, the NBER Summer Institute
conference on Intellectual Property Policy, and seminars at the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Universidad
del Pais Vasco, Emory, Georgia Institute of Technology, Notre Dame, Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research, and Universities of Arizona, Illinois and Turin. We also acknowledge generous support
from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Thursby and Thursby thank the National Science Foundation
for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Richard Jensen, Jerry Thursby, and Marie C. Thursby. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
University-Industry Spillovers, Government Funding, and Industrial Consulting
Richard Jensen, Jerry Thursby, and Marie C. Thursby
NBER Working Paper No. 15732
February 2010
JEL No. O31,O34,O38

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents a theoretical model of faculty consulting in the context of government and industry
funding for research within the university, which then frames an empirical analysis of the funding
and consulting of 458 individual faculty inventors from 8 major US universities. In the theory, firms
realize that they free ride on government sponsored research of the faculty they hire as consultants
and faculty realize their university research projects indirectly benefit from their firm experience. The
model accounts for faculty quality, project characteristics, faculty share of license revenue from university
research, and the university's research support. Empirically we find that government research funding
is positively related to consulting, independent of faculty quality. We find that government and industry
funding for university research are strategic complements as well as evidence of the ability of universities
to leverage their research infrastructure to attract research funding.


Richard Jensen                                        Marie C. Thursby
Dept. of Economics and Econometrics                   College of Management
University of Notre Dame                              Georgia Institute of Technology
434 Flanner Hall                                      800 West Peachtree street, NW
Notre Dame, IN 46556                                  Atlanta, GA 30332-0520
richard.jensen.24@nd.edu                              and NBER
                                                      marie.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu
Jerry Thursby
Georgia Institute of Technology
jerry.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu
1     Introduction
The existence of spillovers is one of the classic arguments for government research funding
(Arrow 1962). This was clearly behind the National Science Council’s call for increased
federal funding for basic research along with increased actions by industry and the academy
to encourage greater “intellectual exchange” between industry and academic institutions
(National Science Board 2008). Unfortunately our understanding of such exchange is limited.
While we know that academic research spills over to industry, we know little about the
mechanisms involved (Jaﬀe 1989; Thursby and Thursby 2006). Much of our understanding
comes from the analysis of spillovers associated with publications or patents (Adams 1990;
Jaﬀe et al. 1993). Except for studies of licensing or start-ups from universities, there is little
modeling of the actual mechanisms behind such spillovers (Zucker et al. 1998; Thursby and
Thursby 2008).
    In this paper, we examine industrial consulting by university faculty as a mechanism for
spillovers in a context that allows us to link them to government, industry, and university
funding decisions. The few existing studies of consulting suggest that it is an important fac-
tor in the intellectual exchange between the academy and industry. For example, Cohen et
al. (1998) find that industrial managers often consider consulting to be more important than
either patents or licensing for transferring knowledge from universities. In his survey, Mans-
field (1995) found the reverse spillover (from firm projects to university research) provided
benefits for faculty members’ government supported research.
    We develop a theoretical model of consulting which incorporates faculty decisions on the
allocation of research time between their university lab and a firm’s lab, as well as govern-
ment and firm decisions on funding for the researcher’s work within the university. We then
exploit a unique database of funding, publications, and patents for 458 faculty inventors to
estimate parameters of the model. The use of individual data, combined with the theory,
provides new insights on the interface between university and industry research. In particu-
lar, we find evidence that government research funding increases faculty consulting on firm
research projects, independent of faculty quality, and that government and industry funding
for faculty research within the university are strategic complements (again independent of
quality eﬀects).
    The model has two stages. In the first stage, a government agency and firm simultane-
ously choose funding levels for a researcher’s university research project. This is followed
by another simultaneous-move game in which the firm chooses a unit consulting fee, and
the faculty researcher decides how much time to consult for the firm on its project. The
model yields predictions for the time spent consulting and the associated fee and the level


                                                2
of government and industry support for university research.
    We allow for diﬀerences in faculty quality and/or academic reputation, as well as diﬀer-
ences in the scientific merit of projects within the university and firm. Research on both
projects is uncertain. The firm can benefit from university research in several ways. It
can license results from a successful university research project, but regardless of success or
whether the firm funded university research, it can benefit from the researcher’s expertise if
it hires her to consult. Thus we allow for R&D spillovers in the sense that the researcher’s
work on government funded research can enhance her probability of success in the firm’s
consulting project. We also incorporate the notion that consulting on the firm’s project
can provide insights of use in her university research. Finally, the university supports the
researcher’s internal research through its infrastructure or some base level of funding.
    The faculty researcher cares about reputation as well as income, so that the amount of
time that she is willing to consult can be increasing or decreasing in the fee depending on
her tradeoﬀ between income and reputation, as well as her attitude toward risk. While in
general the model’s predictions depend on this relationship, several results hold regardless
of the consulting supply function. In particular, increases in either the license revenue the
university receives from her university project or her share of that revenue lead her to spend
less time consulting.
    The university-industry spillover allows the firm to free ride on university infrastructure.
The eﬀects of these spillovers, as well as the eﬀects of changes in government and industry
funding depend on the slope of the consulting supply function. However, in the absence of the
university-industry spillover, increases in government funding and the university’s internal
research support reduce the time spent consulting regardless of the slope. It is this result
that we exploit in our empirical analysis to test for such spillovers. Conversely, the reverse
(industry-university) spillover allows the researcher to free ride on firm infrastructure in her
university project, which leads to less consulting and a higher fee in equilibrium.
    In the funding stage, obtaining unambiguous results requires additional assumptions in
large part because of the ambiguous eﬀects of funding on consulting in the presence of
spillovers. Thus, in general, government and firm funding for research within the university
can be strategic substitutes or complements. Nonetheless, if an increase in either type of
funding increases the marginal eﬀect of the other on the probability that the researcher’s
university project will be successful, then we can provide suﬃcient conditions for government
and firm funding to act as strategic complements. In this case, an increase in university
internal research support, license revenue, or the researchers share of license revenue all lead
to increased government and firm funding for the researcher in equilibrium.
    It is important to note that, while we assume the university project is more basic than


                                               3
the firm’s, we follow Mansfield (1995) in focusing on consulting projects with some scientific
merit. It is this feature of our analysis that allows us to overcome a major barrier to
examining consulting empirically - that is, a lack of data on consulting time or fees. We
employ a unique data set of nearly 1679 patents on which 458 faculty from eight major
US universities are listed as inventors. Thirty percent of these patents are assigned to
firms. In interviews with faculty and university licensing professionals, as well as industry
R&D executives, the major reason given for faculty patents assigned to firms was consulting
(Thursby et al. 2009). We exploit this information and use firm-assigned faculty patents as a
measure of consulting activity. This measure captures only a subset of consulting outcomes
by omitting projects that do not result in patents, but is important for our purposes because
those consulting projects that result in patents clearly have scientific merit. Our data also
include each individual’s government and industry research funding by year, which allows us
to provide estimates for both stages of the model.
    In general, the empirical results support the theory. Results for the consulting stage
support our assumptions that university research projects are more basic than firm projects
and that there are spillovers from the researcher’s university project to firms. We find that
consulting is positively associated with government funding and our measures of university
research support. In the context of the model, this result occurs only with spillovers from
the faculty researcher’s government sponsored research to the firm’s research. In the funding
stage, we find that government and industrial funding are strategic complements. In this
case, the model implies that universities can use their research infrastructure to increase
both types of funding, and indeed we find strong empirical support for this eﬀect.
    This is one of only a few studies to examine consulting either theoretically or empirically.
The aforementioned surveys by Mansfield (1995) and Cohen et al. (1998) are notable excep-
tions. To our knowledge, the only theoretical studies of consulting are Beath et al. (2003)
which examines the potential for budget-constrained universities to relax the constraint by
encouraging faculty to consult and Dechenaux et al. (2009) which examines consulting as
one of the mechanisms for inducing faculty inventors to collaborate in development needed
for commercial success of inventions licensed from the university (Jensen and Thursby 2001).
The latter diﬀers markedly from this paper since the consulting considered is ex post devel-
opment from a project started in the university rather than ex ante research by a faculty
member on an industrial project.
    The license share result in the theory is of particular note since it contributes to policy
debates on the impact of licensing and other commercial opportunities on faculty research.
The policy concern is that the opportunity to earn license revenue would divert faculty
into applied work or research with little scientific merit. Empirical research examining this


                                               4
issue has been unable to find such an eﬀect and in some cases, has found increased research
in response to licensing (Azoulay et al. 2007, 2009; Thursby and Thursby 2009b). Our
theoretical result provides a rationale for these findings since an increased share of license
revenue will increase time spent on the university research project as well as funding for
the research. Moreover, if the university research project has more scientific merit than the
firm’s, the increased share actually leads to an increase in fundamental research.1
    We also contribute to the literature on the relationship between government and industry
funding of research, which has primarily focused on the complementarity or substitutability
of public and private funding of R&D conducted by firms (David and Hall 2000; David et
al. 2000). We focus on funding for research within universities, and show that government
and industry funding are strategic complements. In our model, this occurs because each
type of funding improves the marginal impact of the other in the presence of spillovers,
independent of the faculty member’s reputation or quality. Thus our results diﬀer markedly
from empirical studies of university level data which interpret a positive relationship between
government and other funding as the result of the other sources taking federal funding as
a signal of high quality research (Connolly 1997; Blume-Kohaut et al. 2009). Neither our
theory nor empirics rely on signaling.
    Finally, we contribute to the literature on spillovers from university research to industrial
patenting. Our empirical approach of identifying faculty contributions to industrial patenting
by firm-assigned patents on which faculty are inventors shows that spillovers are greater than
those identified by the common practice of examining citations in firm-assigned patents to
university-assigned patents (Jaﬀe 1989; Jaﬀe et al. 1993; Henderson et al. 1998).2 In this
regard, our work is closest to Thursby et al. (2009) which uses the same empirical approach
to show that 26% of a sample of 5811 patents with faculty inventors from 87 US universities
were assigned solely to firms. That work diﬀers in that it is purely empirical and focuses
on assignment as a function of patent and university characteristics rather than individual
inventor characteristics or research funding.
    Section 2 describes the research technology and player preferences and Section 3 presents
the two stage game. Section 4 presents the econometric analysis. Section 5 concludes. Proofs
of all propositions and the data description are given in Appendices A and B, respectively.
   1
     Increased basic research in response to license incentives can be shown in other contexts (Jensen et al.
2003; Thursby et al. 2007; and Lach and Schankerman 2008).
   2
     For a similar point in a European context see Crespi et al.(2006), Geuna and Nesta (2006), and Saragossi
and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2003).




                                                     5
2     Environment
Our goal is to develop a theory to explain consulting as a mechanism for spillovers between
university and industry research projects. For simplicity, we consider one faculty researcher,
one firm interested in capitalizing on faculty expertise, and one government funding agency.
We incorporate the fact that faculty diﬀer in quality, which we represent by an observable
variable q defined on the interval [0, Q] such that higher values of q correspond to greater
research capability.


2.1     Research Technology
Although there are many dimensions on which one can categorize research, for the purposes
of this analysis it is most useful to think in terms of the pure scientific component of a given
research problem. Thus, we assume research problems can be characterized by a variable x,
defined on the interval [0, X], such that higher values of x correspond to research that has
greater scientific merit and is inherently more diﬃcult to solve.
    Successfully solving a given research problem can generate multiple outputs of value to the
researcher, university, government funding agency, and/or industrial sponsor. These can be
generally thought of as those results of research that contribute to the scientific reputations
and commercial payoﬀs associated with solving the problem, such as publications, citations,
patents, and profits. The likelihood that a research project succeeds depends on a number
of factors, including the nature of the problem to be solved (how fundamental or basic it is),
the quality of the researcher, and the level of funding available.
    For simplicity, we think of the researcher as working on a single research problem within
the university, which has scientific merit xI , with the possibility of also working outside the
university as a consultant on a firm’s research problem, which has scientific merit xO , where
xI > xO . While this assumption is not necessary for our results, it is consistent with the
bulk of the literature on university industry collaboration (Rosenberg and Nelson 1994 and
1996; Mowery and Teece 1996; Lacetera 2009). Assume that T is the total time available in
the period, and that M is the (maximum) amount of time that she can spend consulting,
M < T .3 If t is the time she contracts to consult with the firm, t ∈ (0, M], then T − t is the
time she spends on her own research project in the university. If she does not consult, t = 0,
    3
      Most funding agencies and universities will not allow researchers to sell more than 100% of their time,
so a decision to consult for the firm in its research lab on its project clearly means that the researcher will
not be spending all of her time on her university project. Indeed, if she chose to so this after accepting, for
example, federal funding for the entire year, then the granting agency would undoubtedly adjust their level
of funding for her to adjust for this.




                                                      6
then she works all of the time T on her own university research.4
    We model research as an uncertain production process in which the “production function”
is a probability of success function. We assume that the probability of success in solving
any specific research problem of scientific merit x undertaken by a researcher of quality
q is p(τ , e; q, x), where τ represents the time the researcher devotes to the project, and e
represents her eﬀective funding on that project. From the production perspective, it is
natural to assume that p is increasing and strictly concave in (τ , e, q), so these “inputs”
have positive but diminishing marginal productivities. It is also natural to assume that these
inputs are complements, so the second order cross-partial derivatives of p with respect to
them are all positive. For example, the marginal eﬀect of an additional hour of research on
the probability a project will succeed should be greater for researchers with higher quality
or greater levels of funding. Our assumption that it is more diﬃcult to solve problems with
greater scientific merit implies p is decreasing in x, and it also natural to assume that this
diﬃculty increases at a increasing rate, ∂ 2 p/∂x2 < 0. We also assume that a more diﬃcult
project reduces the marginal eﬀect on the probability of success of time, eﬀective funding,
and quality, so that the cross-partial derivatives with respect to x and each of the inputs are
negative.
    It is important to discuss in more detail what we mean by “eﬀective” research funding.
A common approach to incorporate spillovers in models of R&D is to define eﬀort as the
sum of all expenditures on R&D, including spillovers (see DeBondt 1997). We take a similar
approach and allow for spillovers between research projects by including eﬀective funding in
the probability of success functions.
    The researcher has several sources of potential support for her university research. One
is university infrastructure and knowledge base, KI . She can also obtain sponsored research
funds from a government agency, G, and/or industrial firm, F . Finally, if she consults for a
firm, then there may be spillovers to her university research.
    The firm’s research project is conducted within its own lab, where KO represents its
infrastructure and knowledge base. The unit cost of consulting paid by the firm is c, so ct is
the firm’s expenditure on consulting (and the researcher’s consulting income)
    Thus, we define eﬀective funding on the researcher’s project in the university as

                                eI = KI + G + F + λK0                   if t > 0                             (1a)
                                     = KI + G + F                       if t = 0
   4
    This implicitly assumes that our heroine is an obsessive-compulsive workaholic who prefers her own
research to all forms of leisure activity. This interpretation is perhaps an over-simplification, but it highlights
the stylized fact that most researchers view their own research as a consumption good.



                                                        7
where λ ∈ [0, 1) is the spillover parameter representing the extent to which her consulting
experience can contribute to her university research. Spillovers from consulting to university
research are a function of the firm’s knowledge base.
    Analogously, we define eﬀective funding for the firm’s project as

                          eO = KO + F + β(KI + G) + ct                   if t > 0                       (1b)
                               = KO + F                                  if t = 0,

where β ∈ [0, 1) is the spillover parameter representing the extent to which her university
research experience can contribute to solving the firm’s problem. This approach assumes
that when the firm hires a university researcher as a consultant, what she contributes to
the project is a function of the knowledge from her government and university supported
research. It also embodies the idea that the firm funds university research both to obtain
results with commercial potential and to enhance the firm’s own internal research problems
(Thompson 2003).


2.2     Preferences and Payoﬀs
In general, we think of faculty as deriving utility from the prestige associated with their
research as well as the income it generates (Stephan 1996). Therefore, we assume that
faculty utility at any date is U(R, W ), where R is her current stock of academic (scientific)
reputation and W is her current wealth stock.5 Marginal utility in reputation is positive and
diminishing, while marginal utility of wealth is positive and nondecreasing (we allow for the
case of risk neutrality to clarify which results do not depend on risk-aversion). Let Rs denote
her reputation if she successfully solves her university research problem in this period. We
assume Rs is an increasing function of xI , because successful solution of a research problem
of greater scientific merit results in greater enhancement of her reputation.6 Let Rf denote
her reputation if she fails to solve the problem in this period. This is also her reputational
stock at the beginning of the period, when the funding agency and firm make their funding
decisions. Thus, conditional on success Rs − Rf > 0 is the flow of reputation in this stage
(conditional on success). Define A as her wealth stock at the beginning of the period plus
her university salary minus savings, that is her current net assets (i.e., net of savings and
non-innovation income). Also assume that γ is her share of license revenue paid to the
   5
     An alternative approach would be to assume utility depends on the time spent in each type of research
and the prestige of each type of research stock, as in Jensen and Thursby (2004). In the approach we take
here, the time spent in each type of research eﬀects her expected utility, but only through the probability of
success.
   6
     For notational convenience, we do not write this functional dependence explicitly except when necessary.


                                                      8
university for a success, L ≥ 0. Then current wealth is Ws = A + γL + ct for success and
Wf = A + ct for failure, forms which emphasize the flow income from university invention
and consulting. The researcher’s expected utility is then

                      EU (G, F, t, c) = p(T − t, eI ; q, xI )U(Rs , Ws )                                 (2)
                                             +[1 − p(T − t, eI ; q, xI )]U(Rf , Wf ).

This approach allows us to focus on any given stage in the life cycle of this researcher. From
her perspective, the results that follow depend on the stage of the life cycle only to the extent
that they depend on the relative magnitudes of R and W .7
    The government funding agency is primarily interested in advancing basic scientific re-
search, so its utility, Ug , depends upon the scientific reputational stock associated with the
research it has funded. Because there are alternative uses for its research budget, namely
other researchers’ projects, its net expected utility, EUg , from funding her project is the
expected utility of its reputation less the utility loss V from not funding alternative projects.
Its net expected utility from devoting G to this project is then



                  EUg (G, F, t, c) = p(T − t, eI ; q, xI )Ug (Rgs )                                      (3)
                                          +[1 − p(T − t, eI ; q, xI )]Ug (Rgf ) − V (G)

where Rgs is its reputational stock if she succeeds in her university project, and Rgf is its
reputational stock at the beginning of the period. We also assume Rgs is an increasing
function of xI . The agency does not get reputational credit for her success if it does not fund
her: Rgs > Rgf if and only if G > 0. Note that an increase in the researcher’s consulting time
unambiguously decreases the funding agency’s expected utility by reducing the probability
of success in her university project.
    Finally, the firm’s expected profit arises from both its own research problem and the
university research that it funds. Let π I denote firm profit from funding the researcher’s
university project if it succeeds and π denote the profit from its own research project if it
succeeds. Then expected profit is

             EΠ(G, F, t, c) = p(T − t, eI ; q, xI )(π I − L) − F + p(t, eO ; q, xO )π − ct.              (4)
   7
     This approach abstracts from the savings and salary determination decisions, but the additional com-
plexity from endogenizing them would not add value to the analysis. As we show below, the stage of the
life-cycle matters only to the extent that varying the relative stocks of R and W over time might change the
sign of ∂ 2 U/∂R∂W , and so possibly the direction of shift of her best reply function in response to changes
in some of the parameters of the model in the consulting subgame.


                                                     9
This form implicitly assumes the firm will only fund her university project if it obtains an
option to license a success from the project, and that it is not interested in licensing successful
projects developed without its funding. This form also shows the trade-oﬀ in the probability
of success of each project as her time spent consulting changes.
    To save notation, we let pI denote p(T −t, eI ; q, xI ) and pO denote p(t, eO ; q, xO ) whenever
their meanings are clear.


3       The Funding Game
We adopt a game structure that conforms to the stylized fact that faculty typically prefer
their own research to other projects (Aghion et al. 2008), and therefore focus on obtaining
funds for their research before making any agreements to consult on the firm’s research
project. Thus, the game has two stages. In the first stage, the researcher seeks support for
her university research project from both the government funding agency and the firm. The
agency and the firm then simultaneously choose funding levels for her project. After these
decisions are made and revealed, but before the success or failure of the university research
project is observed, another simultaneous-move game follows in which the firm chooses a
unit consulting fee, and the researcher decides how much time to consult for the firm.8
    Two comments about this approach are in order. First, it assumes that the funding
agency and firm can pre-commit to providing funds for the researcher’s university project.9
It also assumes that researchers cannot be treated as agents who must accept take-it-or-
leave-it oﬀers. That is, we consider the behavior of scientists whose expertise and reputation
gives them more “market power” than workers in a principal-agent model with a perfectly
elastic supply of labor.


3.1     Stage Two Equilibrium
In the second stage the researcher chooses her consulting time t and the firm chooses its unit
consulting fee c, given the values of funding for university research chosen in stage one, F
and G. In Appendix A, we state and prove the formal result for existence of an equilibrium
in this game, (t∗ (G, F ), c∗ (G, F )).10
    8
     This approach also conforms to the “standard” academic year of nine months in which faculty are paid
by the university, followed by three summer months in which faculty are free to pursue external funding
options.
   9
     This approach is similar to that in Lacetera (2009), who assumes that firms commit to university research
as a way of funding basic research.
  10
     These equilibrium values are also functions of all the parameters of the model
(α,β,q,xI ,KI ,xO ,KO ,S,L,γ). Although a minor abuse of notation, we omit these as arguments of the


                                                     10
    Choosing t to maximize EU(G, F, t, c) yields a best reply function t̂(c) for the researcher,
which defines the consulting time that maximizes her expected utility for any unit consulting
fee chosen by the firm. This is essentially her consulting supply function. Similarly, choosing
c to maximize EΠ(G, F, t, c) yields a best reply function ĉ(t) for the firm11 , which defines the
unit consulting fee that maximizes its expected profit for any time in consulting chosen by
the researcher. This is essentially its (inverse) consulting demand function. The equilibria
of this game are more easily understood using diagrams of these best reply functions (see
Figures 1 and 2).
    Because we are interested in deriving testable implications, we focus on the Nash equi-
librium when it is interior,12 in which case it must satisfy

                                          ∂EU (G, F, t∗ , c∗ )
                                                               = 0,                                       (5a)
                                                ∂t

and
                                          ∂EΠ(G, F, t∗ , c∗ )
                                                              =0                                         (5b)
                                               ∂c
where


                 ∂EU(G, F, t, c)     ∂pI
                                 = −     [U(Rs , Ws ) − U (Rf , Wf )]                                     (6a)
                     ∂t              ∂τ
                                         ∂U (Rs , Ws )             ∂U (Rf , Wf )
                                   +c[pI               + (1 − pI )               ]
                                             ∂Y                        ∂Y

and
                                     ∂EΠ(G, F, t, c)   ∂pO
                                                     =     tπ − t.                                       (6b)
                                         ∂c            ∂eO
In this case, the best reply functions are implicitly defined by setting (6a) and (6b) each
equal to zero.
    Examples of this equilibrium are depicted in Figures 1 and 2. To interpret the equilibrium
conditions in (5), consider the expressions for marginal utility and marginal profit in (6).
From (6b), an increase in the consulting fee increases eﬀective funding eO , and therefore
increases the firm’s expected profit, so it increases the fee as long it is less than the marginal
increase in expected profit. Because the firm’s best reply is its inverse demand function, we
functions for clarity of exposition.
  11
     We omit the parameters of the model as explicit arguments of t̂(c) and ĉ(t) for clarity of exposition.
  12
     These results provide some information about corner solutions as well. For example, a change that
increases consulting time in an interior equilibrium is more likely to induce a researcher oﬀ the no-consulting
corner and begin some consulting.




                                                      11
assume that
                                         ∂ 2 pO   ∂ 2 pO
                                                +        c<0                                      (7)
                                        ∂eO ∂τ    ∂e2O
to insure that this demand curve, and the firm’s best reply function, are negatively sloped.
Further note that, because eﬀective funding eO also depends on funding for the researcher’s
university project, (6b) shows how spillovers from basic university research can influence the
firm’s unit consulting fee, and so whether our heroine actually consults.
    Devoting more time to consulting has two conflicting eﬀects on the researcher’s expected
utility. First, for any fee, more time in consulting increases her income, whether or not either
research project succeeds, as shown by the second term in (6a). However, the first term in
(6a) shows that diverting more time to consulting also decreases her expected utility by
decreasing the probability of success in university research, and thus the probability of the
resulting reputational enhancement and license revenue. If the expected loss of utility from
diverting any time to consulting is too high, then she will not do so. Otherwise, she increases
time in consulting until the marginal gain in expected utility from consulting income is oﬀset
by this marginal expected loss in her university research.
    Appendix A shows that she does not consult for free. At c = 0, the expected mar-
ginal utility from consulting is negative, because diverting time from her university project
decreases its probability of success and expected utility without providing any additional in-
come in return, so t̂(0) = 0. However, her expected marginal utility is increasing in the fee at
                                                                                       2 EU     2
t = 0, so t̂0 (0) > 0 and she may consult for a large enough fee. Because t̂0 (c) = − ∂∂t∂c / ∂ ∂tEU
                                                                                                   2 ,

where

              ∂ 2 EU             ∂pI ∂U (Rs , Ws )                    ∂pI ∂U (Rf , Wf )
                       = [pI − t      ]             + {1 − [pI − t        ]}
               ∂t∂c              ∂τ         ∂Y                         ∂τ        ∂Y
                                 ∂ 2 U(Rs , Ws )             ∂ 2 U (Rf , Wf )
                          +ct[pI                 + (1 − pI )                  ],                  (8)
                                       ∂Y 2                        ∂Y 2

the slope of her best reply depends, in general, on both the elasticity of the probability of
success in university research with respect to time spent consulting and her attitude toward
risk.
Theorem 1 When the researcher’s best reply is interior, t̂(c) ∈ (0, M), her best reply func-
tion for consulting time is increasing if she is risk-neutral or not too risk-averse, and if the
probability of success in her university research is not elastic with respect to the time diverted
to consulting, ptI ∂p
                   ∂τ
                     I
                       ≤ 1. However, it can be negatively sloped if this probability is elastic
and/or she is suﬃciently risk-averse.
    As we show in the appendix, consulting occurs in equilibrium only if her best reply
is positively sloped initially (i.e., t̂0 (c) > 0 for the lowest c such that t̂(c) > 0). It may

                                                 12
remain positively sloped for all relevant fees. However, as the fee and her certain income
increase, her best reply may eventually bend back, becoming negatively sloped thereafter.
This can happen if the probability of success in her university research is elastic and/or she
is suﬃciently risk-averse. Therefore, at equilibrium, her best reply can be either positively
or negatively sloped, as depicted in Figures 1 and 2.13
    Comparative statics results depend not only on these slopes, but also on the direction in
which the best-reply functions shift. For some parametric changes, the direction of shift in
the researcher’s best reply depends on how her marginal utility of income varies as a function
of her academic reputation. To abstract from this question, we assume hereafter that her
utility is additively separable, U(R, W ) = f (R) + g(W ), where f 0 (R) > 0 > f 00 (R) for all
R ≥ 0 and g 0 (W ) > 0 > g 00 (W ) for all W ≥ 0.14 This allows us to state the comparative
statics of the consulting subgame equilibria as follows.

Theorem 2 In the equilibrium of the second stage consulting subgame:
(i) An increase in license revenue L or her share γ of it decreases consulting time and
increases the consulting fee.
(ii) An increase in the diﬃculty xO of the firm’s project decreases the fee and decreases
(increases) consulting if her best reply is positively (negatively) sloped.
(iii) An increase in q increases the fee and, if her best reply is negatively sloped, decreases
consulting.
(iv) An increase in government funding G, industrial funding F , or the research support KI
provided by the university:
(a) Decreases consulting but has an ambiguous eﬀect on the fee if her best reply is positively
sloped.
(b) Must either decrease consulting, decrease the fee, or both, if her best reply is negatively
sloped.
(v) An increase in the research support KO provided by the firm has an ambiguous eﬀect on
fee, but decreases consulting if her best reply is positively sloped.
(vi) An increase in her net assets A increases consulting time and decreases the fee if she is
risk neutral.

   These results are easily seen from the figures. An increase in either license revenue L or
the researcher’s share of it γ has no eﬀect on the firm’s best reply, but shifts hers to the left
  13
     There is, of course, the possibility that her best reply not only intersects the firm’s when it is increasing,
but also turns down so sharply that it intersects the firm’s again from above. In this case, however, the
latter equilibrium is not locally stable, so we do not consider it.
  14
     As can be seen in Appendix A, this assumption can be replaced with the weaker assumption that
∂U (Rs ,Ws )   ∂U (Rf ,Wf )
    ∂Y       ≤     ∂Y       , which simply says that her marginal utility of income does not increase when her
university research project succeeds.

                                                        13
because she chooses to consult less for any given fee. Thus, in equilibrium, consulting time t∗
decreases and the fee c∗ increases. That is, our model predicts that the potential for income
from their own university research would lead faculty to substitute time in university research
for consulting. This result has important implications for the Bayh-Dole Act, which gave
rights from governmentally funded patents to universities and their researcher-inventors, and
so was equivalent to an increase in L and γ. Our analysis shows that, whatever the slope of
the researcher’s consulting supply, and whatever the stage of the life cycle, passage of this
act would have reduced consulting. Although scholars and policy makers have expressed
concern that this act may have led to less fundamental research, our analysis implies there
is no reason to expect such an eﬀect. This may explain the failure of empirical studies to
find this eﬀect (Azoulay et al. 2007, 2009; Thursby and Thursby 2009b). We emphasize that
this result does not depend on the assumption that her utility is separable.
    Next, an increase in xO has no eﬀect on the researcher’s best reply, but the firm is willing
to pay less per unit of time for her as a consultant, so its best reply shifts down. Consulting
time decreases when her best reply is positively sloped, and increases when it is negatively
sloped. In either case, the fee decreases. This result also does not depend on the assumption
that her utility is separable.
    An increase in her stock of assets A leads her to consult more for any fee if she is risk-
neutral (or not too risk-averse), so her best reply shifts right. This has no eﬀect on the firm’s
willingness to pay for her as a consultant, so consulting time increases and the fee decreases.
    The results for G, F , KI , and KO assume that there are spillovers, λ > 0 and β > 0. We
therefore defer this discussion until after the following result on spillovers.

Theorem 3 In the equilibrium of the second stage consulting subgame:
(i) An increase in the extent β to which her university research spills over into consulting
decreases the fee, and decreases (increases) consulting, if her best reply is positively (nega-
tively) sloped.
(ii) An increase in the extent λ to which consulting spills over into her university research
decreases consulting time and increases the fee.
(iii) In the special case of β = 0, an increase in government funding G or the research sup-
port KI provided by the university decreases consulting and increases the fee.
(iv) In the special case of λ = 0, an increase in the research support KO provided by the firm
in its lab decreases the fee and decreases (increases) consulting if her best reply is positively
(negatively) sloped.

  An increase in the extent of spillovers to consulting β has no eﬀect on her best reply.
The firm is willing to pay her less per unit of time because it benefits more by free-riding

                                               14
on university infrastructure, so its best reply shifts down. The eﬀect depends on the slope
of her best reply: consulting decreases, but the fee increases (decreases) when her best reply
is negatively (positively) sloped. Because her best reply does not shift, this result does not
depend on assuming that her utility is separable. An increase in the extent of spillovers from
consulting λ has no eﬀect on the firm’s best reply. However, because her university research
benefits from free-riding on the firm’s infrastructure increase, she is willing to consult less
for any given fee, so her best reply shifts left. Therefore, in equilibrium, consulting decreases
and the fee increases.
    It is important to understand how changes in the levels of government and industrial
funding chosen in stage one influence the stage-two consulting equilibrium. An increase in
either G or F shifts the firm’s best reply down, because it is willing to pay less for consulting.
These increases shift the researcher’s best reply left, because she is willing to consult less.
When her best reply is positively sloped, consulting time must decrease, but the eﬀect on
the fee is ambiguous, depending upon the relative magnitudes of these shifts. When her best
reply is negatively sloped, the ultimate changes in both consulting and the fee are ambiguous.
However, when the equilibrium is locally stable, as shown in Figure 2, then both equilibrium
values cannot increase, or even remain constant. Either consulting or the fee must decrease.
If there are no spillovers from the university, β = 0, then the firm’s best reply does not
shift in response to a change in G. In this case, an increase in G decreases consulting and
increases the fee. The analysis for an increase in the university infrastructure KI is the same
as that for G.
    Finally, an increase in the firm’s infrastructure KO shifts the firm’s best reply down.
Spillovers from consulting back to university research increase her productivity there, and
so the opportunity cost of consulting. An increase in KO therefore leads her to spend less
time consulting for any fee, so her best reply shifts left. As stated in Theorem 2, the eﬀect
on the fee is ambiguous, but consulting decreases when her best reply is positively sloped.
If there are no such spillovers, λ = 0, then her best reply does not shift, so the fee decreases
and the eﬀect on consulting depends on the slope of her best reply: it increases (decreases)
if her best reply is negatively (positively) sloped. Again, because her best reply does not
shift, this result does not depend on assuming her utility is separable.


3.2    Stage One Equilibrium
In the first stage, the government funding agency and the firm simultaneously choose funding
levels for the researcher’s university project. As assumed above, the firm allocates a fixed
amount Bf > 0 to R&D, and does not make major adjustments until the next budget cycle.


                                               15
Similarly, it is realistic to assume that the research budget of the government funding agency
is also fixed at the level Bg > 0 during this period. To determine subgame perfect equilibria,
we assume these funding choices are made subject to equilibrium behavior in stage two
embedded in the equilibrium functions t∗ (G, F ) and c∗ (G, F ). Substituting these into (3)
and (4) gives the “reduced form” payoﬀs

                             Pg (G, F ) = EUg (G, F, t∗ (G, F ), c∗ (G, F ))                           (9)

and
                             Pf (G, F ) = EΠ(G, F, t∗ (G, F ), c∗ (G, F )).                           (10)

By construction, a Nash equilibrium (G∗ , F ∗ ) of the simultaneous-move game with these
payoﬀs is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the two-stage funding game. Appendix A formally
states and proves existence of an equilibrium in this game, (G∗ , F ∗ ).15
    Maximization of (9) by choosing G ∈ [0, Bg ] implicitly defines a best reply function Ĝ(F ),
giving the level of government funding for university research that maximizes the agency’s
expected utility for any choice of funding F by the firm. Similarly, maximization of (10)
by choosing F ∈ [0, Bf ] implicitly defines a best reply function F̂ (G), giving the level of
industrial funding for university research that maximizes the firm’s expected profit for any
funding level chosen by the government agency.16 Again, however, because we are interested
in deriving empirical implications, we focus on the interior equilibrium.
    If the Nash equilibrium is interior, G∗ ∈ (0, Bg ) and F ∗ ∈ (0, Bf ), then it must satisfy

                                             ∂Pg (G∗ , F ∗ )
                                                             = 0,                                   (11a)
                                                  ∂G

and
                                             ∂Pf (G∗ , F ∗ )
                                                             =0                                     (11b)
                                                  ∂F
where
                                  µ               ¶
                  ∂Pg (G, F )         ∂pI ∂pI ∂t∗
                              =           −         [Ug (Rgs ) − Ug (Rgf )] − V 0 (G)               (12a)
                     ∂G               ∂eI   ∂τ ∂G
and                                   µ                   ¶                 µ             ¶
                    ∂Pf (G, F )           ∂pI ∂pI ∂t∗                           ∂pO ∂t∗
                                =             −               (π I − L) +                     π.    (12b)
                       ∂F                 ∂eI   ∂τ ∂F                           ∂τ ∂F
  15
     Again, these equilibrium values are also functions of all the parameters of the model
(α,β,q,xI ,KI ,xO ,KO ,S,L, γ).
  16
     We omit the parameters of the model as explicit arguments in these best reply functions for clarity of
exposition.



                                                     16
    These conditions show both the initial marginal trade-oﬀs between the benefits and costs
of funding, and the eﬀects of initial funding choices on the second stage equilibrium values.
Notice that the agency’s payoﬀ does not depend on c∗ , and firm’s second stage optimal choice
of c∗ eliminates its eﬀect on the first stage funding choice (via a standard envelope theorem
application). An example of this equilibrium is depicted in Figure 3.
    Conditions (11a) and (12a) show that increases in government funding directly increase
eﬀective funding eI , and thus both the probability of success and expected utility, so the
agency increases G until this marginal increase in expected utility from this project is oﬀset
by the marginal cost of reduced funding to other projects (embedded in V ). Note that
∂pI          ∗          ∗
∂eI
    − ∂p I ∂t
       ∂τ ∂G
               > 0 if ∂t
                      ∂G
                          < 0, in which case it follows from (12a) that the agency’s best reply is
interior as long as the opportunity cost of funding our heroine is not too high. The conditions
in (11b) and (12b) show that devoting more funds to our heroines’s university research has
conflicting eﬀects for the firm. First, it increases the probability of success in university
                                                              ∗
research, and expected licensing profit. However, if ∂t      ∂F
                                                                < 0, this reduces time in consulting,
and therefore the probability of success in and expected profit from the firm’s project. In
this case, the firm funds university research as long as the increase in expected profit from
licensing a success from the university project outweighs the expected profit loss from its
own project.
                                          ∗         ∗
    Given the general ambiguity of ∂t   ∂G
                                            and ∂t∂F
                                                      , it is diﬃcult to obtain comparative statics
results on equilibrium levels of funding for university research. Indeed, even the slopes of
the government and firm best reply functions are not obvious. Nevertheless, we can obtain
results under reasonable assumptions. To do so we assume that

                               ∂ 2 pI ∂t∗    ∂ 2 pI
                              − 2         +         > 0 for j = G,F                               (13a)
                               ∂τ ∂j        ∂τ ∂eI

and
                               ∂ 2 pI    ∂ 2 pI ∂t∗
                                      −             > 0 for j = G,F .                          (13b)
                               ∂e2I     ∂τ ∂eI ∂j
These conditions essentially state that a stage-one increase in one type of external funding in-
creases the marginal eﬀect of the other type of external funding on the stage-two equilibrium
probability of success in university research, in which case we can show the following.
                                                                                              ∗
Theorem 4 Assume that equilibrium consulting time is decreasing in firm funding, ∂t   ∂F
                                                                                         < 0,
that (13) holds, and that second-order eﬀects on equilibrium consulting times are negligible,
∂ 2 t∗
∂i∂j
       ≈ 0, for all parameters i and j. Then:
(i) The first-stage best reply function of the funding agency is positively sloped.
(ii) The first-stage best reply function of the firm is positively sloped if, in addition, an

                                                 17
                                                                                   ∗
increase in government funding decreases equilibrium consulting time, ∂t ∂G
                                                                            < 0, and suf-
                                                                                    ∂e∗
ficiently decreases equilibrium eﬀective funding for the firm’s consulting project, ∂GO ≤
     2         ∗     ∂ 2 pO
−( ∂∂τp2O )( ∂t
             ∂G
                 )/ ∂τ  ∂eO
                            .

    Two points should be noted. First, the conditions in (13) and a negative eﬀect of firm
funding on equilibrium time spent consulting are suﬃcient for the government’s best reply
function to be positively sloped. Second, the additional hypotheses in (ii) of this theorem
states that, although there are spillovers from university research to the firm’s project, they
cannot outweigh the reduced time the researcher spends in consulting if G increases, so
equilibrium eﬀective funding e∗O for the firm’s project decreases. This guarantees that an
increase in G also results in a decrease in the marginal eﬀect of F on the stage-two equilibrium
probability of success in the firm’s consulting project.
    When the best reply functions are positively sloped, as depicted in Figure 3, we can
identify some comparative statics results for the first stage.

Theorem 5 Under the hypotheses of Theorem 4, if the first-stage equilibrium is locally sta-
ble, then an increase in research funding within the university, license revenue, or her share
of it must increase equilibrium university research funding from both the government and
              ∗             ∗
the firm ( ∂G
            ∂j
                > 0 and ∂F∂j
                              > 0 for j = KI ,L,γ) if, in addition, this suﬃciently decreases
                                                                ∂e∗        2         ∗     ∂ 2 pO
equilibrium eﬀective funding for the firm’s consulting project, ∂jO ≤ −( ∂∂τp2O )( ∂t
                                                                                   ∂j
                                                                                       )/ ∂τ  ∂eO
                                                                                                  for
j = KI ,L,γ.

     An increase in the level of university research support, license revenue, or her share of
it shifts the agency’s best reply up, which must increase funding for her university research
from both external sources. In each of these cases, the additional hypothesis is suﬃcient,
but not necessary, to guarantee that the firm’s best reply shifts right. Because each of
these changes has an ambiguous eﬀect on total consulting expenditure, c∗ t∗ , the condition
∂e∗O        2         ∗     ∂ 2 pO
 ∂j
     ≤ −( ∂∂τp2O )( ∂t
                    ∂j
                        )/ ∂τ  ∂eO
                                   states that this eﬀect is either negative, or not too positive. All
other changes are ambiguous in this case.


4     Econometric Analysis
In this Section we focus on empirical estimates of the two stages of the model. While the
ideal data would include time spent in consulting and the fee paid, to our knowledge such
data are not available. However, because our interest is in consulting that is essentially
research in firm labs, we are able to exploit a unique data set of 1679 patents on which 458
faculty from eight major US universities are listed as inventors. A patent lists, not only the

                                                 18
inventors, but also the patent’s assignee(s) (that is the patent’s owner(s)). By institutional
policies, both firms and universities typically claim ownership of inventions resulting from
projects in their labs.17 In our data, thirty percent of the patents are assigned to firms. In a
series of interviews with faculty, university licensing professionals, and firm R&D executives,
we were told that such assignments are almost exclusively the result of faculty consulting in
firm labs.18 Thus we take firm assignment as our proxy for consulting. While this measure
ignores consulting that does not lead to patents, it clearly indicates inventorship on firm
projects, such as those in our theory, which have scientific merit.
    The eight universities in our sample are Cornell, Georgia Institute of Technology, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, Purdue, Stanford, Texas A & M, Pennsylvania, and Wiscon-
sin. For each of the faculty at these universities in 1993, we have detailed annual information
on faculty publications, citations and research funding. We restrict attention to faculty in
years in which they applied for a patent that was granted between 1993 and 1999. This
yields 1679 patent/inventor pairs where assignment of the patent is either to the university
or to a firm of which 1532 are unique patents.19 Details on our selection process are provided
in Appendix B. When there are two or more faculty inventors on a patent we randomly drop
the duplicate patents so that we consider each patent once in our econometric analysis.
    The reason for focusing on the years in which a faculty member is known to have applied
for a patent is simple. The model we develop is for those faculty who can conceivably consult
with industry. If a university inventor applies in some year for a patent that is subsequently
granted, then clearly some of her work was deemed to be useful, and hence one can argue
that she could have consulted in that year. To maintain comparability across the sample we
also restrict non-consulting observations to those years in which there is an application for a
university-assigned patent. Finally, we use patent characteristics as a measure of the focus
of research. Restricting attention to years with patent applications excludes those faculty
who consulted or could have consulted with industry on non-patentable projects, but, more
to the point, it excludes faculty who were not of interest to industry as consultants.
    It is also important to recognize that while the theoretical model yields a number of
  17
     For federally funded inventions, the Bayh-Dole Act allows universities to claim ownership and for non
federally funded inventions, with rare exception universities claim ownership of inventions using their re-
sources.
  18
     It is also possible that firm assigned patents are on inventions that should legitimately be assigned to
the university. See Thursby et al. (2009) for an empirical analysis of this issue.
  19
     A number of the firms in the sample are firms in which the inventor is a principal (founder, CEO and/or
member of the scientific advisory board). However, our model does not diﬀerentiate between consulting with
a start-up and consulting with an established firm thus our empirical analysis does not diﬀerentiate patents
assigned to start-ups from other firm assigned patents.
  Also an additional 80 patents were found but these were either unassigned or they had multiple assignees.
These are not included in the analysis.



                                                     19
hypotheses that are testable in principle, a number of these concern the consulting fee c∗
which we do not observe. Recall also that a number of results depend on the slope of the
researcher’s consulting supply function or the slopes of the funding best reply functions, and
hence are not testable. Thus some of what follows is properly regarded as estimation of the
system, rather than testing.


4.1     Consulting
For the second stage, we use a logit regression to explain the probability that a patent is
assigned to a university, P (UNIV ASSGNi = 0), rather than to a firm, P (UNIV ASSGNi =
1),where i refers to a patent/inventor pair. Since assignment of a faculty patent to a firm
is largely the outgrowth of consulting we interpret the probability of firm assignment as a
measure of time spent in consulting t∗ .
     According to our theoretical model, regressors in the logit model should include measures
of government and industry funding, G and F , the researcher’s quality, q, the scientific merit
of the university and firm projects, xI and xO , research support provided by the university
and firm, KI and K0 , the inventor’s share γ of university license revenue L, and the two
spillover parameters β and λ. Of these variables we have direct measures only for KI , G, F ,
q, and γ.20
     While the comparative statics for the consulting stage yield few testable hypotheses, three
that we can test are (i) an increase in γ should decrease t∗ , and if there are no spillovers,
i.e., β = 0, then (ii) an increase in either government funding or KI should also decrease t∗ .
     For each faculty member, we include the faculty member’s yearly total U.S. government
sponsored research funds and the total industry sponsored research funds received in the year
prior to the patent application (LAG_GOV _F ND and LAG_IND_F ND) as measures
of G and F . This information was provided by the respective university Oﬃce of Sponsored
Programs. For multiple year and/or multiple principle investigator awards, we assume that
expenditures were uniform across years and/or principle investigators.
     For each university we also have information on γ, the inventor’s share of university licens-
ing income. If the university has a sliding scale we use the inventor share (INV ENT SHARE)
for income between $25k and $50k since the average licensing revenue for an active license
in the US lies between those figures (AUTM, various years).
     As proxies of faculty quality we use the number of publications by the faculty member
in the year prior to the patent application (LAG_P U BS) and the total number of citations
those publications received through 2003 (LAG_P UB_CIT ES). The data are from ISI
  20
     The aggregate annual amount of licensing revenue by university is available. However, the appropriate
value of L is the licensing revenue earned by the university for that specific project if it is licensed.

                                                   20
Web of Science. While citations may indicate inventor quality, it is likely also that faculty
who conduct more fundamental work are cited more (holding constant the number of pub-
lications). Thus LAG_P UB_CIT ES may reflect both inventor quality q and university
project diﬃculty xI .
    We have four proxies for university research support KI . First, we use the National Re-
search Council’s (1995) survey measure of the quality of the inventor’s academic department
(DEP T _QUAL) where higher values are assigned to higher quality departments. High
quality departments are generally considered to be relatively resource rich both in terms of
research tools and the knowledge base of faculty colleagues.21 Second, the average number
of university-based co-authors per article (AV ER_CO_AUT HORS) is a reflection of the
size of the network of the faculty member’s colleagues. The third measure is total univer-
sity research expenditures, in current dollars (UNIV _RD_EXP END). The final measure
reflects university teaching loads, which, all else equal, should be negatively related to re-
search. Instead of detailed data on teaching loads we have department level data on the ratio
of full time graduate students to faculty in 1992 (ST U DENT _F AC_RAT IO) (National
Research Council, 1995). Unfortunately, we do not have information on graduate students
or faculty for other years, however, our prior is that these figures do not vary substantially
year to year. ST UDENT _F AC_RAT IO is a better measure of teaching responsibilities
than the alternative university wide student/faculty ratio. This latter measure includes all
university departments instead of just the department of the faculty member whose consult-
ing we wise to examine. All else equal, the higher the graduate student/faculty ratio, the
greater the teaching and advising roles of the faculty. All else, of course, is not equal. In
particular, we need to control for the level of outside research funding of the department. We
include two such controls. The first is the ratio of the number of department research grants
to the number of faculty in 1992 (T OT _GRANT S_RAT IO). The second is the ratio of
the department’s total research funding (industry and federal) to the number of faculty in
1992 (T OT _F UN DS_RAT IO). T OT _GRANT S_RAT IO captures, to some extent, the
breadth of awards while T OT _F UNDS_RAT IO captures the level of funding within the
department. Both are measures in the year 1992 since the number of students is also for 1992.
In summary, DEP T _QUAL, AV ER_CO_AUT HORS and UNIV _RD_EXP END are
each expected to be positively correlated with KI while ST UDENT _F AC_RAT IO is
expected to be negatively correlated with KI . We do not have a proxy for K0 .
    To control for project diﬃculties xI and xO we use several measures of patent character-
  21
    If DEP T _QU AL and inventor quality q are positively correlated, then DEP T _QU AL can pick up
some of the eﬀects of q. In our data, however, our measures of inventor quality, numbers of publications and
citations, have simple correlations of only 0.141 and 0.209, respectively, with the NRC ranking.



                                                    21
istics that reflect how important and/or fundamental is the patent. More important and/or
fundamental patents are expected to emerge from more diﬃcult (scientifically meritorious)
problems. Three of the measures are backward looking. The first is the number of backward
citations to prior patents (P AT ENT _CIT ES) contained in the focal patent. The larger
the number of backward citations the larger is the existing body of related patented work,
so that we would expect patents with more backward citations to be more incremental and
hence of less scientific merit. The second backward looking measure is the Trajtenberg et al.
(1997) measure of patent originality (ORIGINAL). ORIGINAL is based on a Herfindahl
index that reflects the dispersion of citations made by the patent across patent classes. The
originality score is higher the wider the range of classes to which the patent makes citations.
A score of zero indicates that all citations to prior art are in a single patent class and scores
close to one indicate citations to many classes. A patent is considered more original if it
cites prior art from many rather than few technology classes. Both P AT ENT _CIT ES and
ORIGINAL are from the NBER Patent Database (Hall et al. 2001). We also include as
an additional backward measure the number of non-patent publications cited as prior art in
the patent (ART ICLE_CIT ES). As a forward looking measure we include the number
of forward citations (F OR_CIT ES) received by the patent by October 2006. It reflects
importance of the patent in the sense that the patent has been considered prior art by either
subsequent inventors or patent examiners. According to our theory, with the exception of
P AT ENT _CIT ES the patent characteristics variables should increase the probability of
assignment to the university; P AT ENT _CIT ES will decrease the probability.
    Additional controls are indicator variables for major program field of the inventor:
P HY SCI = 1 if the inventor is in the physical sciences and ENG = 1 for engineering
faculty; the excluded category is biological sciences. When university fixed eﬀects are not
included we include an indicator variable for public versus private university (P UBLIC = 1
if the university is public) and an indicator variable for whether the university is located
in an urban area (URBAN = 1 if the university is located in an urban area). Thursby et
al. (2009) suggest that urban areas might provide more opportunities for consulting. Public
universities often are expected to interact with (particularly local) firms to meet economic
development goals (Thursby et al. 2009, Belonzon and Schankerman 2009).
    Finally, controls are included for the inventor’s gender (MALE = 1 if the inventor is
male) and age at the time of the patent assignment (AGE). Thursby and Thursby (2007)
find significant gender diﬀerences in faculty propensity to engage in licensing activities and
Azoulay et al. (2007) find significant gender eﬀects on faculty patent activity. In our theo-
retical model we show a relationship between inventor assets and consulting. To the extent
that assets rise with age, we expect age and assets to be positively related, so age may be a


                                               22
proxy for assets. Thursby et al. (2007) argue that age eﬀects on faculty commercialization
activities are non-linear, so we also include the square of age (AGESQ). In their theoretical
model Thursby et al. (2007) show that tenure can have a dramatic eﬀect on faculty licensing.
Unfortunately, we do not know for certain if or when a faculty member obtains tenure, but
we do know the start date at their university. In the event that the “tenure clock” started
when they were first employed at this university we can measure tenure as starting in the
7th year of their employment. T ENURE = 1 indicates that the faculty member has tenure
according to our algorithm. Our measure of tenure provides an undercount. Our earliest
observation is for 1989 and the latest is for 1999 with over 92% occurring between 1994 and
1997. To account for any possible change over time in the propensity to consult we include
a time trend (T REND) equal to 1 for the years 1989-91 and equal to 8 for the year 1998-99.
The early and late years are aggregated because of few observations in the early and late
years.
    One hundred and fifty-eight of the patents have more than one faculty inventor. We ran-
domly drop the duplicates so that each patent appears only once in the data. Summary sta-
tistics are found in Table 1 and the logit results in terms of odds ratios are given in Table 2. In
our econometric analysis we use logs of LAG_GOV F ND, LAG_INDF ND, LAG_P UBS,
LAG_P U B_CIT ES, P AT ENT _CIT ES, ART ICLE_CIT ES, F OR_CIT ES,
UNIV _RD_EXP END and AV ER_CO_AUT HORS. Faculty can appear multiple times
in the data so that cluster standard errors are used to account for potential non-independence
of observations when faculty appear multiple times in the data. In Part A are results for
university fixed eﬀects. In Part B we include P UBLIC, INV ENT SHARE and URBAN;
variables which cannot be used in the fixed eﬀects estimation. Part A is our preferred speci-
fication since unobserved heterogeneity across universities could lead to bias in all estimated
coeﬃcients in the Part B regression.
    Recall from our theoretical analysis that the impact of government funding on consulting
should depend on the existence of spillovers. When β > 0, an increase in government funding
G or an increase in university-provided research support KI shifts the researcher’s best reply
back and the firm’s best reply down, hence the ambiguous theoretical results. When β = 0,
however, only the researcher’s best reply shifts with an increase in government funding
or university research support, implying a decrease in consulting. Therefore, a positive
empirical relationship between G and consulting or KI and consulting is possible only if
β > 0. When significantly diﬀerent from zero our measures show that higher levels of G and
KI are positively associated with firm assignment. That is, LAG_GOV F ND has an odds
ratio greater than one as does AV ER_CO_AUT HORS. ST U DENT _F AC_RAT IO,
which is negatively related to KI , has an odds ratio less than one (though it is significant


                                               23
only in Part A). Thus our results clearly imply positive spillovers from the university to the
firm. Further, recall from Theorem 2 that with a spillover, an increase in government funding
will increase consulting only when the researcher’s best reply function is negatively sloped in
equilibrium. With a negatively sloped function, the theory also predicts the negative impact
of quality on consulting. In our empirical results lagged publications decrease the probability
of firm assignment, but the coeﬃcients are not significantly diﬀerent from zero.
    To the extent that the peer review process followed by federal agencies identifies the
best researchers, one might argue that government funding is another measure of researcher
quality. However, the eﬀect of additional government funding is opposite that of publications
and industry funding, and the latter variables are clearly measures of researcher quality.
Thus, in these data government funding is a measure of something other than faculty quality.
    From the theory, an increase in INV ENT SHARE should decrease consulting regardless
of the researcher’s best reply so that the coeﬃcient of INV ENT SHARE should be negative.
The correct sign is observed (see Part B), but it is not significant at conventional levels.
However, with only 8 universities in the sample there is little variation in INV ENT SHARE.
    The coeﬃcients of AGE and AGESQ are neither individually nor jointly significantly
diﬀerent from zero in either regression.
    The patent characteristic variables are consistent with our assumption that university
research projects are more diﬃcult, or fundamental, xI > x0 . Specifically, the measure of
patent originality (ORIGINAL) is associated with a lower probability of firm assignment
and it is significant at the 1% level. The larger the number of backward patent citations
(P AT ENT _CIT ES) the greater is the likelihood that the patent is assigned to a firm, thus
the more incremental patents are assigned to the firm. F OR_CIT ES is not significant in
either regression. Finally, the more citations to journal articles (ART ICLE_CIT ES) the
more likely it is that the patent is assigned to the university. This is the opposite of the eﬀect
of backward patent citations, and, while it might contradict the claim that firm patents are
more incremental, it is likely only a sign that university inventions are closer to the academic
literature, and thus more basic, than are firm inventions.
    A number of robustness checks were considered; for parsimony, the detailed results are not
presented. We included as a regressor the “expected” number of citations for a researcher’s
publications which is computed as the average number of citations received by articles in the
journals and years in which the researcher’s publications appear. Expected citations are not
significant and other results are unchanged. We also considered current year publications,
publication citations, and government and industry funding rather than their lags. The only
change of note is that government funding becomes insignificant in both models.



                                               24
4.2     Government and Industry Funding
In our theoretical model, government and industry research funding are simultaneously de-
termined, so the funding stage regressions explain both the amount of government research
funding, GOV _F N D, and industry research funds, IND_F ND, received by an inventor
in a year in which they applied for a patent. In several of our specifications we also include
the lagged value of the dependent variable (LAG_GOV _F ND or LAG_IND_F ND).
    As in the consulting stage, we use LAG_P U BS and LAG_P UB_CIT ES as measures
of inventor quality. Lagged rather than current publications and citations are used to allow
for a lag between funding applications and awards.22 Lagged publications and citations most
likely reflect the researcher’s productivity at the time the funding was applied for. While it is
standard to consider citations as a measure of quality, a priori, their eﬀect on funding levels
is not entirely clear because, as we noted above, it is likely that more highly cited faculty
conduct more fundamental research. This is in addition to the fact that the comparative
static eﬀects of quality on funding are ambiguous. Nonetheless, it is important to control
for measures of quality.
    Also, as in the consulting stage, when university fixed eﬀects are not included we include
the percentage of licensing revenue the university awards the inventor (INV ENT SHARE)
as well as whether the university is public (P UBLIC) and whether it is in an urban area
(URBAN). Our preferred specification is the one that has university fixed eﬀects.
    The variable SP ILL is the number of the inventor’s articles cited as prior art in the
patent. We view this as a measure of the spillover from the inventor’s university research.
If we assume that the researcher’s journal publications result primarily from solving her
university problem, then the larger is SP ILL the more the firm-assigned patent relies on
the inventor’s university research. Given that many of the inventors in our sample have
multiple patents in a year, we randomly select one of the patents to measure the level of
spillover. Note that this measure of β could not be used in the consulting regression because
SP ILL is always zero when UNIV ASSGN = 1.
    For KI we continue to use the three variables DEP T _QUAL, AV ER_CO_AU T HORS,
and UNIV _RD_EXP EN D which are expected to be positively associated with KI and
ST UDENT _F AC_RAT IO is expected to be negatively associated with KI (along with
the controls T OT _GRANT S_RAT IO and T OT _F UNDS_RAT IO).
    To control for funding diﬀerences across fields we include indicator variables for the major
program area of the inventor (P HY SCI and ENG).
    To account for the many zero dependent variable observations we use Tobit models.
  22
    We also considered regressions including one year lags of publications and citations as well as two year
lags. Results are unchanged so we do not present them for the sake of parsimony.


                                                    25
Because our theoretical model assumes government and industry research funding levels are
simultaneously determined, we use an instrumental variables estimator. Instruments for the
endogenous funding levels are their lagged values. Results are found in Tables 3 and 4. Parts
A and B of each table are specifications including lagged values of the dependent variable.
In Parts C and D the lagged dependent variable is omitted.
    The results for both funding equations suggest that, as in Theorem 4, government and
industry funding within the university are strategic complements. In Table 3, the government
funding regressions, the estimated coeﬃcients of industry funding (INDF N D) are always
positive and, with one exception, are significantly diﬀerent from zero. In Table 4, the industry
funding regressions, the coeﬃcient of government funding (GOV F ND) is also positive in
each of the specifications though it is significantly diﬀerent from zero only in Parts C and
D. All variables are measured in logs so that the estimated coeﬃcients are elasticities and
these estimated elasticities are very small. In other work (Thursby and Thursby 2009a)
we found similar results in a larger dataset that is not conditioned on patenting. In that
work the positive elasticities are always significantly diﬀerent from zero and are of a similar
size as found in Tables 3 and 4. Recall that in each equation we control for quality of
the individual faculty member using their publications and citations. In each specification,
the coeﬃcient of publications is positive and generally significant. Thus, to the extent that
these measures adequately capture quality, the complementarity of government and industry
research funding is not driven by quality.
    According to Theorem 5, when government and firm funding are strategic complements,
an increase in university research support KI should increase equilibrium funding from both
the government and the firm. When the coeﬃcients for our measures of KI are significantly
diﬀerent from zero, they have the correct signs in Tables 3 and 4, with the exception of
ST UDENT _F AC_RAT IO in the industry funding specifications which has a positive
and significant eﬀect in two specifications. While, in general, we think of a higher student
faculty ratio as a drain on research, in the case of industry funding one could argue that firms
fund university research, among other reasons, to gain access to potential hires, suggesting
a positive sign.
    Also according to Theorem 5, an increase in γ should increase both types of funding in
equilibrium. In each specification the coeﬃcient of INV ENT SHARE is negative, though
it is significantly diﬀerent from zero (10% level) in only one specification. As noted above,
our preferred specifications are those that include university fixed eﬀects. It is possible that
there is unaccounted university heterogeneity in the non fixed eﬀects regressions.
    Finally, the comparative static eﬀects of all other parameters in the funding stage of
the theoretical model are ambiguous. Empirically, SP ILL is our measure of the university-


                                              26
industry spillover β. While it is not significant in the government funding equation, it is
always negative and significant in the industry funding regressions. Intuitively, this suggests
that in their funding decisions, firms realize the potential for free riding. AGE and AGESQ
are included as measures of life cycle eﬀects. Within the context of the theory, they should
reflect assets, which are generally larger, for older faculty. We find strong evidence that both
types of funding are increasing in AGE but at a decreasing rate.


5     Concluding Remarks
Despite survey results showing that industrial managers often consider consulting to be one
of the more important mechanisms for industry to access university research, there is little
research either theoretically or empirically of this mechanism. In this paper, we examine
industrial consulting by university faculty as a mechanism for spillovers and do so in a
context that allows us to link them to government, industry, and university funding decisions.
We develop a theoretical model which yields predictions for the time spent consulting, the
associated fee, and the level of government and industry support for university research as
functions of faculty quality, project characteristics, the researcher’s share of license revenue
from the university project, R&D spillovers, university support for the researcher’s internal
project, as well as the willingness of the firm and government to sponsor the faculty member’s
research within the university. We then exploit a unique database of funding, publications,
and patents for 458 faculty inventors to estimate parameters of the model.
    Both the theory and empirics provide clear evidence of spillovers from government-
supported university research to industry. Moreover, together they suggest an important
role for university policies in influencing faculty research and consulting. In the consulting
stage, we find that an increase in either license revenue or the share that accrues to the
faculty will decrease consulting. Thus as long as the university project is more basic than
the firm’s, then contrary to the policy concern that licensing might reduce basic research,
the increase in share increases the time devoted to basic research. Perhaps our most striking
results regard the ability of university policies to leverage both government and industry
research funding. We find evidence that government and industry funding for university
research are strategic complements, in which case increases in the share of revenue univer-
sities allocate to their researchers and the university’s research infrastructure increase both
government and firm funding in the university.
    We also find strong evidence of spillovers from the university to the firm. In the consulting
stage, we find that consulting is positively associated with government funding. In the
context of our theoretical model, this result is possible only if there is a spillover from the

                                               27
faculty researcher’s government sponsored research to the firm’s research problem.
    Several qualifiers to our work suggest directions for further research. First, one fourth
of the patents in the sample assigned to for-profit firms are assignments to firms in which
the inventor is a principal (founder, CEO, and/or scientific advisor). A role as scientific
advisor is consistent with our interpretation of the faculty researcher choosing t > 0 and
is consistent with most university policies as long at t ≤ M. The patent may or may not
be a follow-on patent to one from the faculty researcher’s university research, in which case
we would interpret the follow on project as xo . Moreover, most conflict of interest policies
prohibit faculty from receiving sponsored research from their start ups, so that this example
would be the special case of our model in which F = 0. Of course, we do not diﬀerentiate
between start ups and other types of firms in the analysis so we abstract from many of the
nuances of faculty start ups.
    Second, our empirical measure of consulting is limited in that is only includes consulting
that leads to patentable results, and we do not have measures of the reverse spillovers to the
firm. Nonetheless, to our knowledge there do not exist available databases, the development
of which would be a nontrivial task.


6    References
Adams, J. 1990. Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth. Journal of
Political Economy 98: 673-702.
    Aghion, Philippe, M. Dewatripont, Jeremy Stein. 2008. Academic Freedom, Private-
Sector Focus, and the Process of Innovation. Rand Journal of Economics, 39(3): 617-635.
    Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inven-
tion, in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity edited by Richard Nelson, 609-625.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
    Association of University Technology Managers, various years. Licensing Survey.
    Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding and Toby Stuart. 2007. The Determinants of Faculty
Patenting Behavior: Demographics or Opportunities? Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 63, 599-623.
    ___________. 2009. The Impact of Academic Patenting on the Rate, Quality, and
Direction of (Public) Research Output. The Journal of Industrial Economics 58(4), 637-676.
    Beath, J., Owen, R., Poyago-Theotoky, J., Ulph, D., 2003. Optimal Incentives for
Income-generation Within Universities. International Journal of Industrial Organization
21, 1301-1322.
    Belonzon, Sharon and Mark Schankerman. 2009. The Impact of Private Ownership, In-

                                             28
centives and Local Development Objectives on University Technology Transfer Performance.
The Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming.
    Blume-Kohout, M.E., K. Kumar, and N. Sood. 2009. Federal Life Sciences Funding and
University R&D. Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
15146.
    Cohen, Wesley M., Richard Florida, L. Randazzese, John Walsh. 1998. Industry and
the Academy: Uneasy Partners in the Cause of Technological Advance. The Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C. .
    Connolly, L. 1997. Does External Funding of Academic Research Crowd Out Institutional
Support? Journal of Public Economics 64, 389-406.
    Crespi, Gustavo A., Aldo Geuna and Bart Verspagen. 2006. University IPRs and knowl-
edge transfer. Is the IPR ownership model more eﬃcient? SPRU Science and Technology
Policy Research Paper 154.
    David, Paul A. and Bronwyn Hall. 2000. Heart of Darkness: Modeling Public-private
Funding Interatctions Inside the R&D Black Box. Research Policy 29, 1165-1183.
    David, Paul A., Bronwyn Hall and Andrew Toole. 2000. Is Public R&D a Complement
or Substitute for Private R&D? A Review of the Econometric Evidence. Research Policy 29,
497-529
    DeBondt, Raymond, 1997. Spillovers and Innovative Activity. International Journal of
Industrial Organization 15(1): 1-28.
    Dechenaux, Emmanuel, Jerry Thursby, and Marie Thursby. 2009. Inventor Moral Hazard
in University Licensing: The Role of Contracts. Research Policy, forthcoming.
    Friedman, James W., 1977, Oligopoly and the Theory of Games, North-Holland, Amster-
dam.
    Geuna, A., L. Nesta. 2006. University Patenting and its Eﬀects on Academic Research:
The Emerging European Evidence. Research Policy, 35, 790-807.
    Hall, B. H., Adam Jaﬀe, Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. The NBER Patent Citations Data
File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools. NBER working paper series.
    Henderson, R., Jaﬀe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., 1998. Universities as a Source of Commer-
cial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting 1965- 1988. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 119-127.
    Jaﬀe, A. B., 1989. Real eﬀects of academic research. American Economic Review, 79(5),
957-970.
    Jaﬀe, A. B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. Geographic Local-
ization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 577-598.


                                           29
    Jensen, R. and M.Thursby, 2001. Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing of
University Inventions. American Economic Review, 91, 240-259.
    ___________, 2004. Patent Licensing and the Research University.Cambridge MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10758.
    Jensen, R., J.Thursby, and M.Thursby. 2003. The Disclosure and Licensing of University
Inventions. International Journal of Industrial Organization 21, 1271-1300.
    Lacetera, N. 2009. Diﬀerent Missions and Commitment Power in R&D Organizations:
Theory and Evidence on Industry/University Relations. Organization Science 20:3, 565-582.
    Lach, S. and M.Schankerman. 2008. Incentives and Invention in Universities. RAND
Journal of Economics 39(2): 403-433.
    Mansfield, Edwin, 1995. Academic Research Underlying Industrial Innovations: Sources,
Characteristics, and Financing. The Review of Economics and Statistics 77, 55-65.
    Mowery, David C, and David J. Teece. 1996. Strategic Alliances and Industrial Research
in Richard Rosenbloom and William Spencer, eds, Engines of Innovation. Harvard Business
School Press: Boston MA.
    National Research Council. 1995. Research Doctorate Programs in the United States, M.
Goldberger, B. Maher and P. Flattau (eds.), Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
    National Science Board. 2008. Research and Development: Essential Foundation for
U.S. Competitiveness in a Global Economy. Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.
    Rosenberg, Nathan and Richard Nelson. 1994. American Universities and Technical
Advance in Industry, Research Policy 23, 323-348.
    ____________, 1996. The Roles of Universities in the Advance of Industrial Tech-
nology, in Richard Rosenbloom and William Spencer, eds, Engines of Innovation. Harvard
Business School Press: Boston MA.
    Saragossi, S. and B.van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie. 2003. What Patent Data Reveal
about Universities: the Case of Belgium. Journal of Technology Transfer, 28, 47-51.
    Stephan, Paula. 1996. The Economics of Science. Journal of Economic Literature, 34,
1199-1235.
    Thompson, Tyler B. 2003. An Industry Perspective on Intellectual Property from Spon-
sored Research, Research Management Review 13 (2), 1-9.
    Thursby, Jerry G. and Thursby, Marie C. 2006. Where is the New Science in Corporate
R&D? Science 314, 1547.
    ____________. 2007. University Licensing, Oxford Review of Economic Policy,
23:4, 620-639.
    ____________, 2008. Knowledge Creation and Diﬀusion of Public Science with
Intellectual Property Rights, Intellectual Property Rights and Technical Change, Frontiers


                                           30
in Economics, Vol. 2, edited by Keith Maskus, Elsevier.
   _____________. 2009a. Faculty Participation in Licensing: Implications for
Research. Research Policy, forthcoming.
   ____________. 2009b. University Licensing: Harnessing of Tarnishing Faculty
Research? Innovation Policy and the Economy, forthcoming.
   Thursby, Jerry G., Anne Fuller, and Marie Thursby. 2009. US Faculty Patenting: Inside
or Outside the University, Research Policy, 38, 14-25.
   Thursby, Marie, Jerry Thursby, and Swasti Gupta-Mukherjee. 2007. Are There Real
Eﬀects of Academic Entrepreneurship: A Life Cycle View, Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, Vol. 63, 577-598.
   Trajtenberg, Manuel., Jaﬀe, Adam and Henderson, Rebecca. 1997. "University versus
Corporate Patents: A Window on the Basicness of Invention," Economics of Innovation and
New Technology 5 (1), 19-50.
   Trajtenberg, Manuel, Gil Shiﬀ, and Ran Melamed. 2006, The “Names Game”: Harness-
ing Inventors’ Patent Data for Economic Research, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 75.
   Zucker, Lynne, Michael Darby, Maryanne Brewer, 1998. Intellectual Capital and the
Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises. American Economic Review 88, 290-306.


A     Appendix
A.1     Existence in the Second-Stage Game
Assume the firm allocates a fixed amount Bf > 0 to R&D in a given period, so c ∈ [0, Bf /M].

Lemma 1 Consider the strategic form game with the researcher and firm as the players,
whose strategies are t ∈ [0, M] and c ∈ [0, Bf /M], and payoﬀ functions are defined by (2)
and (4). Also assume each player’s payoﬀ function is continuous and strictly quasi-concave
in its own strategy, given any strategy choices by the other players. Then this game has a
Nash equilibrium (t∗ (G, F ), c∗ (G, F )).

    Proof. Because the number of players is finite, their strategy sets are compact and
nonempty, and their payoﬀ functions are continuous and strictly quasi-concave, this follows
directly from the well-known existence theorem for strategic form games with continuous
strategy spaces (see, for example, Friedman 1977).




                                            31
A.2      Properties of the Researcher’s Best Reply
Her best reply function, t̂(c), is defined by arg max{t ∈ [0, M] : EU (G, F, t, c)}. We suppress
its dependence on the other parameters j = G,F ,β,λ,q,xI ,KI ,xO ,KO ,A,L,γ for notational
convenience. In general, we are interested in whether and when her best reply is positive,
so she supplies time to consulting, whether and when she supplies all available time M to
consulting, and the slope of her best reply. First note that, given the strict concavity of
EU(G, F, t, c) in t,

                                       ∂EU(G, F, 0, c)
                          = 0           if             ≤0
                                            ∂t
                                      ∂EU(G, F, 0, c)      ∂EU(G, F, M, c)
                   t̂(c) ∈ (0, M) if                   >0>
                                           ∂t                   ∂t
                                      ∂EU(G, F, M, c)
                         = M       if                   ≥0
                                            ∂t

defines the range of her best reply.
    Proof of Theorem 1. Note that when her best reply is interior, its slope is t̂0 (c) =
    2 EU         2                                     ∂ 2 EU
−( ∂∂t∂c   )/( ∂ ∂tEU
                    2 ), which has the sign of ∂t∂c by the strict concavity of EU . From (8), with

                                                                            I ∂U (Rf ,Wf )
                         2 EU
                                             I ∂U(Rs ,Ws )
risk-neutrality, ∂∂t∂c        = [pI − t ∂p∂τ
                                              ] ∂Y          + [1 − pI + t ∂p
                                                                          ∂τ
                                                                             ] ∂Y          > 0 because ptI ∂p
                                                                                                           ∂τ
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                               ≥1
                      ∂pI       ∂U           ∂pI                                                       t ∂pI
implies pI ≥ t ∂τ , and ∂Y > 0, ∂τ > 0, and pI < 1 by assumption. However, if pI ∂τ < 1,
                                                     2 EU
then pI < t ∂p    ∂τ
                     I
                        and the first term in ∂∂t∂c         is negative. Similarly, if she is risk averse, then
      ∂ 2 U(Rs ,Ws )              ∂ 2 U (Rf ,Wf )
ct[pI ∂Y 2             + (1 − pI ) ∂Y 2 ] < 0 as well, so (8) is more likely to be negative.

Lemma 2 The researcher’s best reply function in consulting time, t̂(c), is positive only if
cm = min{c : ∂EU (G,F,0,c)
                   ∂t
                           = 0} exists and is finite. If so, then cm > 0, and her best reply
is positive and increasing in the consulting fee, t̂(c) > 0 and t̂0 (c) > 0, for all fees in a
neighborhood above cm .

     Proof. First observe from (6a) that ∂EU (G,F,t,0)
                                                   ∂t
                                                           = − ∂p
                                                               ∂τ
                                                                  I
                                                                    [U(Rs , A + γL) − U (Rf , A)] < 0
for all t because Rs > Rf , γL > 0, and positive marginal utility imply that U(Rs , A + γL) >
U(Rf , A), and ∂p ∂τ
                     I
                       > 0. Hence, because t is constrained to be nonnegative, t̂(0) = 0. That
                   ∂EU (G,F,t,c)
is, if we plotted       ∂t
                                 as a function of c for fixed (G, F, t), then it would intersect the
                                                            2
(vertical) utility axis at a negative value. Because ∂ EU(G,F,t,c)
                                                                ∂t2
                                                                         < 0, if ∂EU (G,F,0,c)
                                                                                      ∂t
                                                                                               < 0 for
                            ∂EU(G,F,t,c)
all c ∈ [0, Bf /M], then          ∂t
                                         < 0 for all c, and consulting never occurs, t̂(c) = 0 for
                                                                         2
all c. However, the slope of ∂t with respect to c at c = 0 is ∂ EU(G,F,0,c)
                                  ∂EU
                                                                             ∂t∂c
                                                                                     = pI ∂U (R∂Ys ,Ws ) +
          ∂U (R ,W )
(1 − pI ) ∂Yf f > 0 Thus, it is possible that ∂EU (G,F,t,c) ∂t
                                                                     increases (though perhaps not
monotonically) as c increases, and eventually intersects the (horizontal) c axis. If so, there
                                                                       2
exists a positive, finite cm defined as above. By continuity, ∂ EU (G,F,0,c ∂t∂c
                                                                                  m)
                                                                                     > 0. Note that

                                                       32
cm is the fee at which the function EU(G, F, t, c) takes on its unconstrained maximum at
t = 0 (or the smallest fee if this occurs for more than one value). Therefore, for all fees in a
neighborhood above cm , EU (G, F, t, c) takes on its unconstrained maximum at some t > 0,
so t̂(c) > 0. Moreover, t̂0 (c) > 0 in this neighborhood from the proof of Theorem 1 because
∂ 2 EU (G,F,0,cm )
       ∂t∂c
                   > 0.
                                                                                                            ∗       2      2
     Proof of Theorems 2 and 3. Using standard comparative statics, ∂t                                ∂j
                                                                                                            = [ ∂∂t∂c
                                                                                                                  EU ∂ EΠ
                                                                                                                      ∂c∂j
                                                                                                                           −
∂ 2 EΠ ∂ 2 EU               ∂c∗      ∂ 2 EΠ ∂ 2 EU      ∂ 2 EU ∂ 2 EΠ
  ∂c2 ∂t∂j
              ]/D2 and ∂j = [ ∂c∂t ∂t∂j − ∂t2 ∂c∂j ]/D2 , for j = G,F ,β,λ,q,xI , KI ,xO ,KO ,A,L,γ
                    2     ∂ 2 EΠ       2 EU ∂ 2 EΠ
where D2 = ∂ ∂tEU      2   ∂c2
                                  − ∂∂t∂c    ∂c∂t
                                                      > 0 by the assumption that the equilibrium is locally
stable.
                                2 EU         ∂ 2 pI                                        I ∂U (Rs ,Ws )    ∂U(R ,W )
Diﬀerentiation yields ∂∂t∂G           = − ∂τ    ∂eI
                                                     [U(Rs , Ws )−U(Rf , Wf )]+c ∂p     ∂eI
                                                                                             [ ∂Y         − ∂Yf f ] < 0
                      ∂U (Rf ,Wf ) ∂ 2 EU          ∂ 2 EU          2 EU   ∂ 2 EU            2 EU          2 EU
if ∂U (R∂Ys ,Ws ) ≤       ∂Y
                                   , ∂t∂F = ∂t∂K         I
                                                             = ∂∂t∂G    , ∂t∂K O
                                                                                 = ( Kλ ) ∂∂t∂λ  = λ ∂∂t∂G      (but = 0 if
                                                                                        O
                               2 EU        ∂ 2 pI                                             I ∂U (Rs ,Ws )    ∂U (Rf ,Wf )
λ = 0 or t = 0), ∂∂t∂q               = − ∂τ    ∂q
                                                  [U(Rs , Ws ) − U (Rf , Wf )] + c ∂p       ∂q
                                                                                               [ ∂Y          −        ∂Y
                                                                                                                               ]<0
     ∂U (Rs ,Ws )          ∂U(Rf ,Wf ) ∂ 2 EU          ∂ 2 EU           ∂ 2 EU         ∂pI ∂U (Rs ,Ws )         ∂ 2 U (Rs ,Ws )
if         ∂Y
                     ≤         ∂Y
                                      , ∂t∂β = ∂t∂xO = 0, ∂t∂L = [− ∂τ                           ∂Y
                                                                                                         + pI c ∂Y 2 ]γ =
         2                2                                  ∂U (Rf ,Wf )           2                           2 (R ,W )
                                        I ∂U (Rs ,Ws )
( Lγ ) ∂∂t∂γ
           EU
               < 0, ∂∂t∂A   EU
                                = − ∂p∂τ
                                         [ ∂Y             −       ∂Y
                                                                          ] + c[pI ∂ U ∂Y
                                                                                       (Rs ,Ws )
                                                                                          2       + (1 − pI ) ∂ U ∂Y   s
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                              ], and
∂ 2 EU             ∂ 2 pI                                             ∂pI ∂U(Rs ,Ws )      ∂U (Rf ,Wf )      ∂pI ∂U (Rs ,Ws ) 0
∂t∂xI
           = − ∂τ ∂xI [U (Rs , Ws ) − U(Rf , Wf )] + c ∂xI [ ∂Y                       −         ∂Y
                                                                                                        ] − ∂τ         ∂R
                                                                                                                               Rs +
      ∂ 2 U (Rs ,Ws ) 0                           ∂ 2 EΠ       ∂ 2 pO      ∂ 2 pO
cpI ∂Y ∂R Rs .Next note that ∂c∂t = [ ∂eO ∂τ + ∂e2 c]tπ < 0 at an interior solution to the
                                                                               O
firm’s problem, so (7) implies the consulting demand function is negatively sloped. Diﬀer-
                   2 EΠ               2
                          ∂ 2 EΠ
entiation yields ∂∂c∂G  = ∂c∂K  I
                                  = ∂∂ep2O βtπ < 0 if β > 0 (but = 0 if β = 0 or if t = 0),
                                                     O
∂ 2 EΠ     ∂ 2 pO           2 EΠ      2
                                                            ∂ 2 EΠ      2 EΠ      2 EΠ     2 EΠ     2 EΠ
∂c∂F
         = ∂e2O
                  tπ < 0, ∂∂c∂β   = ∂∂ep2O (KI + G)tπ < 0, ∂c∂x   I
                                                                    = ∂∂t∂A   = ∂∂c∂L  = ∂∂c∂γ  = ∂∂c∂λ  = 0,
                                        O
               2                            2                                2
∂ 2 EΠ       ∂ pO               2                                 2
∂c∂q
         = ∂e   O ∂q
                               ∂ EΠ
                     tπ > 0, ∂c∂x O
                                     = ∂e∂O p∂xOO tπ < 0, and ∂c∂K
                                                                 ∂ EΠ
                                                                     O
                                                                        = ∂∂ep2O tπ < 0. The assumption
                                                                               O
                                                               ∂U (Rf ,Wf )
that     U(R, W ) = f (R) + g(W ) implies ∂U (R∂Ys ,Ws ) −          ∂Y
                                                                            =  0. Combining this and the
preceding results proves all statements in Theorem 3 and all in Theorem 2 except for those
about G, F, and KI in (iv).
                             2 EU                                            ∂U (Rf ,Wf ) ∂ 2 EΠ
Finally, recall that ∂∂t∂j          < 0 for j = G, F, KI if ∂U (R∂Ys ,Ws ) ≤     ∂Y
                                                                                         , ∂c∂F < 0, and
∂ 2 EΠ                                                                         ∂t∗    ∂c∗        2 EU ∂ 2 EΠ
 ∂c∂j
        < 0 for j = G, KI if β > 0. Therefore, under these conditions, ∂j + ∂j = { ∂∂t∂j               [ ∂c∂t −
∂ 2 EΠ        ∂ 2 EU   ∂ 2 EU ∂ 2 EΠ                                                      ∂ 2 EΠ    ∂ 2 EΠ
 ∂c2
       ] + [ ∂t∂c − ∂t2 ] ∂c∂j }/D2 > 0 for j = G, F, KI if and only if both ∂c∂t − ∂c2 < 0
       ∂ 2 EU      2
and ∂t∂c − ∂ ∂tEU    2 < 0, which contradicts the local stability condition. This proves statements
(iv)(b) and (iv)(b) in Theorem 2.


A.3          Existence in First-Stage Game
Lemma 3 Consider the strategic form game with the government funding agency and firm
as the players, whose strategies are G ∈ [0, Bg ] and F ∈ [0, Bf ], and payoﬀ functions are
defined by (8) and (9). Also assume each player’s payoﬀ function is continuous and strictly
quasi-concave in its own strategy, given any strategy choices by the other players. Then this
game has a Nash equilibrium (G∗ , F ∗ ), and (G∗ , F ∗ , t∗ (G∗ , F ∗ ), c∗ (G∗ , F ∗ )) is the subgame

                                                                33
perfect equilibrium of the two-stage funding game.


A.4            Properties of First-Stage Equilibrium
                                                                                                                          2        ∗          ∂ 2 pI             ∂ 2 pI
Proof of Theorem 4.                               V. Proof of Theorem 4. Set Θ = − ∂∂τp2I ∂t
                                                                                          ∂G
                                                                                             +                                               ∂τ ∂eI
                                                                                                                                                     ,   Λ=      ∂e2I
                                                                                                                                                                          −
 ∂ 2 pI ∂t∗                     2      ∗            ∂ 2 pI                 ∂ 2 pI         ∂ 2 pI ∂t∗
∂τ ∂eI ∂G
            ,     Φ =       − ∂∂τp2I ∂t
                                     ∂F
                                              +    ∂τ ∂eI
                                                           ,   Ω =          ∂e2I
                                                                                    −    ∂τ ∂eI ∂F
                                                                                                     ,    and ∆Ug = Ug (Rgs ) − Ug (Rgf ) >
                                                                                                                  ∂ Pg                                           2
0. Recall from (12) Θ > 0, Λ > 0, Φ > 0, and Ω > 0 by assumption. Then ∂G∂F                                            =
        ∂t∗     ∂pI       ∂ 2 t∗                               ∂t∗                 ∂ 2 t∗
[Θ(− ∂F )+ ∂τ (− ∂G∂F )+Λ]∆Ug > 0 because ∂F < 0 and ∂F ∂G ≈ 0 by assumption. Similarly,
 ∂ 2 Pf             ∂t∗         ∂pI ∂ 2 t∗                         ∂ 2 pO ∂t∗           ∂ 2 pO ∂e∗O ∂t∗       2 ∗
∂F ∂G
        =   [Φ(−    ∂G
                        ) −      ∂τ ∂G∂F
                                             + Ω](π I − L)   +  {[  ∂τ  2 ( ∂G
                                                                                 ) +          ( )] ∂F + ∂p
                                                                                       ∂τ ∂eO ∂G
                                                                                                          O ∂ t
                                                                                                         ∂τ ∂F ∂G
                                                                                                                  }π > 0
            ∂t∗          ∂t∗            ∂ 2 t∗           ∂ 2 pO ∂t∗         ∂ 2 pO ∂e∗O
because ∂G < 0, ∂F < 0, ∂F ∂G ≈ 0, and ∂τ 2 ( ∂G ) + ∂τ ∂eO ( ∂G ) ≤ 0 by the hypothesis of the
theorem.
                                                                                                           ∂G∗          ∂ Pg  2
                                                                                                                                 f     ∂2P           ∂ 2 Pf ∂ 2 Pg
      Proof of Theorem 5.                                      In this case, we have                        ∂j
                                                                                                                    = [ ∂G∂F ∂F ∂j
                                                                                                                                   −                 ∂F 2 ∂G∂j
                                                                                                                                                                   ]/D1
        ∂F ∗               ∂ 2 Pf ∂ 2 Pg            ∂ 2 Pg ∂ 2 Pf
and       ∂j
                   =    [ ∂F ∂G ∂G∂j
                                              −      ∂G2 ∂F ∂j
                                                                      ]/D1 , for j = β,λ,q,xI ,KI ,xO ,KO ,γ,A,L, where D1 =
∂ 2 Pg ∂ 2 Pf         ∂ 2 Pg ∂ 2 Pf
 ∂G2 ∂F 2
                 − ∂G∂F ∂F ∂G > 0 by the assumption that the equilibrium is locally stable, and
             ∂ 2 Pg                         ∂ 2 Pf                                                                                                                 ∂ 2 Pg
where ∂G∂F > 0 and ∂F ∂G                                > 0 from the preceding theorem. First, observe that ∂G∂j                                                            =
         ∂t∗           ∂pI ∂ 2 t∗                                                                       ∂t∗                                                  ∂ 2 t∗
[Θ(− ∂j ) − ∂τ ∂G∂j ]∆Ug > 0 for j = γ,L because ∂j < 0 for j = γ,L and ∂i∂j ≈ 0.
                                 2 EU            ∂ 2 EU                ∂ 2 EΠ          ∂ 2 EΠ                              ∂t∗          ∂t∗                       ∂ 2 Pg
Next note that ∂∂t∂G                      = ∂t∂K         I
                                                              and       ∂c∂G
                                                                                =      ∂c∂K   I
                                                                                                  imply        that       ∂K  I
                                                                                                                                  =     ∂G
                                                                                                                                               <   0,    so     ∂G∂K     I
                                                                                                                                                                            =
             ∗                    2  ∗                                                                        2
                                                                                                            ∂ Pg                        ∗                2  ∗
[Θ(− ∂K   ∂t
              I
                 ) − ∂p     I
                         ∂τ ∂G∂KI
                                 ∂ t
                                          + Λ]∆Ug > 0 as well. However, ∂G∂j                                         = [Θ(− ∂t        ∂j
                                                                                                                                          ) − ∂p    I ∂ t
                                                                                                                                                 ∂τ ∂G∂j
                                                                                                                                                                ]∆Ug for
                     ∂ 2 Pg                          ∗                   2  ∗                         ∂ 2P                        ∗              2  ∗
j = β,xO , ∂G∂KO = [Θ(− ∂K                       ∂t
                                                     O
                                                        )− ∂p      I    ∂ t
                                                                 ∂τ ∂G∂KO
                                                                                +λΛ]∆Ug , ∂G∂λg = [Θ(− ∂t                      ∂λ
                                                                                                                                    )− ∂p    I ∂ t
                                                                                                                                          ∂τ ∂G∂λ
                                                                                                                                                        +KO Λ]∆Ug ,
  2                                                                                                                 2
 ∂ Pg                     ∂t∗           ∂pI ∂ 2 t∗              ∂ 2 pI ∂t∗        ∂ 2 pI                           ∂ Pg                      ∂t∗                     2 ∗
∂G∂q
         = [Θ(− ∂q ) − ∂τ ∂G∂q − ∂τ ∂q ∂G + ∂eI ∂q ]∆Ug , and ∂G∂xI = [Θ(− ∂xI ) − ∂p                                                                          I ∂ t
                                                                                                                                                            ∂τ ∂G∂xI
                                                                                                                                                                            −
 ∂ 2 pI ∂t∗         ∂ 2 pI                         0 0                                                              ∂ 2 Pf                  ∂t∗        ∂pI ∂ 2 t∗
∂τ ∂xI ∂G
               + ∂eI ∂xI ]∆Ug +ΘUg Rsg are all ambiguous. Similarly, ∂F ∂j = [Φ(− ∂j )− ∂τ ∂F ∂j ](π I −
                2        ∗        ∂ 2 pO ∂e∗O ∂t∗                         2 ∗                                                    ∂2P                       ∂t∗
L) + {[ ∂∂τp2O ∂t     ∂j
                             + ∂τ    ∂eO ∂j ∂F
                                                   ] + ∂p            O ∂ t
                                                                   ∂τ ∂F ∂j
                                                                              }π > 0 for j = γ,L and ∂F ∂Kf I = [Φ(− ∂K                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                 )+Ω−
         2  ∗                                   2           ∗           2      ∂e∗        ∗                  2   ∗                                        ∗
∂pI ∂ t
 ∂τ ∂F ∂KI
                 ](π I − L) + {[ ∂∂τp2O ∂K              ∂t
                                                             I
                                                                 + ∂τ  ∂ pO      O ∂t
                                                                         ∂eO ∂KI ∂F
                                                                                     ]        + ∂p    O ∂ t
                                                                                                    ∂τ ∂F ∂KI
                                                                                                                     }π > 0 because ∂t                  ∂j
                                                                                                                                                               < 0 and
  2                       2           ∗
∂ pO ∂t     ∗          ∂ pO ∂eO
 ∂τ 2
       ( ∂j ) + ∂τ ∂eO ( ∂j ) ≤ 0 for j = γ,L,KI by the hypothesis of the theorem. Next note
         ∂2P                         ∗                   2 ∗                               2        ∗        ∂ 2 pO ∂e∗O ∂t∗                     2 ∗              ∂2P
that ∂F ∂βf = [Φ(− ∂t             ∂β
                                       ) − ∂p      I ∂ t
                                                ∂τ ∂F ∂β
                                                                ](π I − L) + {[ ∂∂τp2O ∂t        ∂β
                                                                                                       + ∂τ     ∂eO ∂β ∂F
                                                                                                                             ] + ∂p         O ∂ t
                                                                                                                                          ∂τ ∂F ∂β
                                                                                                                                                        }π, ∂F ∂KfO =
                                                                                                                        ∗
          ∂t∗                       ∂pI ∂ 2 t∗                                    ∂ 2 pO ∂t∗              ∂ 2 pO ∂eO ∂t∗                ∂pO ∂ 2 t∗                 ∂ 2 Pf
[Φ(− ∂K       O
                 )  +   Ωλ      −    ∂τ    ∂F   ∂K   O
                                                        ](π    I  −    L)   +  {[   ∂τ  2 ∂K
                                                                                                O
                                                                                                    +    ∂τ  ∂e  O  ∂K  O
                                                                                                                           ] ∂F
                                                                                                                                   +     ∂τ   ∂F  ∂K   O
                                                                                                                                                         }π,       ∂F  ∂λ
                                                                                                                                                                            =
            ∗                              2  ∗                             2        ∗        2       ∂e ∗       ∗              2   ∗         ∂ 2P                       ∗
[Φ(− ∂t  ∂λ
              )+ΩKO − ∂p              I ∂ t
                                   ∂τ ∂F ∂λ
                                                  ](π I −L)+{[ ∂∂τp2O ∂t          ∂λ
                                                                                       + ∂τ  ∂ pO
                                                                                               ∂eO ∂λ ∂F
                                                                                                            ] + ∂p
                                                                                                         O ∂t              O ∂ t
                                                                                                                         ∂τ ∂F ∂λ
                                                                                                                                      }π, ∂F ∂qf = [Φ(− ∂t             ∂q
                                                                                                                                                                           )+
   2             2                                                            2                   2       ∂e ∗          2                                            2P
 ∂ pI          ∂ pI ∂t   ∗                2   ∗                                         ∗                                          ∗               2  ∗            ∂
∂eI ∂q
         − ∂τ      ∂q ∂F
                             − ∂p    I ∂ t
                                  ∂τ ∂F ∂q
                                                 ](π I − L) + {[ ∂∂τp2O ∂t           ∂q
                                                                                           + ∂τ ∂ pO
                                                                                                   ∂eO ∂q
                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                  + ∂∂τp∂qO ] ∂t∂F
                                                                                                                                      + ∂p    O ∂ t
                                                                                                                                           ∂τ ∂F ∂q
                                                                                                                                                         }π, ∂F ∂xfI =
                         2              2                                                           2                    2          ∗
         ∂t∗                              pI ∂t∗                     2 ∗                                   ∂t∗         ∂ pO ∂eO ∂t∗                        2 ∗
[Φ(− ∂x     I
               )+ ∂e∂I ∂x  pI
                               I
                                 − ∂τ∂ ∂x    I ∂F
                                                      − ∂p     I ∂ t
                                                            ∂τ ∂F ∂xI
                                                                           ](π I −L)+{[ ∂∂τp2O ∂x              I
                                                                                                                  + ∂τ    ∂eO ∂xI ∂F
                                                                                                                                      ] + ∂p        O ∂ t
                                                                                                                                                 ∂τ ∂F ∂xI
                                                                                                                                                                  }π, and
    2                                                                                2                    2          ∗          2
  ∂ Pf                         ∗                   2  ∗                                        ∗        ∂ pO ∂eO                           ∗                 2  ∗
∂F ∂xO
           = [Φ(− ∂x        ∂t
                               O
                                 ) − ∂p    I ∂ t
                                        ∂τ ∂F ∂xO
                                                           ](π I − L) + {[ ∂∂τp2O ∂x         ∂t
                                                                                               O
                                                                                                  + ∂τ     ∂eO ∂xO
                                                                                                                         + ∂τ∂ ∂x pO ∂t
                                                                                                                                       ] + ∂p
                                                                                                                                     O ∂F
                                                                                                                                                     O ∂ t
                                                                                                                                                   ∂τ ∂F ∂xO
                                                                                                                                                                     }π are
all ambiguous. The statements of the theorem then follow immediately from these results
plus locally stability.




                                                                                    34
B     Method of Identifying Faculty Patents
We started with the names of every scientist and engineer in PhD granting departments
at Cornell, Georgia Institute of Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Purdue,
Stanford, Texas A & M, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin reported in the National Research
Council’s (1995) survey of PhD granting departments in the US. The list is for faculty
in residence in 1993. The names were compared to inventor names on US patents granted
between 1993 and 1999. Once names had been paired we used a multi-staged name screening
process to insure that the faculty member and the inventor are the same. The first step was
to check the distance between the zip code of the university and the zip code of the city of
residence of the inventor. If the distance was more than 50 miles the patent was removed
from the database. The average zip code distance in the final data is less than 7 miles.
     We then used the surname data from the 1990 Census to evaluate the incidence of each
name. At this point we used various filters to eliminate common names. The filter was least
dense when we had a match on first, middle and last name for the university faculty listing
and the name on the patent. The filter was most dense when we could only match a last
name and first initial. About 10% of the matches are eliminated because of common names.
     From the NRC survey we know that a faculty member is at a respective university in 1993
(the year of the survey). Our procedure for verifying institutional aﬃliation for inventors
on applications filed in years other than 1993 was the following. If the assignment was
to the inventor’s 1993 university we assumed the inventor was with the university. If the
assignment was not to that university, we used a combination of web searches and the faculty
listing in the National Faculty Directory to verify aﬃliation. If we determined that a faculty
member was on the faculty in any year after 1993 we assumed she was on the faculty in the
intervening years between 1993 and the latter year. If we could not verify faculty aﬃliation
for the patent application year the patent was dropped.
     The final data contains 1690 patent/inventor pairs where assignment of the patent is
either to the university or to a firm. These pairs include 1532 patents and 458 faculty
inventors. When there are two or more faculty inventors on a patent we randomly drop the
duplicate patents so that we consider each patent once in our econometric analysis.




                                             35
             ^
             c(t)      ^
                       t(c)



Consulting
   Fee




                    Time in Consulting

                    Second Stage
                       Figure 1
             ^
             c(t)

                    ^

                     t(c)
Consulting
   Fee




                    Time in Consulting

                        Second Stage
                         Figure 2
                            ^
                            F(G)

Government
 Funding
                        ^
                        G(F)




             Firm Funding
              First Stage
               Figure 3
Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                                              Obs.     Mean    St. Dev.       Min        Max
AGE                              Inventor age                                 1455    49.318    10.009         28          83
ARTICLE_CITES                    Articles cited in patent                     1521    17.108    23.666          0         203
AVER_CO_AUTHORS                  Average number of univ. co-authors           1521    12.532    43.210          0   418.843
BIOSCI                           Bio science faculty                          1521     0.342      0.474         0           1
DEPT_QUAL                        Dept. quality                                1521     4.277      0.530         2        4.97
ENG                              Engineering faculty                          1521     0.460      0.499         0           1
FOR_CITES                        Forward patent citations                     1521    21.131    36.994          0         459
GOV_FND                          Federal funding                              1521     0.838      1.841         0     15.021
IND_FND                          Industrial funding                           1521     0.165      0.562         0      4.177
INVENTSHARE                      Inventor share of licensing revenue          1521    30.486      7.208        20          50
MALE                             Inventor is male                             1494     0.952      0.214         0           1
ORIGINAL                         Measure of patent originality                1374     0.465      0.291         0      0.930
PAT_CITES                        Patent citations to prior patents            1521    11.938    19.901          0         354
PERIOD                           Yearly trend                                 1521     4.505      1.742         1           8
PHYSCI                           Physical science faculty                     1521     0.198      0.399         0           1
PUB_CITES                        Citations to publications                    1521   264.858   533.241          0       6557
PUBLIC                           University is public                         1521     0.318      0.466         0           1
PUBS                             Annual publications                          1521     7.300      8.525         0          51
STUDENT_FAC_RATIO                Graduate student faculty ratio               1441     3.655      2.320         0          13
TENURE                           Facult member is tenured                     1521     0.774      0.418         0           1
TOT_FUNDS_RATIO                  Ratio of total dept. funding to faculty      1492     0.552      0.747         0      4.775
TOT_GRANTS_RATIO                 Ratio of number of dept. grants to facutly   1521     3.640      1.782     0.302     10.333
UNIV_RD_EXPEND                   University R&D expenditures                  1521   362493      70680    161714     509782
UNIVASSIGN                       Patent is assigned to university             1521     0.690      0.463         0           1
URBAN                            University in urban area                     1521     0.645      0.479         0           1

All funding variables are in millions of real dollars.
Table 2. Consulting
Dependent Variable: ASSIGN=1 if assigned to a firm.
                        Part A                        Part B
                        Odds Ratio t-Statistic        Odds Ratio t-Statistic
LAG_PUB                        0.791      -1.01              0.739     -1.36
LAG_PUB_CITES                  0.970      -0.35              1.003      0.04
LAG_GOVFND                     1.021       2.01 **           1.023      2.13 **
LAG_INDFND                     0.983      -1.23              0.982     -1.28
TENURE                         1.088       0.27              0.990     -0.03
ENG                            0.617      -0.92              0.562     -1.07
PHYSIC                         1.632       0.91              1.489      0.72
ORIGINAL                       0.313      -2.87 ***          0.303     -2.94 ***
PATENT_CITES                   2.248       5.20 ***          2.301      5.29 ***
FOR_CITES                      0.965      -0.35              0.987     -0.14
ARTICLE_CITES                  0.704      -3.36 ***          0.702     -3.34 ***
AGE                            0.826      -1.61              0.857     -1.29
AGESQ                          1.002       1.58              1.001      1.26
MALE                           0.738      -0.54              0.853     -0.31
TREND                          1.093       1.38              1.096        1.6
DEPT_QUAL                      1.001       0.00              1.582      1.44
UNIV_RD_EXPEND                 0.353      -0.68              0.350     -1.41
AVER_CO_AUTHORS                1.336       2.98 ***          1.291      2.85 ***
STUDENT_FAC_RATIO              0.865      -1.66 *            0.948     -0.61
TOT_GRANTS_RATIO               1.023       0.18              0.989     -0.09
TOT_FUNDS_RATIO                1.166       0.55              1.664      2.34 **
PUBLIC                                                       1.735      1.32
INVENTSHARE                                                  0.421     -1.04
URBAN                                                        1.123        0.3
University Fixed Effets         YES                            NO
Pseudo R-Square                0.178                          0.16
Observations                   1215                          1215
Table 3. Government Funding
                        Part A                         Part B                      Part C                       Part D
                        Coeff        t-Statistic       Coeff       t-Statistic     Coeff      t-Statistic       Coeff     t-Statistic
INDFND                        0.0258        2.11 **         0.0187        1.57        0.0327         2.47 **       0.0267        2.05 **
LAG_GOVFND                    0.1128        7.03 ***        0.1105        6.93 ***
LAG_PUB                       0.1372        1.51            0.1671        1.85 *      0.1532         1.68 *        0.1807        1.99   **
LAG_PUB_CITES                 0.0359        0.94            0.0250        0.65        0.0558         1.42          0.0454        1.15
TENURE                       -0.0885       -0.61           -0.0962       -0.68       -0.0623        -0.39         -0.0752       -0.50
SPILL                        -0.0140       -0.20           -0.0559       -0.76        0.0026         0.03         -0.0292       -0.39
ENG                           0.0798        0.38            0.1054        0.51        0.0934         0.40          0.1048        0.46
PHYSIC                        0.5532        2.37 **         0.5954        2.70 ***    0.6659         2.57 *        0.6964        2.82   ***
AGE                           0.1091        2.06 **         0.1002        1.88 *      0.1541         2.72 ***      0.1480        2.62   ***
AGESQ                        -0.0011       -2.16 **        -0.0010       -1.99 **    -0.0015        -2.75 ***     -0.0014       -2.65   ***
MALE                          0.3511        1.38            0.3442        1.32        0.4531         1.61          0.4545        1.59
PERIOD                        0.0082        0.31           -0.0016       -0.06        0.0246         0.89          0.0224        0.91
DEPT_QUAL                     0.3664        1.94 *          0.2405        1.47        0.3798         1.93 *        0.2724        1.60
UNIV_RD_EXPEND               -0.3300       -0.50            0.7316        2.55 **     0.0893         0.13          0.6087        2.13   **
AVER_CO_AUTHORS               0.0388        0.58            0.0442        0.66        0.0319         0.49          0.0410        0.64
STUDENT_FAC_RATIO            -0.1222       -2.57 *         -0.1411       -3.28 ***   -0.1271        -2.39 **      -0.1386       -2.86   ***
TOT_GRANTS_RATIO              0.0203        0.48            0.0318        0.76        0.0181         0.41          0.0266        0.61
TOT_FUNDS_RATIO               0.6085        3.69 ***        0.6601        4.58 ***    0.6954         3.84 ***      0.7788        4.86   ***
PUBLIC                                                      0.2874        1.51                                    -0.2690       -1.44
INVENTSHARE                                                -0.0171       -1.33                                    -0.0213       -1.73   *
URBAN                                                       0.5138        3.03 ***                                 0.4708        2.69   ***
University Fixed Effets         YES                            NO                        YES                          NO
Observations                     956                           956                        956                         956
Table 4. Industry Funding
                         Part A                         Part B                        Part C                        Part D
                         Coeff        t-Statistic       Coeff       t-Statistic       Coeff     t-Statistic         Coeff     t-Statistic
GOVFND                         0.0460        1.32            0.0508        1.43          0.0577        1.76 *          0.0578        1.72 *
LAG_INDFND                     0.0906        5.87 ***        0.0901        5.81 ***
LAG_PUB                        0.1853        1.22            0.2223        1.50          0.3303        2.53   ***      0.3523        2.67   ***
LAG_PUB_CITES                 -0.0853       -1.26           -0.0965       -1.43         -0.1156       -1.91   *       -0.1163       -1.86   *
TENURE                        -0.6663       -3.15 ***       -0.6515       -3.04 ***     -0.6555       -3.06   ***     -0.6269       -2.89   ***
SPILL                         -0.6392       -4.22 ***       -0.7004       -4.54 ***     -0.6926       -4.18   ***     -0.7262       -4.12   ***
ENG                           -0.2475       -0.70           -0.2104       -0.59         -0.4377       -1.28           -0.3570       -1.01
PHYSIC                        -0.4814       -1.48           -0.3785       -1.25         -0.7810       -2.21   ***     -0.6620       -1.94   *
AGE                            0.1996        2.27 **         0.1616        1.90 *        0.1876        2.11   ***      0.1555        1.81   *
AGESQ                         -0.0019       -2.27 **        -0.0016       -1.91 *       -0.0018       -2.11   ***     -0.0015       -1.82   *
MALE                           0.1542        0.31            0.1959        0.39          0.2875        0.58            0.2589        0.53
PERIOD                         0.0682        1.48            0.0853        2.16 **       0.0717        1.57            0.0889        2.26   **
DEPT_QUAL                     -0.0074       -0.03           -0.3723       -1.95 **       0.0839        0.35           -0.1205       -0.67
UNIV_RD_EXPEND                 1.2959        1.13            0.2246        0.46          1.6012        1.39            0.1397        0.31
AVER_CO_AUTHORS                0.1475        2.15 ***        0.1746        2.56 ***      0.1155        1.61            0.1271        1.79   *
STUDENT_FAC_RATIO              0.1065        1.76 *          0.0590        1.15          0.1386        2.14   ***      0.0869        1.59
TOT_GRANTS_RATIO              -0.2037       -2.55 ***       -0.1772       -2.21 **      -0.2249       -2.70   ***     -0.2093       -2.58   ***
TOT_FUNDS_RATIO                0.5091        2.75 ***        0.3031        1.84 *        0.5051        2.65   ***      0.1723        0.95
PUBLIC                                                       0.4143        1.41                                        0.2691        0.97
INVENTSHARE                                                 -0.0208       -1.50                                       -0.0125       -1.01
URBAN                                                        0.4574        1.80 *                                      0.5202        2.01   **
University Fixed Effets          YES                            NO                         YES                            NO
Observations                      956                           956                        956                            956
