NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BUSINESS CYCLE AND HEALTH BEHAVIORS
Xin Xu
Robert Kaestner
Working Paper 15737
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15737

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Xin Xu and Robert Kaestner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Business Cycle and Health Behaviors
Xin Xu and Robert Kaestner
NBER Working Paper No. 15737
February 2010
JEL No. I12,J22
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we take a structural approach to investigate the effects of wages and working hours on
health behaviors of low-educated persons using variation in wages and hours caused by changes in
economic activity. We find that increases in hours are associated with an increase in cigarette smoking,
a reduction in physical activity, and fewer visits to physicians. More importantly, we find that most
of the effects associated with changes in hours can be attributed to the changes in the extensive margin
of employment. Increases in wages are associated with greater consumption of cigarettes.

Xin Xu
Institute of Health Research and Policy
University of Illinois at Chicago
xxu11@uic.edu
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Introduction
It is firmly established that sustained expansion of the economy can cure most economic
problems. The expression “a rising tide lifts all boats” sums up the view that economic
expansions provide greater opportunities for work, raise incomes and reduce poverty rates,
especially for those socially and economically disadvantaged (Pigen & Wray 1998; Reich 1999;
Barrington 2000; Wilson 2000; Freeman 2001; Freeman 2003; Davis & Bosley 2005). While it is
clear that economic expansions provide widespread and immediate financial benefits, it is less
certain whether economic expansions improve health. Intuition suggests that health would
improve during good economic times because of rising incomes and decline during recessions
because of falling incomes. However, as a recent article in the New York Times concludes
“…the data on how an economic downturn influences an individual’s health are surprisingly
mixed” (Parker-Pope, Oct. 6 2008).
The conclusion of the New York Times article accurately reflects findings from previous
studies of how the business cycle affects health behaviors and health. For example, Ruhm
(2000), Neumayer (2004) and Gerdtham and Ruhm (2006) found that mortality decreased during
recessions, but Tapia-Granados (2004), Economou et al. (2007) and Halliday (2006) reported the
opposite. Similarly contradicting evidence is found in the literature concerned with the effects of
economic activity on other measures of health such as highway fatalities, heart disease and
obesity (Ruhm 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2007; Neumayer 2004; Gerdtham & Ruhm 2006;
Economou et al. 2007; Tapia Granados 2005; and Bockerman et al. 2006). Finally, mixed

2

evidence is also reported in studies of the effects of economic conditions on health behaviors
(Ruhm 1995; Ettner 1997; Freeman 1999; Dee 2001; Ruhm & Black 2002).
Lack of consensus as to the effects of economic activity on health and health behaviors
warrants additional study. More importantly, additional studies that identify the casual
mechanisms through which changes in economic activity may affect health and health behaviors
are needed. Most previous studies have taken a reduced form approach that relates health or
health behaviors to measures of economic activity (e.g., unemployment). 1 However, economic
activity itself is not a cause of changes in health; unemployment does not affect health. Rather it
is changes in time use, income (wages) and other determinants of health that affect health or
health behaviors. Therefore, greater insight into the issue can be gained from studying how
economic activity affects these proximate causes of health (e.g., wages), and in turn, how these
proximate causes affect health or health behaviors.
From both a scientific and public policy perspective, it is of more interest to understand
why economic activity affects health or health behaviors than whether economic activity affects
health. For example, if binge drinking increases during economic expansions, as indicated by
some previous studies, is this because of an increase in income, or is it due to an increase in stress
that comes from greater work intensity? The answer to this question matters because it is
necessary to know the mechanism linking economic expansions to binge drinking if the goal is to

1

Exceptions are Ettner (1997), Ruhm (2005, 2007), Charles and DeCicca (2008) and Barnes and Smith
(2009). We discuss these below.

3

design appropriate public and private interventions to offset potentially harmful consequence of
expanded economic activity (e.g., adverse health outcomes associated with binge drinking).
While previous studies have discussed potential causal mechanisms linking economic
activity to health such as changes in wages, hours of work (leisure time availability), air pollution
and vehicle miles traveled, none has tried to identify empirically the effect of these proximate
causes on health or health behaviors. 2 This is the purpose of this study. Specifically, this paper
examines the effects of changes in wages and working hours, which are associated with changes
in economic activity, on health behaviors of low-educated persons. We focus on low-educated
persons because both economic theory and empirical evidence suggest that the business cycle has
the greatest impact on their wages and working hours (Oi 1962; Becker 1975; Bils 1985; Keane et
al. 1988; Blank 1989; Blank 1990; Freeman 1990; Bartik 1994; Solon et al. 1994; Bartik 1996;
Hoynes 1999; Ziliak et al. 1999; Bradbury 2000; Freeman 2001; Messemer 2004; Couch &
Fairlie 2005, Charles & DeCicca 2008).
Estimates of the effects of wages and working hours on health behavior are obtained
using a two-sample instrumental variables approach (TSIV). TSIV is an appealing approach
because there are no large datasets that contain detailed information on wages, hours of work and
health behaviors. The TSIV approach overcomes this data limitation. Further, the TSIV
framework provides parameter estimates that are policy relevant. The TSIV procedure provides

2

There are many studies that compare differences in health and health behaviors between employed and
unemployed persons, but these studies fail to address the likely non-random nature of employment status.
Indeed, it is this selection problem that motivates the study of aggregate economic activity on health
behavior and health.

4

estimates of the effect of wages and hours on health behaviors for those whose wages and hours
are altered by the business cycle.
Our results indicate that people are more likely to engage in unhealthy behaviors during
economic expansions, namely increased cigarette smoking, reduced physical activity, and fewer
physician visits. More importantly, our findings suggest that most of these effects are associated
with the change in the extensive margin of employment—changes in employment status, rather
than changes in hours of work for those who work. These findings imply that labor supply
rationing associated with the business cycle may have substantial effects on health behaviors, at
least in the short run, and these effects may be more important than business cycle induced
changes in income.
Previous Literature: Economic Activity and Health Behaviors
Several recent studies have used local and regional variations in unemployment rates to
examine the association between economic recessions and individual health behaviors such as
alcohol use, cigarette smoking, physical activity and doctor visits. As noted above, this literature
has not produced a consensus as to the effect of the business cycle on these behaviors.
Ruhm (1995) provided one of the earliest and most widely cited studies. He used statelevel, aggregate data to study the effect of economic recessions on alcohol consumption and
found evidence that alcohol consumption was pro-cyclical; alcohol consumption declined during
economic recessions and increased during economic expansions. Using similar data, but with a
different empirical strategy, Freeman (1999) confirmed the pro-cyclical variation of alcohol
consumption. Using individual-level data from the Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System

5

(BRFSS) from 1987-1999, Ruhm and Black (2002) also found evidence for the pro-cyclical
alcohol consumption, as did Ettner (1997) who used individual-level data from the 1988 National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS). 3 In contrast, Dee (2001), who used the BRFSS from 1984 to
1995, found evidence that the prevalence of binge drinking was strongly counter-cyclical.
Furthermore, he argued that even among those who remained employed, binge drinking increased
substantially during economic recessions. Finally, Charles and DeCicca (2008) found little
evidence of cyclical changes in binge drinking behaviors. Their analysis used data from the
NHIS from 1997 to 2001.
Studies of the association between aggregate economic activity and physical activity also
yielded inconsistent evidence. Ruhm (2000, 2005) and Dustmann & Windmeijer (2000) reported
evidence of counter-cyclical variation in individual physical activity; physical activity increased
during recessions and decreased during expansions. Charles and DeCicca (2008), on the other
hand, found that physical activity was independent of economic activity. In their study, they
investigated the effect of economic activity on both moderate and vigorous exercise by education
levels, and none of the estimates were statistically significant.
There has been less study addressing the effect of economic activity on smoking. Ruhm
(2000, 2005) found evidence that cigarette smoking was pro-cyclical and that declines in use
during recessions were disproportionately concentrated among heavy smokers. Charles and

3

Johansson et al. (2006) examined the issue using individual-level data from Finland from 1982 to 2001.
These authors also found pro-cyclical variation in alcohol consumption.

6

DeCicca (2008) also found evidence of pro-cyclical tobacco use. 4 However, according to a recent
study by Barnes and Smith (2009), the probability of becoming unemployed resulted in greater
continuation and resumption of smoking, which is suggestive of counter-cyclical variation in
tobacco use.
Ruhm also investigated the association between economic activity and use of health care
services such as doctor visits. Using data from the NHIS from 1972 to 1981, Ruhm (2003)
reported that use of health care services such as hospital episodes and doctor visits was procyclical, but the estimates were not statistically significant. Several studies in public health found
the opposite when they compared employed and unemployed persons, which ignored likely
selection into employment. For example, Linn et al. (1985) found that unemployed US veterans
were more likely than employed to visit the doctor.
As this brief review highlights, there is a lack of consensus as to the impact of economic
activity on health behaviors, which suggests that additional study is warranted. More
importantly, additional studies that identify the causal mechanisms through which economic
activity may affect health behaviors are particularly needed, as most studies have taken a reduced
form approach that relates health behaviors to measures of economic activity (e.g.,
unemployment). Some efforts to estimate a more structural model have been made, but they are
limited. Charles and DeCicca (2008) examined the effect of local unemployment rate on health
behaviors and allowed the effect of unemployment to differ by those more or less likely to be

4

Novo et al. (2000) examined the cigarette smoking behaviors among young men and women during
economic expansion (1986) and recession (1994) in Sweden. These authors also found pro-cyclical
variation in daily tobacco use.

7

employed (propensity of employment). Ruhm (2005, 2007) included aggregate working hours
per week and personal income per capita in his primary specifications to indirectly assess whether
the changes in incomes or leisure time help to explain the changes in lifestyle. Barnes and Smith
(2009) examined how the probability of being unemployed affected smoking using an
instrumental variables procedure.
Our study provides greater insight into the mechanisms linking the business cycle to
health behaviors by examining the relationship between changes in wages and hours of work,
which are a result of changes in economic activity, and changes in health behaviors. It is the first
study to do this. The main objective of this study is to identify the casual effect of short-run,
business cycle induced changes in income and hours of work (leisure) on health behaviors.
The Business Cycle and Health Behaviors
A simple, human capital model of the demand for health can be used to illustrate the
potential mechanisms through which economic activity (e.g., recessions) may affect individual
health behaviors (Grossman 1972; Grossman 2000). In this model, individual utility depends on
current health status (H); a relatively time-intensive health-related commodity (A) such as
physical activity; a less time-intensive health-related commodity (C) such as cigarette smoking;
other consumption (X); and a vector of individual characteristics (Z1) such as age, race/ethnicity,
and education attainment. 5 Algebraically, utility is represented as follows:
U = U(H, C, A, X; Z1)

(1)

5

The conceptual model is one of individual decision making and thus complications posed by interrelationships between individuals living in the same household are ignored.

8

This is a static model that ignores dynamic aspects of investments in health.
In this model, health is produced by the individual according to a given production
technology:
H=H(C, A, Tw; Z1 ,Z2,ε)

(2)

In equation (2), Z2 are local environmental influences of health such as air quality or vehicle
miles traveled. The health-related commodities A and C are inputs in the health production
function, as is time spent working (Tw). Working hours may affect health because of stress
associated with work, or because of psychological effects (e.g., depression) associated with
changes in hours. Individual genetic (biological) endowments of health are denoted by ε.
In most simple models of the consumer, individuals face one budget (full income)
constraint, but this assumes that individuals are able to freely choose working hours to maximize
their utility. However, given our focus on the consequences of changes in economic activity, for
example, recessions, it is more plausible to assume that individuals’ working hours are rationed in
the short run. 6 In other words, if individuals are not able to freely trade their time for money at
the margin during economic recessions and/or economic expansions, the direct substitution of the
time constraint into the budget constraint is no longer valid. We argue that this is particularly true
in the short run, during economic recessions, as a portion of the population loses their job
involuntarily during economic recessions.

6

See Burtless & Hausman (1978), Ashenfelter (1980), Ham (1982), Killingsworth (1983), Kooreman &
Kapteyn (1986), Bockstael, Strand & Hanemann (1987), Kooreman & Kapteyn (1987), and Prowse (2005)
for formal discussions on labor supply under rationing.

9

Under such circumstances, the consumer has two constraints: a time constraint and a
budget constraint. These are shown as follows:

T − Tw − tc C − t A A − t X X = 0

(3)

WTw + pC C − p A A − p X X = 0

(4)

In equations (3) and (4), T is the fixed time endowment, Tw represents working hours, W is the
wage rate, and ti and pi are fixed time and money inputs for per unit of commodities. We assume
that t A > tC because A is a time intensive commodity.
The Lagrangian condition can be expressed as:

L = U [ H (C , A, Tw ; Z1 , Z 2 , ε ), C , A, X ; Z1 ] + λ (T − Tw − t c C − t A A − t X X )
+ γ (WTw − pC C − p A A − p X X )

(5)

In this model, individuals maximize their utility by choosing the amount of commodities they
consume subject to both constraints. First order conditions for these choices are:
∂U
∂U ∂H
= λtC + γpC −
∂C
∂H ∂C
∂U
∂U ∂H
(b) :
= λt A + γp A −
∂A
∂H ∂A
∂U
(c ) :
= λt X + γp X
∂X
(d ) : T − Tw − t c C − t A A − t X X = 0
(a ) :

(6)

(e) : WTw − pC C − p A A − p X X = 0

As shown in equations (6a) and (6b), health-related commodities A and C have both a direct and
an indirect effect on utility. The indirect effect works through the effects of these commodities on
health. The way we have written these first order conditions makes the indirect effect of
consumption part of the marginal cost of consumption (i.e., right hand side of first order
condition). For health-related commodities that positively affect health, for example, physical

10

activity, the health effect of greater consumption of these goods lowers the marginal cost of
consumption. For commodities that adversely affect health, for example, cigarette smoking, the
health effect of greater consumption of these commodities raises the marginal cost. In general,
the marginal benefit (utility) from greater consumption of these commodities is equal to the
marginal cost, which includes the money and time price of consumption, and the health effect.
Solving the first-order conditions in (6) yields reduced-form demand functions for A, C,
and X of the general form:

Yi = Di ( PC , PA , PX , tC , t A , t X ,W , TW , Z1 , Z 2 , ε )
i = A, C , X

(7)

Equation (7) indicates that the demand for health-related commodities (health behaviors A and C)
will depend on prices (PC, PA, PX ), time inputs for consumption of A, C and X (tC , t A , t X ) , wages
(W), hours of work (Tw), personal characteristics (Z1), environmental factors (Z2), and the health
endowment (ε).
To assess the impact of a recession, we focus on the two budget constraints in (6d) and
(6e). Changes in economic activity may affect both the wage and hours of work. A change in the
wage will have only an income effect because the consumer cannot (voluntarily) adjust hours in
response to the wage change (by assumption, which is consistent with idea that hours are rationed
in the short run). The absence of a price (substitution) effect associated with the wage implies
that consumption of all commodities (normal goods) will be positively associated with the wage.
So a recession that decreases wages (income) will result in a decline in consumption of A, C and
X.

11

The business cycle will also affect hours. For example, a recession will decrease hours of
work and income, even if wage rates remain unaffected. So the changes in hours may also be
positively associated with consumption of A, C and X because of an income effect. However, a
change in hours of work changes the time available for other consumption. A decrease in hours,
for example because of a recession, will cause the consumer to increase their consumption of
some commodities (i.e., reallocate their time spent in other consumption). This time effect may
offset the decrease in consumption associated with the income effect of a decrease in hours, so the
net effect on each commodity associated with changes in hours of work is ambiguous. Therefore,
the impact of changes in time constraint depends on individual preferences and time spent on the
consumption of these commodities.
The time-intensive nature of the good is likely to play a role. A decrease in hours of
work is likely to be associated with an increase in consumption of goods that are relatively time
intensive and a decrease in consumption of goods that are relatively less time intensive. In sum,
this simple model predicts that changes in wages caused by changes in economic activity will be
positively related to consumption of A, C and X (if they are normal goods), and that changes in
hours of work (employment) caused by changes in economic activity may be positively or
negatively related to consumption of A, C and X. For example, goods for which consumption is
relatively time intensive will tend to increase during recessions and goods for which consumption
is not time intensive will tend to decrease during recessions.
Empirical Model Specification
The empirical counterpart to equation (7) is given by the following:

12

HBijt = α j + δ t + X ijt γ + Z jt λ + β 1 HRS ijt + β 2WAGE ijt + v ijt

(8)

In equation (8), health behavior (HB, for example alcohol) of person (i) depends on state (or
MSA) effects (α j ) , year effects (δ t ) , personal and family characteristics denoted by X, and timevarying state (or MSA) specific characteristics (Z) such as state (or MSA) cigarette or beer prices.
The two parameters of interest in equation (8) are those associated with the wage rate (WAGE)
and hours of work per week (HRS).
The wage and hours of work are likely to be endogenous due to unobserved factors that
affect labor market choices and health behaviors. For example, rates of time preference will
determine both investments in human capital (wages) and health. To address this problem, we
use an instrumental variables (IV) approach. We instrument for wages and hours using the statespecific (or MSA-specific) unemployment rate (UNEM) and industry mix (IND). Specifically,
we estimate the following first stage regressions to obtain the instrumental variables:

~
~
(a) HRSijt = α~ j + δ t + X ijtγ~ + Z jt λ + β1IND jt + β 2UNEM jt + β3 ( UNEM jt * IND jt * AGEijt ) + uijt
(b) WAGEijt = α j + δ t + X ijtγ + Z jt λ + γ 11IND + γ 2UNEM jt + γ 3 ( UNEM jt * IND jt * AGEijt ) + eijt

(9)

In equations (9a) and (9b), the instruments for the wage and working hours are the unemployment
rate (UNEM), industry mix (IND), and the interaction between unemployment, industry mix and
age categories. Note that we have denoted reduced form parameters with the symbols ~ and -.
The IV approach is almost perfectly suited for the objectives of this study. Changes in
hours of work and wages in response to changes in economic activity will yield estimates of the
local average treatment effect (LATE) of wages and hours on health behaviors. This is exactly
the effect of interest because the objective of this paper is to identify the causal mechanisms that

13

link recessions (and expansions) to health behaviors. And this is exactly what the IV (LATE)
approach yields. The challenge in this case is to justify the exclusion restrictions of the
instrumental variables by appropriate use of conditioning variables.
As equation (7) indicates, prices of other goods may affect health behaviors and prices
may be correlated with economic activity, which would violate the exclusion restriction.
Unfortunately, in practice, it is difficult to measure many prices. However, prices of goods are
determined primarily at the national level rather than at the local level. We control for national
trends in prices using year fixed effects. Further, state or MSA level fixed effects are included in
the regression model to control for time-invariant differences in prices across geographic
locations. Therefore the major threat to the validity of the instruments is state (or MSA) time
varying changes in prices. In order to address this issue, state cigarette and alcohol prices (or
taxes) are included in all specifications, which are the most likely prices to change in response to
changes in the economy given the prominent role of sin taxes in states’ fiscal plans (e.g., Kubik &
Moran 2003).
Changes in economic activity would also affect local environmental factors (Z2), for
example, air quality or vehicle miles traveled per capita, but these are unlikely to affect individual
health behaviors. Nevertheless, in some models we include controls for these local time-varying
factors so as to provide a sensible test for the exclusion restriction of instruments.
Finally, it is reasonable to assume that genetic endowments and time inputs per unit of
commodities (ti) are unrelated to changes in economic activity. Even if advances in technology
change time inputs associated with consumption of goods, these advances in technology are

14

unlikely to be correlated with changes in local economic activity. We recognize that there may be
some ability for persons to alter the time spent consuming different commodities in response to
changes in wages and hours of work, but data limits our ability to fully address this problem. In
sum, while it is possible that omitted variables would render the exclusion restrictions non-valid,
it is plausible that conditional on wages, hours of work and the variables just described, changes
in economic activity as measured by our instruments are plausibly excludable from the health
behavior models.
The efficacy of the IV procedure also depends on whether the instruments are sufficiently
correlated with individual wage rates and working hours. Not surprisingly, there is considerable
evidence that working hours (and employment) are highly correlated with local economic
conditions. The strong positive association between local unemployment rates and working hours
is quite mechanical since higher state unemployment rates suggest more people having zero
working hours (the extensive margin of working hours). In addition, a substantial literature has
documented that conditional on working, average working hours are also sensitive to local
economic activities—the intensive margin of employment (Oi 1962; Freeman 1990; Hoynes
1999; Solon et al. 1994; Bartik 1996; Bradbuty 2000; Freeman 2001; Messemer 2004; Couch &
Fairlie, 2005). For example, Bartik (1996) found that both wages and annual hours worked are
correlated with local employment growth, and the effects are more pronounced for the loweducated.
The relationship between real wages and economic activity has been long debated.
However, most studies of the issue find that real wages in United States are pro-cyclical, and this

15

trend is more pronounced for the low-educated (Raisian 1983; Bils 1985; Keane et al. 1988,
Blank 1989; Blank 1990; Freeman 1990; Blanchard et al. 1992; Solon et al. 1994; Bartik 1994;
Abraham & Haltiwanger 1995; Bartik 1996; Hoynes 1999; Ziliak et al. 1999; Freeman 2001;
Bowlus et al. 2002; Liu 2003; Messemer 2004).
Brechling (1967) suggests the local unemployment rates, at any given time, can be
separated into two components: an industrial structure and a cyclical component. Therefore, the
industry mix, as measured by the distribution of state employment by industry, can have a
mediating influence on the effect of economic recessions on hours for work and income. Park
and Hewings (2003) reported that 40 percent of the variation in state employment can be
explained by the industry mix. In addition, Attaran (1986) found that state industrial diversity is
highly associated with per capita income. Consistent with the theoretical and empirical evidence
described above, estimates of the first stage, which are presented below, show a significant
correlation between the instruments and individual wages and hours of work.
The interaction terms of local industry mix and unemployment rates in equations (9a) and
(9b) are meant to capture the different responses in labor demand of various industries when they
confront same changes in local economic activity. Substantial evidence has been provided to
show that local industry mix can have a substantial effect on the cyclical sensitivity of
unemployment rates (Van Duijn 1975; Browne 1978a; Browne 1978b; Hyclak & Lynch 1980;
Forrest & Naisbitt 1988; Malizia & Ke 1993; Park & Hewings 2003; Moscarini & Postel-Vinay
2009). One of the possible explanations is that industries in a diverse economy may experience
fluctuations at different severity and timing (Malizia & Ke 1993). For example, the labor demand

16

of the manufacturing sectors may be more sensitive to economic recessions and response quicker
than the services sectors (Park & Hewings 2003) or labor demand of large firms is more sensitive
than that of small ones to economic recessions (Moscarini & Postel-Vinay 2009). As a result,
employment gains in some industries may mute the reductions of employment in other industries
so as to serve as a buffer to general changes in economic activity
We allow the effect of unemployment by industry to differ by age. This specification is
motivated by the theoretical and empirical literature that has documented that the cyclical
volatility of hours of work is U-shaped as a function of age (Becker 1975, Clark & Summers
1981, Ríos-Rull 1996, Gomme, et al. 2004, Hansen & Imrohoroglu 2007, Jaimovich & Siu 2009).
The employment and hours of work of the young are much more variable than that of prime-aged
people over the business cycle, while those closer to retirement ages experience the volatility
somewhere in between. For example, Jaimovich and Siu (2009) have shown that when averaged
across G7 countries the standard deviation of cyclical employment fluctuations for the 15 to 19
years old was nearly six times greater than that of the 40 to 49 years old. Similarly, the average
employment volatility of the 60 to 64 years old was about three times greater than that of the 40
to 49 years old.
Sample Selection Bias
As is well known, analyses of the determinants of wages usually face a potential bias
because wages of those not working are unobserved. Often this is referred to as a sample
selection bias—those who work are not a random sample of the population (Heckman 1979). In
this research, the selection issue is minimized because we focus on a sample of men in prime

17

working age (25 to 55). More importantly, the conceptual model is one in which there are no
substitution effects associated with the wage. Consumers are involuntarily off of their labor
supply curve because of changes in economic activity. Therefore, the wage only has an income
effect. This implies that the correct measure to use is the observed wage including zeros.
Other Statistical Issues
Due to data limitations, estimates of the effects of wage and hours of work on health
behaviors are obtained by using the two-sample instrumental variables approach (TSIV). This
approach has been used in previous studies that faced similar data limitations (Bjorklund & Jantti
1997; Currie & Yelowtiz 2000; Dee & Evans 2003; Borjas 2004: Kaushal 2007). This is also an
appealing approach for the study because, as far as we know, there are no publicly available data
that contain detailed information on income, hours of work, and health behaviors. The TSIV
approach is able to overcome this data limitation. Specifically, the determinants of wage and
hours of work per week in the first stage (equation 9a and 9b) are estimated by using samples
from the Current Population Survey. In the second stage, the effects of changes in these factors
on health behaviors are obtained by including the predicted values of wages and hours per week
for the samples from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System and the National Health
Interview Survey. A more detailed description of data is provided in the next section. Standard
errors in the second stage need to take into account the predicted nature of these variables. Here,
we obtain standard errors by bootstrapping method.
Data

18

Data for the study come from the Current Population Study (CPS), the Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The
CPS is used to estimate the effects of economic activity on wages and working hours. The
BRFSS and the NHIS are used in the second stage to estimate the effect of wages and working
hours on health behaviors. Demographic variables common to all three datasets include
respondents’ education attainment (less than high school, high school graduate, some college),
family structure (married, single and other), race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic
Black, Hispanic), and age. The sample is limited to males ages 25 to 55 with some college
education or less. We focus on low-educated persons because of their greater labor market
sensitivity to the business cycle.
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
Data on health behaviors from the BRFSS are from years 1984 to 2005. The BRFSS is
administered by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The BRFSS is an on-going
annual telephone survey of persons age 18 and over. Fifteen states participated in the survey in
the starting year, 1984, and this number grew to 33 in 1987, 45 in 1990, 50 in 1994 and all 51
states, including Washington, DC in 1996. 7
Three health behaviors are derived from the BRFSS: cigarette smoking, alcohol use, and
physical activity. Two measures of cigarette consumption are constructed: one dichotomous
variable for the extensive margin of use, current smoker, and one for the intensity of use: an

7

To address concerns about the unbalanced panel data in BRFSS, since early waves only contain data from
15 states, we replicate our estimates with BRFSS data from 1987 to 2005. Estimates are discussed below.

19

indictor for smoking 20 or more cigarettes per day. Those who never smoked or who smoked
less than 100 cigarettes in their lives have a value of zero. Three measures of alcohol use are
constructed: any alcohol use in the last 30 days, any binge drinking (five or more drinks per
occasion) in the last 30 days, and an indicator for having 60 or more drinks in the last 30 days,
which captures participation in “chronic” drinking (Dee 2001; Ruhm and Black 2002). Measures
of physical activity from the BRFSS are not consistent throughout the time period. For this
reason, we adopt a dichotomous indicator, physical activity, which is equal to one if the
respondent reported any physical activity or exercises in last 30 days. Table 1 presents the
summary statistics for the samples from the BRFSS from 1984 to 2005.
National Health Interview Survey
The National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), which is conducted by National Center
for Health Statistics (NCHS), is designed to be the major source of information on the health of
the civilian non-institutionalized population of the U.S. Because the smallest geographic
identifiers available in the NHIS public used data are large metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs),
the NHIS samples used for the empirical analysis are limited to those from these MSAs, as are the
matched CPS samples from 1976 to 2001. 8
The NHIS is used to obtain measures of health care use. We use the number of doctor
visits in the past 12 months. 9 The measures of doctor visits, while extremely useful, are worthy
8

More recent information could not be used, however, because geographic identifiers (beyond the census
region) have been omitted from the public-use files after 2001.
9
The wording of this question changes during this time period. From 1976-1996, the respondents were
simply asked about “doctor visits in past 12 month”, In the waves from 1997-1999, the respondents were
directed to report their visits to both doctor and other health care professionals about their own health.
Moreover, they were asked to exclude their hospital overnights, visits to emergency rooms, home visits and

20

of some discussion. Changes in number of doctor visits are associated with behavioral responses,
for example people may reduce their doctor visits when facing tight work schedules. However,
doctor visits also reflect health, which may change with the business cycle. One strategy to
address this issue would be focusing on whether a person had few visits, which may minimize the
influences from health status. Therefore, in this study, we create two dichotomous variables for
doctor visits in the past 12 month, having any doctor visits (the variable equals one if the
respondent had one or more doctor visits in the past 12 months) and having two or more doctor
visits (the variable equal one if the respondent had two or more doctor visits in the past 12
months). Table 2 presents the summary statistics for the samples from the BRFSS from 1984 to
2005 and the NHIS from 1976 to 2001.
Current Population Survey
The CPS March file is widely used in economic studies of wages and hours. The key
variables used in this study are individual wage rate and hours of work per week. The wage rate
is constructed from information on wage and salary income, weeks worked and usual working
hours per week in the preceding year. 10
Unemployment Rates and Industry Mix
The indicators for local economic activity are the annual state- or MSA-specific
unemployment rate and industry mix (the distributions of employment by industry) for the

telephone calls. Since 2000, the respondents were told specifically to exclude dental visits, in addition to
the exclusions above.
10
All nominal monetary terms are converted to 1982-1984 U.S. Dollars using the all-items consumer price
index.

21

civilian non-institutionalized population (aged 16 years and over). 11 Measures on annual state
unemployment rates and state industry mix come from BLS and the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA), while unemployment rates and industry mix for large MSAs from1975 to 2000
come from CPS March file. 12 State industry mix from 1983-2004 is constructed as the
percentages of wage and salary disbursements paid by industry, which is provided by the BEA in
Regional Economic Accounts, while state unemployment rates for the same time period come
from the BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) Database. 13
Cigarette and Alcohol: Prices and Taxes
In order to control for changes in tobacco and alcohol prices we include cigarette taxes,
cigarette prices, beer taxes, and beer prices in the regression models. Data on state cigarette taxes
and prices from 1976 to 2005 are from the Tax Burden on Tobacco (Orzechowski & Walker
2006). Cigarette prices are weighted average prices per package in a state. Data on state beer
taxes for the same time period comes from various issues of the U.S. Brewers’ Association
Brewer’s Almanac, while state beer prices come from the Cost of Living Index (COLI), which is
published quarterly by the American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association (ACCRA
1984–2003). State annual beer prices generated from ACCRA are averaged prices of surveyed

11

In Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), there are 11 SIC industry divisions, including Agriculture,
Forestry, and Fishing; Mining; Construction; Manufacturing; Transportation, Communication and Public
Utilities; Wholesale Trade; Retail Trade; Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate; Services; and Public
Administration.11 In this study, we collapsed the wholesale trade industry with the retail trade industry.
12
Because unemployment rates at large MSAs provided by the BLS only go back to 1990s and industry
mix generated from the BEA Regional Economic Accounts can only go back to 1998, annual
unemployment rates and industry mix for the large metropolitan areas from 1975 to 2000 are generated
from CPS, using both male and female individual observations aged from 18 to 70.
13
See (http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/outside.jsp?survey=la.. Since individual wage and salary income and hours
of work reported in the CPS March file are from the preceding year (t-1), we match the state unemployment
rates and the distribution of employment by industry from the preceding year (t-1) to these measures.

22

cities in a state. 14 Data on cigarette and beer taxes in the large metropolitan areas from 1976-2001
are constructed from state taxes, weighted by the proportion of the MSA population in each state,
if applicable. 15
Vehicle Miles Traveled, Highway Fatality and Air Pollutants
State vehicle miles traveled per capita (VMT) from 1984 to 2005, as well as highway
fatalities and air pollution measures in large MSA levels from 1976 to 2001 were also obtained.
These variables are included in some regression models to control for local time-varying factors
and to assess the exogeneity of the instrumental variables. Specifically, state VMT per capita is
provided by National Center for Statistics and Analysis (NCSA) of National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA). The annual county-level highway fatality data comes from the
Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS), NCSA, while the county-level air pollutant
measurements are constructed from annual summaries of key measurements from each monitor

14

Creating state level measures of beer prices from ACCRA may be subject to measurement error. First,
COLI is designed to provide measures of living cost differences among urban areas. Therefore, state rural
areas are not included for this survey. Second, survey areas of COLI change from quarter to quarter since
city’s chamber of commerce may not consistently agree to participate the survey. As a result, COLI is not
able to provide a national or even state representative sample across the years. In addition, data collection
vary brands, packs, containers, and excluding container deposits.
15
The NHIS changed MSA definitions in 1984 and 1995 and the CPS changed their MSA definitions in
1985 and 1996 to accommodate the revisions of the MSA definitions by the Office of Management and
Budget. In addition, some large metropolitan areas may cross state borders; 13 out of the 46 MSAs in our
sample contain counties from different states during 1995 to 2001. In that case, the population weighted
MSA cigarette or beer taxes are created, by using the 1990 state population living in these MSAs as
weights. Consequently, the population weights of a MSA may be different during the three time periods,
1976-1984, 1985-1994 and 1995-2001, due to the changes in the metropolitan area definitions.
Specifically, we generate the MSA taxes for cigarette and beer using the following equation:
n
 p


MTax jtk = ∑  ik
 STtaxit  , where MTax denotes the population weighted taxes in MSA j, year t and
p
jk 
i =1 


time period k, Pik is the population from 1990 census in state i living in MSA j at period k, Pjk is the
population of MSA j at period k, STtax is the state taxes for cigarette or beer in state i and year t. k stands
for three time periods (1976-1984, 1985-1994 and 1995-2001) with different MSA definitions.

23

provided by AirData, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 16 By using the similar
procedure as creating the population weighted MSA taxes, the county-population weighted MSA
highway fatalities and air pollutions are generated, which are included in the analysis at large
MSA level.
TSIV Results
The primary goal of this paper is to obtain estimates of the effect of wages and working
hours on health behaviors using the variations in these factors caused by changes in economic
activity. To obtain estimates that can be plausibly interpreted as causal effects, we adopt a TSIV
approach. Specifically, local unemployment rates and industry mix are the instrumental variables
for wages and working hours. Estimates from the first stage (equations 8a and 8b) are provided
in Appendix Table 1. Specifically, the appendix table show estimates associated with the
instruments from models predicting wage rates and hours of work using the CPS for years 1984
to 2005 (BRFSS analysis) and 1976 to 2001 (NHIS analysis). At the bottom of Appendix Table
1, partial F-statistics for the excluded instruments are presented. Estimates indicate that both state
(or MSA) unemployment rates and industry mix are significant determinants of wage rates and
hours of work per week of the low-educated, with the joint F-statistics between of 6.9 and 26.4
depending on the sample. 17
16

The annual summaries provided by AirData include five “criteria” pollutants, carbon monoxide (CO),
ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), lead (Pb) and total suspended particulates (TSP). we focus on CO level
during this time period in this study, since previous studies suggest that high level of CO is associated with
infant mortality, school absences and asthma (Neidell 2004; Currie & Neidell 2005; Currie et al. 2009). We
also take sensitivity analyses on ozone, which provide the same results.
17
Since the variables associated with the number of cigarettes smoked are only available from 1984 to
2000, a separate set of first stage regressions is performed to accommodate the requirement of TSIV. The
joint F-statistics of 8.4 and 23.8 are obtained for the equation of wage rates and hours of work respectively
and for the sub-sample, they are 7.7 and 11.8.

24

Panel A in Table 3 presents our primary estimates of the effects of wages and hours of
work on health behaviors. The first three columns in Panel A provide strong and consistent
evidence that both wages and hours of work are positively associated with cigarette smoking.
These estimates are obtained using linear probability models. The results in column 1 suggest that
a one-dollar increase in the real wage rate is associated with a 1.2 percentage point increase,
corresponding to 3.5-percent, in smoking prevalence. On the other hand, a one hour increase in
hours of work per week is associated with a 0.8 percentage point (two percent) increase in
smoking prevalence. Moreover, the results in columns 2 and 3 indicate that both wage and hours
of work are also associated with smoking intensity. A one-dollar increase in the real wage rate is
associated with an increase in the probability of having 10 or more cigarettes daily of 0.5
percentage points, and one hour increase in hours of work per week is associated with an increase
in the probability of having 10 or more cigarettes daily of 1.9 percentage points. These estimates
are consistent with findings from Ruhm (2000, 2005) and provide evidence that cigarette smoking
is pro-cyclical.
Columns 4 through 6 in Panel A present estimates of the effects of wage and hours of
work on alcohol use and abuse. We do not find evidence that wages and working hours have
significant impact on alcohol use or “chronic” use. Both point estimates and statistical
significance are quite small for the drinking participation and intensity measures. The effect of
working hours on binge drinking participation is the exception. The results suggest that working
hours are negatively associated with binge drinking participation, although the magnitude is quite

25

small; a one hour increase in hours per week is associated with a 0.4 percentage point decrease in
probability of binge drinking.
The effects of wage and hours of work on leisure time physical activity is reported in
column 7. Admittedly, this is a limited measure of physical activity. Estimates indicate that
longer working hours are negatively associated with physical activity participation. The effect,
however, is quite small, given the fact that over 70 percent of the sample had some kind of leisure
time exercises in the past month. The probability of engaging in any physical activity in past
month would decline by 0.4 percentage points, a corresponding 0.6% reduction, if the average
working hours per week increased for an hour. In general, our estimates provide evidence
suggesting a counter-cyclical variation in physical activity, which is consistent with findings in
Ruhm (2000, 2005) and Dustmann & Windmeijer (2000). In addition, we show that such impact
on physical activity mainly due to time effect, rather than income effect.
Estimates associated with doctor visits in the preceding year are presented in last two
columns of Table 3. No wage effect is found for both measures. Estimated wage effects are small
and statistically insignificant. On the other hand, estimates of the effects of working hours
suggest that the number of doctor visits in the preceding year is negatively associated with
working hours. Specifically, estimates indicate that one extra working hour per week would
decrease the probability of having at least one doctor visit in the past 12 months (having two or
more doctor visits) in the preceding year by 1.5 (3.0) percent. These effects are relatively large
and statistically significant. They indicate that the number of doctor visits exhibits a countercyclical variation.

26

In sum, the results in Panel A of Table 3 suggest that changes in both the wage and hours
of work associated with local economic activity have significant associations with health
behaviors. Specifically, estimates indicate that both doctor visits and leisure-time physical
activity are counter-cyclical mainly because of changes in working hours, while both cigarette
smoking prevalence and smoking intensity exhibit pro-cyclical variation, which are affected by
changes in income and hours. More importantly, these findings suggest that the effects of
changes in working hours may have different influences on time-intensive behaviors such as
binge drinking, visits to physician and physical activity than on less time-intensive behaviors such
as cigarette smoking.
In order to distinguish between effects of changes in hours of work on the extensive
margin of employment from the total effect of hours (extensive and intensive), we replaced hours
of work with a dichotomous indicator of employment status, and re-estimated the models in Panel
A of Table 3. These estimates are reported in Panel B. By comparing estimates of changes in
employment status with estimates of changes in average working hours, we can identify which
aspect (intensive or extensive) of hours of work is associated with health behaviors. In Panel C of
Table 3, the effect of a 2.5-percent change in employment is also reported. This is relevant
because the average hours of work per week are approximately 40. Thus, a one-hour change in
average working hours can be brought about by a 2.5-percent change in total employment (and no
change in hours for those who work). In this case, the effect from changes of the extensive margin
of employment (changes in employment status) can be separated from the effect associated with
changes of the intensive margin of employment (changes in hours of work).

27

Estimates of the effect of employment status in Panel B have the same signs and pattern of
statistical significance as estimates of hours of work in Panel A. Moreover, a comparison of
estimates in Panel C with those in Panel A indicate that, on average, a 2.5 percent increase in
individual employment is associated with the same magnitude of changes in health behaviors as a
one hour change in average hours of work per week. Specifically, a 2.5 percent increase in
employment is associated with:
•

an increase in smoking participation (cigarette smoking intensity measures) of 1

(2-2.5) percentage point;
•

a decrease in binge drinking participation of 0.2 percentage points;

•

a decrease in leaisure time physical activity of 0.5 percentage points;

•

and a decrease the any and number of doctor visits of 1.5 percentage points.

By comparing these estimates with the estimates of an extra hour of work in Panel A, it is clear
that changes in individual employment status are the major reason for changes in health behaviors
during economic fluctuations.
Sensitivity Analyses
Sensitivity analyses have been performed in order to investigate the robustness of our
primary findings. 18 Estimates from the alternative specifications for the BRFSS samples are
reported in Table 4. The first analysis addresses potential concerns about the exogeneity of the
instrumental variables: state unemployment rates and industry mix. Because state and year fixed

18

In an analysis not presented, we replaced cigarette and beer taxes with prices, and result were same as
reported in Table 3. In anther analysis, we limited BRFSS sample to post 1987 to address the concern
about the unbalanced panel of the BRFSS. Again, we obtained similar estimates as in Table 3.

28

effects are controlled in all specifications, the primary threat to the instrument variables comes
from potentially unmeasured time-varying state level effects that may affect health behaviors of
the low-educated are correlated with changes in unemployment rates and industry mix. This issue
is investigated by adding state vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per capita to the primary
specification. The estimates of wage or hours of work per week should not change with the
inclusion if the instrumental variables are exogenous. In fact, this is the case. As estimates in
Table 4 indicate, estimates of wages and working hours are basically unchanged from those in
Table 3 when state VMT per capita are included in the model. More importantly, this finding is
not because VMT is not significantly associated with the dependent variable, it is, but because it
is more or less uncorrelated with the instrumental variables. Thus, the results from these
alternative specifications provide evidence to support the identification strategy.
Alternative specifications for the NHIS sample are also presented in Table 4 (columns 8
and 9). Two additional covariates representing time varying factors in these large MSAs are
included: population weighted highway fatality per capita and population weighted ozone levels
in these metropolitan areas. Again, estimates in Table 4 are very similar to those in Table 3.
Importantly, highway fatality per capita is highly significant, which provides additional evidence
supporting the exogeneity of the instruments.
Summary and Discussion
Previous studies provide mixed evidence on the effect of economic expansions or
recessions on health behaviors, and most of these studies take a reduced form approach. We
extend the existing literature by taking a more structural approach. We examined the effects of

29

wages and working hours on health behaviors of the low-educated using variations in these
factors caused by changes in local macroeconomic activity. We used a two-sample instrumental
variables approach to overcome data limitation and to provide estimates that can be possibly
interpreted as causal.
We find evidence that economic expansions are associated with an increase in unhealthy
behaviors; an increase in cigarette smoking, a reduction in physical activity, and fewer visits to
physicians. More importantly, we find that changes in hours of work have different associations
with time-intensive and less time-intensive goods Specifically, increases in working hours result
in greater consumption of cigarettes, which is a less time-intensive good, at both the intensive and
extensive measures, while increases in working hours have significantly negative impacts on
physical activity and doctor visits, which are consumption of time-intensive goods. We also find
that increases in wages lead to higher consumption of cigarettes, We find little evidence of an
association between employment (including both wages and working hours) and alcohol
consumption among the low-educated. All these findings are robust to alternative specifications
including adding additional state-specific (or MSA-specific) time varying controls. In addition,
we find that most of the effects associated with hours of work can be attributed to the changes in
the extensive margin of the employment rather than the intensive margin of hours of work.
An important implication of our findings is the apparent inability to smooth leisure
consumption over the business cycle and its effects on health behaviors of the low-educated. Our
results reveal that changes in employment associated with local economic activity, rather than
changes in income, has the most important impacts on health behaviors. These findings imply

30

that labor supply rationing of the low-educated during economic recessions or expansions may
have substantial effects on their health and health behaviors in the short run.

31

References
Abraham, K. G., Haltiwanger, J. C.: Real Wages and the Business Cycle. Journal of Economic
Literature 33(3); 1215-64: 1995.
Ashenfelter, O.: Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of Aggregate Labor Supply.
Econometrica 48; 547-64: 1980.
Attaran, M.: Industrial Diversity and Economic Performance in U.S. Areas. Annals of Regional
Science 20(2); 44-54: 1986.
Barrington, L.: Does a Rising Tide Lift All Boats? Washington, DC: The Conference Board,
2000.
Bartik, T. J.: The Effects of Metropolitan Job Growth on the Size Distribution of Family Income.
Journal of Regional Science 34; 483-501: 1994.
Bartik, T. J.: The Distributional Effects of Local Labor Demand and Industrial Mix: Estimates
Using Individual Panel Data. Journal of Urban Economics 40; 150-178: 1996.
Barnes M. G., Smith, T. G. : Tobacco Use as Response to Economic Insecurity: Evidence from
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy:
9(1): Article 47: 2009. Available at: http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/vol9/iss1/art47.
Beale, N., Nethercott, S.: The Nature of Unemployment Morbidity. 1. Recognition. The Journal
of the Royal College of General Practitioners 38: 197-199: 1988a.
Beale, N., Nethercott, S: The Nature of Unemployment Morbidity. 2. Description. The Journal of
the Royal College of General Practitioners 38: 200-202: 1988b.
Becker, G. S.: Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1975.
Bils, M. J.: Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data. Journal of Political
Economy 93; 666-89: 1985.
Bjorklund, A., Jantti, M.: Intergenerational Income Mobility in Sweden Compared to the United
States. American Economic Review 87(5); 1009-101: 1997.
Blanchard, O. J., Katz, L. F., Hall, R. E., Eichengreen, B.: Regional Evolution. Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1; 1-75: 1992.

32

Blank, R. M.: Disaggregating the Effect of Business Cycle on the Distribution of Income.
Economica 56; 141-63: 1989.
Blank, R. M.: Why are Wages Cyclical in the 1970s? Journal of Labor Economics 8(1); 16-47:
1990.
Bockerman, P., Johansson, E., Helakorpi, S., Prättälä, R., Vartiainen, E., Uutela, A.: Does a
Slump Really Make You Thinner? Finnish Micro-Level Evidence 1978-2002. Health Economics
16(1); 103-107: 2006.
Bockstael, N. E., Strand, I. E., Hanemann, W. M.: Time and the Recreational Demand Model.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 69(2); 293-302: 1987.
Borjas, G. J.: Food Insecurity and Public Assistance. Journal of Public Economics 88; 1421-43:
2004.
Bowlus, A., Liu, H., Robinson, C.: Business Cycle Models, Aggregation, and Real Wage
Cyclicality. Journal of Labor Economics 20(2); 308-35: 2002.
Bradbuty, K. L.: Rising the Tide in the Labor Market: To What Degree Do Expansions Benefit
the Disadvantaged. New England Economic Review 2000(May/Jun); 4-32: 2000.
Brechling, F.: Trends and Cycles in British Regional Unemployment. Oxford Economic Papers
19; 1-21: 1967.
Browne, L. E.: Regional Unemployment Rates: Why are They So Different? New England
Economic Review, 1978(Jul/Aug); 5-26: 1978a.
Browne, L. E.: Regional Industry Mix and the Business Cycle. New England Economic Review
1978(Nov/Dec); 35-53: 1978b.
Burtless, G., Hausman, J. A.: The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply: Evaluating the Gary
Negative Income Tax Experiments. Journal of Political Economy, 86(6): 1103-30: 1978.
Charles, K. K., Decicca, P. Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Health: Is There a Connection
and for Whom? Journal of Health Economics 27(6): 1532-1550; 2008.
Clark, K. B., Summers, L. H.: Demographic Differences in Cyclical Employment Variation.”
Journal of Human Resources, 16(1): 61–79: 1981.

33

Couch, K. A., Fairlie, R.: Last Hired, First Fired? Black-White Unemployment and the Business
Cycle. University of Connecticut, Department of Economics Working Paper Series; No. 2005-50:
2005.
Currie, J. and Yelowitz, A.: Are Public Housing Projects Good for Kids? Journal of Public
Economics 75; 99-124: 2000.
Currie, J., Hanushek, E., Kahn, M. E., Neidell, M., Rivkin, S.: Does Pollution Increases School
Absences? Review of Economics and Statistics 91(4): 682-94: 2009.
Currie, J., Neidell, M.: Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn from California’s
Recent Experience. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3); 1003-1030: 2005.
Davis, E. E, Bosley, S. A.: The Impact of the 1990s Economic Boom on Less-Educated Workers
in Rural America. Rural Poverty Research Center Working paper Series; No. 05-05: 2005.
D'Arcy, C: Unemployment and Health: Data and Implications. Canadian Journal of Public Health
77: 124-131: 1986.
Dee, T. S.: Alcohol Abuse and Economic Conditions: Evidence from Repeated Cross-Sections of
Individual-Level Data. Health Economics 10(3); 257-70: 2001.
Dee, T. S., Evans, W. N.: Teen Drinking and Educational Attainment: Evidence from TwoSample Instrumental Variables Estimates. Journal of Labor Economics 21(1); 178-209: 2003.
Dustmann, C., Windeijer, F.: Wages and the Demand for Health – A Lifecycle Analysis. IZA
Discussion paper; 171: 2000.
Economou, A., Nikolau, A., Theodossiou I.: Are Recessions Harmful to Health After All?
Evidence from the European Union. University of Aberdeen Business School Working Paper
Series; No. 2007-18: 2007.
Ettner, S. L.: Measuring the Human Cost of A Weak Economy: Does Unemployment Lead to
Alcohol Abuse? Social Science and Medicine 44(2); 251-60: 1997.
Freeman, D. G.: A Note on ‘Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems’. Journal of Health
Economics 18(5); 661-70: 1999.
Freeman, D. G.: Trickling Down the Rising Tide: New Estimates of the Link between Poverty
and the Macroeconomy. Southern Economic Journal 70(2); 359-373: 2003.

34

Freeman, R. B.: Employment and Earnings of Disadvantaged Young Men in a Labor Shortage
Economy. NBER Working Paper; No. 3444: 1990.
Freeman, R. B.: The Rising Tide Lifts……. NBER Working Paper; No. 8155: 2001.
Forrest, D., Naisbitt, B.: The Sensitivity of Regional Unemployment Rates to the National Trade
Cycle. Regional Studies 22(2); 149-53: 1988.
Gerdtham, U., Ruhm, C. J.: Deaths Rise in Good Economic Times: Evidence from the OECD.
Economics and Human Biology 4(3); 298-316: 2006.
Gomme, P., Rogerson, R., Rupert, P., Wright, R. The Business Cycle and the Life Cycle. In
National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual 2004. Vol. 19, ed. Mark Gertler
and Kenneth Rogoff, 415–61: 2005. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grossman, M.: On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand of Health. Journal of Political
Economy 80; 223-255: 1972.
Grossman, M.: The Human Capital Model. In: Handbook of Health Economics. A. J. Culter, J. P.
Newhouse (eds.), Vol1A, New York, NY: Elservier, 2000.
Halliday, T.: The Impact of Aggregate and Idiosyncratic Income Shocks on Health Outcomes:
Evidence from the PSID. mimeo, University of Hawaii at Manoa: 2006.
Ham, J. C.: Estimating of Labor Supply Model with Censoring Due to Unemployment. Review of
Economic Studies 49; 333-54: 1982.
Hansen, G. D., Imrohoroglu, S. Business Cycle Fluctuations and The Life Cycle: How Important
is On-the-Job Skill Accumulation? NBER Working Paper; No. 13603: 2007.
Heckman, J. J.: Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica 47(1); 153-161:
1979.
Hoynes, H.: The Unemployment, Earnings, and Income of Less Skilled Workers Over the
Business Cycle. NBER Working Paper; No7188: 1999.
Hyclak, T., Lynch, G.: An Empirical Analysis of State Unemployment Rates in the 1970s.
Journal of Regional Science 20(3); 377-86: 1980.
Jaimovich, N., Siu, H. E. The Young, the Old, and the Restless: Demographics and Business
Cycle Volatility. American Economic Review, 99(3): 804-26: 2009.

35

Johansson, E., Bockerman, P., Prattala, R., Uutela, A.: Alcohol-Related Mortality, Drinking
Behavior, and Business Cycles. The European Journal of Health Economics 7: 215-220: 2006.
Kaushal, N.: Do Food Stamps Cause Obesity? Evidence from Immigrant Experience. Journal of
Health Economics 26(5); 968-91: 2007.
Keane, M., Robert, M., Runkle, D.: Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Estimating the Impact
of Heterogeneity with Micro Data. Journal of Political Economy 96; 1232-66: 1988.
Killingsworth, M. R.: Labour Supply. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Kooreman, P. and Kapteyn, A.: Estimation of Rationed and Unrationed Household Labor Supply
Functions Using Flexible Functional Forms. Economic Journal 96(382); 398-412: 1986.
Kooreman, P., Kapteyn, A.: A Disaggregated Analysis of the Allocation of Time within the
Household. Journal of Political Economy 95(2); 223-49: 1987.
Linn, M. W., Sandifer, R. S., Stein, S.: Effects of Unemployment on Mental and Physical Health.
American Journal of Public Health 75: 502-506: 1985.
Liu, H.: A Cross-Country Comparison of the Cyclicality of Real Wages. Canadian Journal of
Economics 36(4); 923-48: 2003.
Malizia, E. E., Ke, S.: The Influence of Economic Diversity on Unemployment and Stability.
Journal of Regional Science 33(2); 221-35: 1993.
Messemer, C.: How do Permanent and Transitory Shocks to GDP Translate into Income
Inequality Across Race, Gender and Education Attainment? memio, Lewis and Clark College:
2004.
Moscarini, G., Postel-Vinay, F.: Large Employers are More Cyclically Sensitive. IZA Discussion
Paper No. 4014: 2009. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1351178.
Mullahy, J., Robert, S.: No Time to Lose? Time Constraints and Physical Activity. NBER
Working Paper Series, w14513: 2008. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1305827.
Neidell, M.: Air Pollution, Health, and Socio-Economic Status: The Effect of Outdoor Air
Quality on Childhood Asthma. Journal of Health Economics 23(6); 1209-36: 2004.

36

Neumayer, E.: Recessions Lower (Some) Mortality Rates. Social Science and Medicine 58 (6);
1037-47: 2004.
Novo, M., Hammarstrom, A., Janlert, U.: Smoking Habits: A Question of Trend or
Unemployment? A Comparison of Young Men and Women between Boom and Recession.
Public Health, 114: 460-3: 2000.
Oi, W. Y.: Labor as a Quasi-Fixed Factor. Journal of Political Economy 70(6); 538-55: 1962.
Orzechowski, W., Walker, R.: The Tax Burden on Tobacco, Volume 41. Orzechowski and
Walker, Arlington, VA, 2006.
Park, Y. and Hewings, G. J.: Does Industry Mix Matter in Regional Business Cycles? Regional
Economics Applications Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana; Discussion Paper 03-T-29:
2003.
Parker-Pope, T. Are Bad Time Healthy? New York Times, Oct. 6 2008. Available at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/07/health/07well.html?_r=1.
Pigeon, M.,Wray, R.: Did the Clinton Rising Tide Raise All Boats? Job Opportunity for the Less
Skilled. Levy Institute Public Policy Brief Series No. 45: 1998.
Prowse, V.: Estimationg Labour Supply Function Under Rationing. Mimeo, Nuffield College,
University of Oxford: 2005.
Raisian, J.: Contracts, Job Experience and Cyclical Labor Market Adjustments. Journal of Labor
Economics, 1; 152-70: 1983.
Reich, R. B.: To Lift All Boats. The Washington Post, May 16; B1: 1999.
Ríos-Rull, J. Life-Cycle Economies and Aggregate Fluctuations. Review of Economic Studies,
63(3): 465–89: 1996.
Ruhm, C. J.: Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems. Journal of Health Economics 14(5);
583-603: 1995.
Ruhm, C. J.: Are Recessions Good For Your Health? Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2);
617-50: 2000.
Ruhm, C. J.: Good Times Make You Sick. Journal of Health Economics 22(4); 637-658: 2003.

37

Ruhm, C. J.: Healthy Living in Hard Times. Journal of Health Economics 24; 341-363: 2005.
Ruhm, C. J.: A Healthy Economy Can Break Your Heart. Demography, 44(4): 829-848: 2007.
Ruhm, C. J., Black, W. E.: Does Drinking Really Decrease in Bad Times? Journal of Health
Economics 21(4); 659-78: 2002.
Solon, G., Barsky, R., Parker, J. A.: Measuring the Cyclicality of Real Wages: How Important is
Composition Bias. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(1); 1-25: 1994.
Tapia Granados, J.: Recessions and Mortality in Spain: Reconceptualizing and Empirical
Relationship. mimeo, University of Michigan: 2004.
Tapia Granados, J.: Increasing Mortality during the Expansions of the U.S. Economy, 1900-1996.
International Journal of Epidemiology 34; 1194-1202: 2005.
Wilson, W. J.: All Boats Rise. Now What? New York Times Wednesday Apr. 12th; Op-Ed page:
2000.
Yuen, P., Balarajan, R.: Unemployment and Patterns of Consultation with the General
Practitioner. British Medical Journal 298: 1212-1214: 1989.
Ziliak, J. P., Wilson, B. A., Stone, J. A.: Spatial Dynamics and Heterogeneity in the Cyclicality of
Real Wages. Review of Economics and Statistics 81(2); 227-36: 1999.

38

Table 1. Summary Statistics of the BRFSS sample: 1984-2005

Current Smoker
Having 10 or more cigarettes
Having 20 or more cigarettes

Mean
35.1
30.4
22.5

Standard Deviation
47.7
46.0
41.8

Any Alcohol Use
Any Binge Drinking
Having 60 or more Drinks

61.8
27.0
9.7

48.6
44.4
29.6

Any Physical Activity

71.1

45.3

Real Wage Rate
Hours of Work per Week

8.6
42.0

2.0
2.8

Less Than High School
High School
Some College Education
Non-Hispanic White
Non-Hispanic Black
Hispanic
Age
Married
Other
Single
Number of Observations

15.6
46.1
38.3
79.3
8.8
12.0
39.1
65.4
15.8
18.9

36.3
49.8
48.6
40.5
28.3
32.5
8.6
47.6
36.4
39.1
460,841

Notes: Data are from 1984 to 2005 years of the BRFSS. Samples are limited to non-disabled male
respondents aged 25-55 with some college education or less. Real wages rates and hours of work per
week in BRFSS are predicted by using estimates from CPS samples in the first stage.

39

Table 2. Summary Statistics of the NHIS Sample: 1976-2001
Mean

Std. Dev.

Any Doctor Visits
Two or More Doctor Visits

64.1
38.3

48.0
48.6

Real Wage Rate
Hours of Work per week

8.6
39.1

2.7
4.1

Less Than High School
24.0
42.7
High School
46.0
49.8
Some College Education
30.0
45.8
Non-Hispanic White
65.1
47.7
Non-Hispanic Black
15.7
36.4
Hispanic
19.2
39.4
Age
38.4
8.8
Married
71.6
45.1
Others
10.9
31.1
Single
17.5
38.0
Number of Observations
147,965
Notes: The NHIS samples are from waves of 1976 to 2001. Samples are limited to nondisabled male respondents aged 25-55. Real wages rates and hours of work per week in
BRFSS are predicted by using estimates from CPS samples in the first stage. In addition,
NHIS samples are restricted to large MSAs due to the limitation of geographic identifiers in
the public used data.

40

Table 3. Effects of Wages and Working Hours on Health Behaviors
Current
Smoker

Panel A
Wages
Hours of Work
Panel B
Wages
Employment
Panel C
Effect of 2.5% Increase
Employment

Smokes 10
or More
Cigarettes

Smokes 20
or More
Cigarettes

Any
Alcohol
Use

Any Binge
Drinking

Having 60
or more
Drinks

Any
Physical
Activity

Any
Doctor
Visits

>2 Doctor
Visits

a

a

(1)
0.012***
(0.002)
0.008***
(0.002)

(2)
0.005**
(0.002)
0.019***
(0.002)

(3)
0.004*
(0.002)
0.020***
(0.002)

(4)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.002)

(5)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.004*
(0.002)

(6)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

(7)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.004**
(0.002)

(8)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.010***
(0.002)

(9)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.012***
(0.002)

0.014***
(0.002)
0.348***
(0.117)

0.008***
(0.002)
0.883***
(0.142)

0.007***
(0.002)
1.047***
(0.124)

-0.006*
(0.003)
0.034
(0.158)

-0.003
(0.002)
-0.075
(0.147)

-0.002
(0.001)
-0.018
(0.079)

-0.002
(0.003)
-0.189
(0.176)

-0.002
(0.002)
-0.586***
(0.139)

-0.002
(0.002)
-0.611***
(0.119)

0.009

0.022

0.026

0.001

-0.002

-0.000

-0.005

-0.015

-0.015

Mean
0.351
0.304
0.225
0.618
0.270
0.097
0.711
0.641
0.383
Number of Obs.
460,841
259,315
259,315
390,295
385,659
383,018
390,769
146,536
147,965
Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors, calculated assuming that observations are independent across years and states but not within states in a given
year, are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions contain controls for demographic variables, including education,
age, race/ethnicity, and marital status. Other covariates include local cigarette and beer taxes, state (or MSA) and year fixed effects. (a) Variables
associated with number of cigarettes smoked daily are only available from 1984-2000.
.

41

Table 4. Effects of Wages and Working Hours on Health Behaviors: Sensitivity Analyses
Current
Smoker

Wage
Hours of Work

(1)
0.012***
(0.002)
0.008***
(0.002)

Smokes 10
or More
Cigarettes

Smokes 20
or More
Cigarettes

a

a

(2)
0.006**
(0.002)
0.019***
(0.002)

(3)
0.005**
(0.002)
0.020***
(0.002)

Any
Alcohol
Use

Any Binge
Drinking

Having 60
or more
Drinks

Any
Physical
Activity

Any
Doctor
Visits

>2 Doctor
Visits

(4)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.002)

(5)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.004**
(0.002)

(6)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

(7)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.004*
(0.002)

(8)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.011***
(0.002)

(9)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.013***
(0.002)

VMT per capita

0.001**
0.001**
0.001
0.000
0.001***
0.000**
0.001**
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Highway Fatality
0.000***
0.000**
(0.000)
(0.000)
Ozone
0.228
0.365
(0.283)
(0.314)
Number of Obs.
460,841
259,315
259,315
390,295
385,659
383,018
390,769
146,536
147,965
Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors, calculated assuming that observations are independent across years and states but not within states in a given
year, are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions contain controls for demographic variables, including education,
age, race/ethnicity, and marital status. Other covariates include local cigarette and beer taxes, state (or MSA) and year fixed effects. (a) Variables
associated with number of cigarettes smoked daily are only available from 1984-2000.

42

Appendix Table 1. First Stage Estimates Using the CPS Samples

Construction
Financial
Manufacturing
Mining
Trade
Transportation &
Utilities
Agriculture
Services
Unem.*Pub.*Age4
Unem.*Con.*Age4
Unem.*Fin.*Age4
Unem.*Man.*Age4
Unem.*Min.*Age4
Unem.*Trade*Age4
Unem.*Tran.*Age4
Unem.*Agri*Age4
Unem.*Sev.*Age4
Unem.*Pub.*Age3
Unem.*Con.*Age3
Unem.*Fin.*Age3
Unem.*Man.*Age3
Unem.*Min.*Age3

For the BRFSS samples from
1984 to 2005
Wage Rates
Hours of Work
15.062
13.759
(12.889)
(8.949)
-2.607
13.166**
(9.131)
(6.531)
-5.111
4.074
(8.520)
(5.168)
30.021*
20.309*
(17.610)
(10.741)
12.836
20.563***
(21.754)
(7.803)
-20.377
-0.264
(20.969)
-32.699
(69.610)
-3.930
(9.685)
0.650
(0.499)
1.282
(1.602)
0.483
(0.809)
1.023**
(0.480)
-1.436
(1.876)
-3.445
(2.559)
4.010
(3.959)
-2.835
(7.044)
-0.756*
(0.426)
-0.494
(0.626)
-1.244
(2.846)
-1.658
(1.184)
0.352
(0.599)
-3.345
(2.944)

(10.958)
-42.737
(33.472)
0.499
(5.624)
-0.460
(0.441)
-2.207*
(1.317)
-1.381*
(0.748)
0.480**
(0.240)
-1.511
(0.923)
-2.098**
(1.057)
2.596
(1.735)
13.692***
(4.477)
-0.969***
(0.345)
-0.633*
(0.379)
-0.335
(1.140)
-1.073
(0.742)
0.424*
(0.218)
-1.868**
(0.826)

For the NHIS samples from 1976
to 2001
Wage Rates
Hours of Work
73.197
68.188***
(76.228)
(22.424)
127.752
10.442
(130.004)
(16.667)
120.910
25.471*
(123.857)
(13.746)
93.289
19.514
(100.829)
(14.592)
103.243
15.747
(111.541)
(14.198)
97.927
16.861
(105.736)
104.476
(106.567)
108.253
(116.399)
12.425
(10.537)
6.848
(5.449)
-2.762
(3.240)
-0.535
(0.762)
0.556
(2.183)
-0.060
(0.758)
1.418
(1.967)
0.290
(0.764)
-1.672
(1.483)
11.902
(10.647)
7.016
(5.306)
-5.104
(3.726)
-0.487
(0.759)
1.441
(2.208)

(14.243)
22.473*
(13.407)
9.485
(15.092)
2.726
(2.470)
-5.791**
(2.937)
0.478
(1.533)
-0.378
(0.268)
-1.288
(1.150)
-0.563
(0.665)
0.181
(1.400)
-0.242
(0.447)
0.319
(1.003)
1.360
(2.091)
-6.330**
(2.671)
1.970
(1.323)
-0.248
(0.257)
-0.999
(1.038)

43

Unem.*Trade*Age3

-2.139
-2.382**
0.566
-0.430
(2.089)
(0.927)
(0.749)
(0.577)
Unem.*Tran.*Age3
9.651
3.203**
-0.276
-0.673
(7.315)
(1.527)
(2.085)
(1.214)
Unem.*Agri *Age3
-8.061
12.130***
0.434
-0.274
(11.219)
(3.647)
(0.688)
(0.395)
Unem.*Sev.*Age3
0.546
-0.368
-0.760
1.441
(0.662)
(0.316)
(1.578)
(0.923)
Unem.*Pub.*Age2
0.059
-1.178***
2.465
2.263
(0.497)
(0.398)
(4.618)
(2.254)
Unem.*Con.*Age2
0.395
-2.692**
5.321
-1.432
(1.592)
(1.198)
(3.878)
(2.532)
Unem.*Fin.*Age2
-0.642
-1.482**
-1.418
1.289
(0.694)
(0.707)
(2.488)
(1.289)
Unem.*Man.*Age2
0.889*
0.237
-0.139
0.596**
(0.470)
(0.214)
(0.746)
(0.291)
Unem.*Min.*Age2
-1.756
-1.398*
0.632
0.389
(1.901)
(0.793)
(1.429)
(1.213)
Unem.*Trade*Age2
-3.010
-1.668*
-0.635
-0.518
(2.392)
(0.983)
(1.203)
(0.608)
Unem.*Tran.*Age2
5.171
2.589
-1.591
0.054
(3.836)
(1.624)
(2.098)
(1.293)
Unem.*Agri *Age2
1.524
12.184***
0.784
-1.272***
(6.979)
(3.529)
(1.527)
(0.407)
Unem.*Sev.*Age2
0.046
0.379
1.059
4.239***
(0.417)
(0.334)
(1.006)
(0.853)
Unem.*Pub.*Age1
-0.214
-1.407***
9.487
2.040
(0.494)
(0.441)
(10.459)
(2.506)
Unem.*Con.*Age1
1.195
-3.968***
5.789
-7.376***
(1.631)
(1.180)
(4.853)
(2.748)
Unem.*Fin.*Age1
-0.880
-2.388***
-3.742
1.628
(0.723)
(0.777)
(3.714)
(1.525)
Unem.*Man.*Age1
0.713
0.287
-0.160
0.851***
(0.465)
(0.233)
(0.818)
(0.322)
Unem.*Min.*Age1
-1.318
-1.174
1.037
0.655
(1.916)
(0.837)
(1.896)
(1.487)
Unem.*Trade*Age1
-2.796
-1.224
0.357
-0.452
(2.400)
(1.049)
(0.741)
(0.716)
Unem.*Tran.*Age1
4.241
2.025
1.078
2.041
(3.895)
(1.722)
(1.718)
(1.421)
Unem.*Agri *Age1
4.808
12.730***
-0.702
-2.393***
(7.042)
(3.917)
(0.621)
(0.473)
Unem.*Sev.*Age1
0.079
0.319
-0.466
4.007***
(0.432)
(0.347)
(1.464)
(0.958)
F statistics
8.9
26.4
6.7
12.3
N
506,753
506,753
216,113
216,113
Notes: Robust standard errors, calculated assuming that observations are independent across years
and states but not within states in a given year, are reported in parentheses.*** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. Both regressions include controls for demographic variables, such as education,
age, race/ethnicity, and marital status. For the BRFSS sample, other covariates include state

44

cigarette taxes, beer taxes, state and year fixed effects and for the NHIS sample, other covariates
include MSA cigarette taxes, beer taxes, MSA and year fixed effects. Age1: age group for 25-29;
Age2: age group for 30-39; Age3: age group for 40-49; Age4: age group for 50-55.

45

