                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     VINTAGE CAPITAL AND CREDITOR PROTECTION

                                         Efraim Benmelech
                                         Nittai K. Bergman

                                        Working Paper 15735
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15735


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2010




We thank Marios Angeletos, Douglas Baird, Lucian Bebchuk, Guido Imbens, Boyan Jovanovic, Florencio
Lopez-de- Silanes, Giacomo Ponzetto, Adriano Rampini, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Columbia Law School, Duke, the European Summer Symposium in Financial
Markets, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Harvard Economics, Harvard Law School, London Business
School, London School of Economics, Northwestern, Ohio State University, Stanford, Stockholm
School of Economics, Tilburg University, 2008 WFA meetings in Waikoloa, University of Alberta,
University of Amsterdam, and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Yale Law School.
We also thank Robert Grundy and Phil Shewring from Airclaims Inc. Alex Radu and Kate Waldock
provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Vintage Capital and Creditor Protection
Efraim Benmelech and Nittai K. Bergman
NBER Working Paper No. 15735
February 2010
JEL No. E22,E44,G32,G33,L93

                                              ABSTRACT

We provide novel evidence linking the level of creditor protection provided by law to the degree of
usage of technologically older, vintage capital in the airline industry. Using a panel of aircraft-level
data around the world, we find that better creditor rights are associated with both aircraft of a younger
vintage and newer technology as well as firms with larger aircraft fleets. We propose that by mitigating
financial shortfalls, enhanced legal protection of creditors facilitates the ability of firms to make large
capital investments, adapt advanced technologies and foster productivity.


Efraim Benmelech
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer 233
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu

Nittai K. Bergman
MIT Sloan School of Management
E52-437
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
nbergman@mit.edu
Introduction

There is a large body of evidence that better legal rules covering protection of corporate shareholders
and creditors are associated with more developed ﬁnancial markets and higher economic growth (La
Porta et al., (1997), (1998); King and Levine, (1993); Beck et. al., (2000); and Rajan and Zingales,
(1998)). While the empirical regularities found in the data are quite robust, most of the research
is based on cross-country outcomes and suﬀers from small samples and potential identiﬁcation
problems (see Djankov at al. (2007)). In addition, the results from cross-country regressions do
not pin down the underlying mechanism through which creditor rights and shareholder protection
aﬀect real economic outcomes. This paper attempts to ﬁll this gap. We study the relation between
creditor protection and the use of vintage capital in the airline industry in a sample of most of the
aircraft in the world (489,916 aircraft-year observations) covering 5,987 operators in 129 countries
in the years 1978-2003. We ﬁnd that airlines enjoying the beneﬁts of higher creditor protection
operate aircraft of a newer technology and younger vintage.
      The importance of new capital goods for economic growth has been suggested by Solow (1960):
“...many if not most innovations need to be embodied in new kinds of durable equipment before
they can be made eﬀective. Improvements in technology aﬀect output only to the extent that
they are carried into practice either by net capital formation or by the replacement of old-fashioned
equipment by the latest models...” More recent theoretical models show that capital of older vintage
hampers productivity and growth (Benhabib and Rustichini (1991), Hsieh (2001)), slows technol-
ogy diﬀusion (Chari and Hopenhayn (1991)), and increases income inequality across individuals
and countries (Jovanovic (1998)). Empirical estimates suggest that around 60% of US per-capita
growth is due to technical change that is embodied in new more eﬃcient capital goods (Green-
wood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997)).1 Our paper provides novel evidence on a ﬁnancial channel
in technological adaption and capital formation.
      While we propose and provide evidence on one mechanism connecting ﬁnancial constraints
and creditor protection to aircraft vintage and ﬂeet size, our results suggest a broader link between
ﬁnancial development, investor protection and economic activity. Our empirical methodology diﬀers
from previous research which has focused mostly on aggregate, macroeconomic outcomes of investor
protection such as ﬁnancial market development and economic growth (King and Levine (1993), La
  1
      See Boucekkine, de la Croix, and Licandro (2008) for a survey of the vintage capital literature.



                                                           1
Porta et al. (1997, 1998), Rajan and Zingales (1998)). The wealth of the data and our focus on an
important global industry allow careful consideration and identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc mechanism
through which investor protection aﬀects and fosters technical progress and economic development.2
       We start by developing a simple price-theory model of an airline choosing its scale and average
asset age given an internal ﬁnancing constraint and an external creditor protection environment
that is determined at the country level. The airline must decide on the quantity of aircraft to
purchase and their average age. Older aircrafts are assumed to be less eﬃcient – either because
of depreciation in aircraft eﬃciency stemming from their normal use, or because of technological
improvements in aircraft design over time. The model shows that increased availability of external
ﬁnance due to enhanced creditor protection will have two important eﬀects on ﬁrms. First, when
creditor rights are greater, and hence ﬁnancial constraints more relaxed, ﬁrms will be able to invest
in newer, more expensive technologies. Second, since ﬁnancing considerations will place fewer
constraints on ﬁrm scale, ﬁrms will tend to be larger in countries with greater creditor rights.3
       Using detailed proﬁles of most aircraft in the world during the period 1978-2003 we then study
the relation between the level of creditor protection and two measures of aircraft vintage. The ﬁrst
measure of vintage is simply aircraft age, deﬁned as the time elapsed since the date of the aircraft
delivery. The second measure of vintage, called ‘technological age’, is calculated as the time elapsed
since the model type of that aircraft was ﬁrst introduced. The level of country creditor protection
is measured using the creditor rights score as developed by La Porta et al. (1997, 1998), and in
particular the more recent score that covers 129 countries in the years 1978-2003 (Djankov et al.
(2007)). Consistent with our ﬁrst prediction, our analysis shows that aircraft operated in countries
with higher creditor protection are of a younger vintage and newer technology. Furthermore, we
also ﬁnd that operators’ size are larger in countries with better creditor protection. Our regressions
controls for a battery of economic development variables, legal origin, government ownership of
airlines, and a country’s civil aviation quality, and a variety of year, country, and airline ﬁxed-
   2
     Our paper adds to a growing body of literature that uses industry- and ﬁrm-level data to evaluate the eﬀects of
investor protection and ﬁnancial development on resource allocation (Fisman and Love (2004), Wurgler (2000)), eco-
nomic growth (Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2005)), corporate risk-taking
and innovation (Acharya, Amihud, and Litov (2008), Acharya and Subramanian (2008)), and ﬁnancial contracts and
lending structures (Bergman and Nicolaievsky (2007), Braun (2003), Esty and Megginson (2003), Lerner and Schoar
(2005), Liberty and Mian (2007), Onega and Smith (2000), and Qian and Strahan (2007)).
   3
     Our model is closely related to Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007) who show that ﬁrms which are credit constrained
purchase more used, rather than new, capital because, higher ex-post maintenance payments of used capital relaxes
current ex-ante ﬁnancial constraints.




                                                         2
eﬀects. In particular, the panel dimension of our data allows us to control for country ﬁxed-eﬀects
and hence to identify oﬀ of changes in creditor rights within a country.
   To alleviate concerns about omitted variables and to provide additional evidence in support
of the ﬁnancing channel of technology adoption, we conduct a number of tests which split our
sample into aircraft that should be treated by the creditor rights index and those that should not
be treated by this index. We begin by splitting our sample into aircraft operated by commercial
and private airlines, and those operated by the military. We expect the negative relation between
creditor protection and both aircraft age and ﬂeet size to hold only for non-military operators,
since private and commercial operators are those required to raise funds from outside investors in
cases of cash ﬂow shortages. Moreover, only commercial and private operators would fall under
the bankruptcy provisions of the local corporate and bankruptcy laws which are the essence of the
creditor rights score. In contrast, sovereign debtors are incentivized to repay creditors mainly for
reputational concerns and continued access to capital markets (Bulow and Rogoﬀ (1989a,b)). Our
results conﬁrm this ﬁrst conjecture: we ﬁnd that the creditor rights score is correlated with the
age and ﬂeet size of commercial and private operators but is uncorrelated with the age and size of
military ﬂeets.
   Focusing on commercial and private operators, we then split our sample into planes that are
leased and those which are not leased. Following Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009), we conjecture that
leasing allows ﬁrms to alleviate some of the ﬁnancial frictions associated with debt ﬁnancing, as asset
repossession is easier for a lessor than for a creditor. This diﬀerence in ﬁnancing frictions implies,
ﬁrst, that airlines in countries with poor creditor rights will be more likely to lease rather than
own aircraft, and second, that the negative relation between creditor rights and aircraft vintage
described above should be concentrated amongst non-leased aircraft. We ﬁnd support for both
of these hypotheses in the data: i) aircraft are more likely to be leased in countries with worse
creditor protection, and ii) while there is a strong statistically signiﬁcant negative relation between
creditor rights and non-leased aircraft, we ﬁnd no relation between creditor rights and aircraft
vintage amongst leased aircraft. By examining the relation between creditor right and both leased
and non-leased aircraft separately, we alleviate the concern that our results are driven by variation
in unobserved variables, and in particular variation in investment opportunities, correlated with
variation in creditor rights. Indeed, there is little reason to suspect that increased investment
opportunities should diﬀerentially impact the vintage of leased vs. non-leased aircraft. In contrast,

                                                  3
the ﬁnancing channel provides a clear prediction regarding the diﬀerential impact of creditor rights
on the two methods of aircraft ﬁnancing.
     We continue by splitting the sample of commercial aircraft based on airlines’ ﬁnancial condition.
The ﬁnancing channel predicts that the negative relation between aircraft vintage and creditor
rights should be stronger for airlines in poor ﬁnancial health. We ﬁnd that vintage of aircraft of
airlines with lower leverage ratios and airlines with less debt overhang is less sensitive to creditor
rights. While both leverage and long-term debt are clearly endogenous, our identiﬁcation strategy
relies on the interaction eﬀects between country and ﬁrm characteristics. Furthermore, testing this
prediction also alleviates the concern that a correlation between creditor rights and unobserved
investment opportunities is driving our results, since there is little reason to suspect that increases
in creditor rights are more strongly correlated with improved investment opportunities in ﬁnancially
constrained ﬁrms as compared to ﬁnancially unconstrained ﬁrms.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I presents a simple price-theory model.
Section II provides a description of our data sources and summary statistics. Section III presents
the empirical link between aircraft age and utilization and eﬃciency. Section IV describes the
empirical analysis of the relation between creditor rights and aircraft age and ﬂeet size. Section V
concludes.


I.     The Model

We begin by providing a simple model of a ﬁrm facing an external ﬁnancing constraint which needs
to choose the vintage of the technology it will operate and its scale of operation. For simplicity,
ﬁrms in our model will choose between two technologies – new and old. Our main goal is to describe
the cross sectional variation in the allocation of vintage capital across ﬁrms operating in countries
with creditor protection, and hence ﬁnancial constraints, of varying degree. The model is related to
Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007), but assumes that technologies of diﬀerent vintage are characterized
by diﬀerent production functions.

A.     Technology allocation with exogenous prices

Consider a continuous set of ﬁrms deciding on their scale of operation and deciding between the
use of assets which embody either an old or a new technology. For consistency with the empirical
section we refer to ﬁrms as airlines and their assets as aircraft. For simplicity, we assume that


                                                   4
airlines can use only one type of technology in their ﬂeets.
       A ﬂeet of qnew new aircraft is assumed to provide income f (qnew ), where f is twice diﬀerentiable,
concave, and f (0) = 0.4 Similarly, a ﬂeet of qold old aircraft is assumed to provide income g(qold),
where again, g is twice diﬀerentiable, concave, and g(0) = 0. As is common, concavity of the
production function stems from decreasing returns to scale.
       Airlines are assumed to be price takers. New technology aircraft are supplied perfectly elastically
at a price normalized to one while the price of an old aircraft is assumed in this section to be
exogenously given at pold .
       An important aspect in the model will be the tradeoﬀ between airline size and ﬂeet quality.
Given a ﬁxed amount of capital expenditure, an airline will need to choose between operating a
relatively large number of old technology aircraft, or a smaller number of new technology aircraft.
To solve this problem it turns out useful to deﬁne an equivalence function between old and new
aircraft, h, which relates a ﬂeet of new aircraft of size qnew to the size of the old aircraft ﬂeet with
equal income. Formally, h satisﬁes g(h(qnew )) = f (qnew ), so that h(qnew ) old aircraft provide equal
income as qnew new aircraft.5
       Initially, we assume that airlines have no internal funds and must purchase their ﬂeets using
funds raised in an external capital market. Each airline operates in a country with a level of
protection provided to investors parameterized by µ, where µ measures the fraction of income that
insiders within the airline can pledge to outside investors.6 Thus, given any income R, the airline’s
pledgeable income – i.e. the maximal amount that it can guarantee as repayment to its investors –
is µ ∗ R, with µ between zero and one. It should be emphasized that µ is a country level parameter,
determined, for example, by the legal code in which ﬁrms operate. Capital markets are assumed
to be perfectly competitive, and the discount factor is taken for simplicity to be 1.
       To choose the size and technology of its ﬂeet, each airline will compare the value of a new ﬂeet
to the value of an old one. The value of a ﬂeet comprised of new aircraft in a country with investor
   4
     Airline output is measured in passenger miles ﬂown, which combined with the average ticket price, generate
approximately 80 percent of airline revenue (Air Transport Association, 2007).
   5
     Since new aircraft are assumed to be more eﬃcient than older aircraft – either because of depreciation in aircraft
eﬃciency stemming from their normal use, or because of technological improvements in aircraft design over time –
we have that h(qnew ) > qnew for all qnew . Clearly, also, h = g−1 (f ).
   6
     1 − µ can be interpreted as the fraction of income insiders can costlessly expropriate from outside investors.




                                                          5
protection µ is given by:

                                       Vnew (µ) = M ax[f (qnew ) − qnew ]                                 (1)

                                                     s.t. qnew ≤ µf (qnew )

Similarly, the value of a ﬂeet comprised of old aircraft in a country with investor protection µ is
given by:

                                   Vold (µ, pold) = M ax[g(qold ) − pold qold ]                           (2)

                                                      s.t. pold qold ≤ µg(qold )

Since capital markets are perfectly competitive, outside investors break even, so that the maximand
of the maximization problems have airlines obtaining the full NPV of the project subject to the
ﬁnancing constraint. We further assume that Vnew (1) > Vold (1, pold) so that in an economy without
ﬁnancial constraints (or in one in which ﬁrms can pledge all of their output to investors), the new
technology is superior to the old technology.7
      It is easy to see that the solution to (1), the new technology maximization problem, is given
                                                                           uc to be the solution
in the following manner (the old technology solution is analogous). Deﬁne qnew
to the unconstrained problem, i.e. M ax(q) (f (q) − q). If qnew
                                                            uc
                                                                satisﬁes the ﬁnancing constraint
q uc ≤ µf (q uc ), and is hence achievable by the airline, it will be the constrained solution as well.
On the other hand, if q uc is not achievable (q uc > µf (q uc )), the ﬁnancing constraint will be binding
and the constrained solution will be deﬁned implicitly by q = µf (q). In this region, investment and
ﬁrm value will be increasing in µ, as increases in µ relax the ﬁnancing constraint.
      In choosing between the new and old technologies, an airline in a country with investor pro-
tection µ simply compares Vnew (µ) to Vold(µ, p). Proposition 1 describes this choice (all proofs are
provided in Appendix A):

Proposition 1. If h, the equivalency function between new and old technology, is convex in qnew ,
then for every pold there exists a µ̄ ≥ 0 such that airlines operating in countries with investor
protection µ < µ̄ choose the old technology, and airlines operating in countries with investor
protection µ > µ̄ choose the new technology.

      Proposition 1 states that if h is convex, the allocation of vintage capital is such that airlines
  7
      This assumption is for expositional use only, and is no longer required once pold is endogenized.


                                                            6
operating in low investor protection countries will choose an old aircraft ﬂeet, while those operating
in high investor protection countries will choose a new aircraft ﬂeet.
       One potential reason for the equivalence function to be convex is when there are economies of
scale in the use of the new technology but not in the use of the old technology. For example, in
the context of aircraft, there might be economies of scale in the homogenous maintenance of new
aircraft, but not of older heterogenous aircraft.8 The intuition for this convexity is that because of
the economies of scale, the relative advantage of the new aircraft ﬂeet increases with its size. As
the size of the new aircraft ﬂeet increases, the marginal increase in old aircraft required to replicate
the new ﬂeet will be ever increasing – i.e. h is convex. We provide a proof showing this result in
Appendix A.9
       To understand Proposition 1, it is useful to combine maximization problems (1) and (2) into
one, by realizing that, in eﬀect, each airline can produce income f (qnew ) in two ways – either
by employing qnew new aircraft or by employing h(qnew ) old aircraft. Thus, an airline can obtain
income f (qnew ) at an eﬀective cost of c(qnew ) = min[qnew , pold ∗h(qnew )]. The maximization problem
of an airline in a country with investor protection µ can be written therefore as

                                         M ax[f (qnew ) − c(qnew )]                                             (3)

                                          s.t. c(qnew ) ≤ µf (qnew )

       Figure 1 depicts maximization problem 3 graphically in the case where h is convex in qnew . As
can be seen, the convexity of h is equivalent to stating that the old technology has a comparative
advantage when a ﬁrm operates on a small scale, while the new technology has a comparative
advantage when the ﬁrm operates on a large scale. Indeed, if an airline operates in the region
where income f (qnew ) is comparatively low, then pold ∗ h(qnew ) < qnew – i.e. the old technology is
the eﬃcient method of production. In contrast, if an airline operates in the region where income
f (qnew ) is comparatively high then pold ∗ h(qnew ) > qnew and the new technology represents the
eﬃcient method of production. Economically, convexity of h arises if employing new technology
aircraft economizes on ﬁrm scale and organizational costs are convex in scale.
       To understand Proposition 1 note that when an airline operates in a low investor protection
   8
    We thank an anonymous referee for making this point.
   9
    In proving this result we also show that while economies of scale lead to convexity of the equivalence function,
they are not required. Indeed, assuming simply that both new and old aircraft have ﬁxed marginal costs, and that
their sole diﬀerence is that the marginal cost of new aircraft is lower than that of old ones – due, for example, to
higher fuel eﬃciency – the equivalence function will be convex when marginal revenue is weakly concave.


                                                         7
country (i.e. low µ) its ﬁnancial constraint will be binding and thus its operating scale and income
will be limited. It will therefore choose to operate the old technology because in low scale production
this is the eﬃcient method of production. As the degree of investor protection improves the ﬁnancial
constraint relaxes, and ﬁrm operating scale increases. Firms therefore switch to the new technology
since it is the more eﬃcient method of production at higher levels of production.
      Figure 2 presents the value functions of the two technologies as a function of µ. As Proposition
1 states, low µ ﬁrms select the old technology, while high µ ﬁrms select the new technology.10

B.      Endogenous prices and fleet size

We now endogenize the price of old technology, pold . To do so, we assume that there is a ﬁnite
measure of preexisting old aircraft and that µ is distributed according to some distribution function
G. An equilibrium p∗old is a price for old technology aircraft such that the market for old aircraft
clears. The equilibrium is characterized by the following proposition:

Proposition 2. If h, the equivalency function between new and old technology, is convex in qnew ,
then the equilibrium p∗old is such that there exists a µ̄ > 0 such that airlines operating in countries
with investor protection µ < µ̄ choose the old technology, and airlines operating in countries with
investor protection µ > µ̄ choose the new technology.

      The intuition behind Proposition 2 is straightforward. All else equal, as the price of old technol-
ogy, pold , decreases, Vold(µ, pold ) increases compared to Vnew (µ). Old technology therefore becomes
more attractive and a larger fraction of airlines select it. The price of old technology simply de-
creases to the point where the demand for old technology equals the supply. Further, from Propo-
sition 1, we know that at the equilibrium price p∗old it is the low µ ﬁrms which are the ones who
choose the old technology while the high µ ﬁrms choose the new technology. We next characterize
the size of airlines’ ﬂeets as measured by their number of aircraft.

Proposition 3. There exist µ∗ and µ∗∗ such that fleet sizes of airlines with µ ≤ µ∗ are smaller
than the fleet sizes of airlines with µ ≥ µ∗∗

      Proposition 3 states that airlines operating in low µ countries are ﬁnancially constrained, so
that their ﬂeet sizes are restricted. In contrast, those operating in relatively high µ countries will
not be constrained, and indeed their ﬂeet sizes will be equal to the unconstrained level.
 10
      Both value functions become ﬂat when the ﬁnancing constraint becomes non-binding


                                                        8
      As a ﬁnal step, we relax the assumption that airlines have no internal funds and must fund all
of their ﬂeet acquisition employing external ﬁnance. We prove the following proposition:

Proposition 4. If h, the equivalency function between new and old technology, is convex, for any
level of investor protection µ, there exists an A(µ), such that an airline operating in a country with
investor protection µ with internal capital A ≥ A(µ) employs the new-technology fleet while an
airline with internal capital A < A(µ) employs the old-technology fleet. Further, A(µ) is decreasing
in µ.

      Proposition 4 states that all else equal, ﬁrms with internal wealth above a certain threshold
will employ a new technology ﬂeet. Further, the level of internal funds at which airlines switch
to the new technology is lower in countries with better investor protection. This is because these
ﬁrms can more easily rely on external ﬁnance to ease their credit constraints. Internal wealth and
investor protection are therefore natural substitutes in investment decisions.
      From Propositions 2 through 4, we have the following three predictions which are tested in the
empirical section:
Prediction 1: All else equal, airlines operating in countries with lower investor protection will
have older vintage ﬂeets.
Prediction 2: All else equal, airlines operating in low investor protection countries will have
smaller ﬂeets than those operating in high investor protection countries.
Prediction 3: The eﬀect of the level of investor protection on airline ﬂeet vintage will be smaller
for airlines with greater internal funds.


II.      Data and Summary Statistics

This section describes the data sources used in the empirical analysis and presents summary statis-
tics for both aircraft age and ﬂeet size.

A.      Aircraft Level Data

Throughout our analysis we utilize data from the Ascend CASE database – a leading provider of
individual aircraft and airline data which contains ownership and operating information about most
commercial and corporate aircraft worldwide as well as many military and government aircraft. We
construct a sample of all aircraft that are available in the database for the 129 countries that are


                                                  9
included in Djankov at al. (2007). Our sample consists of all aircraft worldwide over the period
January 1, 1978 to December 31, 2003 in the Ascend CASE database.11 The data are very detailed
and include information on individual aircraft characteristics such as model-type, serial number,
year of construction, operating airline, and owner. The data in Ascend CASE thus enables us to
uniquely identify most of the aircraft in the world during the time period studied in the paper.
      For each aircraft in the sample we construct two measures of aircraft vintage, which are then
related to the creditor rights scores described below. The ﬁrst measure is aircraft age, deﬁned in
each year as the time elapsed from the year of the aircraft’s initial delivery. The second measure
of vintage, which we name ‘technological age’, is deﬁned as the time elapsed from the year in
which the aircraft’s model type was ﬁrst introduced. This second measure proxies for the age of the
technology that is embodied in the aircraft. The Ascend CASE database deﬁnes two aircraft-type
classiﬁcation – narrow and broad. We thus deﬁne two variants of technological age corresponding to
the two aircraft type classiﬁcation. To ﬁx ideas consider the following example: aircraft N368AA,
built in 1991, and delivered on December, 5, 1991 to American Airlines is a Boeing 767-300ER. In
this case, the broad classiﬁcation is the B767 model type which was ﬁrst introduced in 1981. This
particular variant of B767 (i.e. 300ER) was ﬁrst introduced in 1986. Thus, as of the year 2008,
the aircraft’s age is 17 years, its technological age using the broad classiﬁcation is 27 years, and its
technological age using the narrow deﬁnition is 22 years.
      Panel A of Table 1 displays summary statistics of aircraft age for 4 sub-periods and for the
entire sample. There are 489,916 aircraft-year observations in the entire sample, with an average
(median) age of 13 (12) years, and a standard deviation of 9.2 years. The sample represents 219
aircraft types, 5,987 operators from 129 countries.
      In the last two columns of Panel A we split our sample into aircraft operated by commercial
and private airlines (Commercial), and those operated by the military and government agencies
(Military) – a distinction that plays an important role later in the analysis. There are 373,261
commercial aircraft and 116,655 that are classiﬁed as military aircraft in the sample. The com-
mercial sample represents 161 aircraft types, 5,437 operators from 129 countries, while the military
sample represents 200 aircraft types, 893 operators from 115 countries. Further, as can be seen
in Panel A of the table, military aircraft are older than commercial aircraft; the average age of a
commercial aircraft is 12.0 years compared to 16.0 years for military aircraft (p-value for an equal
 11
      Benmelech and Bergman (2008, 2009) provide an extensive description of the Ascend CASE database.


                                                       10
means t-test=0.000).
      Panel B of Table 1 presents summary statistics for broad and narrow (in parentheses) techno-
logical age. The mean broad (narrow) technological age of the entire sample is 21.9 (18.2). As
in Panel A, we split our sample into commercial and military aircraft in the last two columns of
Panel B. Military aircraft embody older technology than commercial aircraft; the average broad
technological age of a commercial aircraft is 20.2 years compared to 27.1 years for military aircraft
(p-value for an equal means t-test=0.000).

B.      Country Level Data

We match the data on individual aircraft to country level macro and legal variables of the aircraft’s
country of operator and owner. We augment the data from Ascend CASE with country level macro
data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database. This macro data includes
GDP and GDP per capita in U.S. Dollars, GDP growth, GDP per capital growth, as well as country
area (in sq km.) and population data. We obtain data on legal origins and creditor rights from the
new database assembled by Djankov et al. (2007) that covers 129 countries in the period 1978-2003.
This new data is a major improvement upon the La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) data, as it covers
many more countries and tracks their variation in creditor rights score over time.
      For each country, the creditor rights index measures four powers of secured lenders in bankruptcy.12
First, whether there are restrictions on bankruptcy ﬁling; second, whether there is no ‘automatic
stay’ or ‘asset freeze’ that prevent secured creditors from seizing their collateral. Third, whether
secured creditors are paid ﬁrst, and ﬁnally, whether a trustee diﬀerent from the management runs
the ﬁrm during reorganization. A value of one is assigned to each of the provisions when a coun-
try’s law provides these powers to secured creditors. The creditor rights index is then calculated by
aggregating the scores of the four provisions, and varies between a score of 0 (poor creditor rights)
and 4 (strong creditor rights). Djankov et. al. (2007) collect time series data on creditor rights
for each of the 129 countries by identifying all major reforms and assessing their impact on the
creditor rights score.
      Panel C of Table 1 reports summary statistics of the creditor rights index, GDP per capita,
and legal origin. The mean (median) creditor rights in the sample is 1.64 (1.0) and the standard
deviation is 1.01. The sample includes 276,601 aircraft from countries with English legal origin,
 12
      See Djankov et. al. (2007) for a comprehensive description of the index and its construction.



                                                          11
107,587 from countries with French legal origin, 50,982 from Socialist legal origin, 47,070 from
German legal origin, and 7,676 aircraft are from countries with a Nordic legal origin. Table B1 in
Appendix B lists the top 10 countries with the most aircraft-year observations in the sample, and the
bottom 10 countries with the least aircraft-year observations. With a total of 184,122 observations,
the U.S. accounts for 37.58% of the sample, followed by the Russian Federation (37,907 aircraft),
U.K. (19,556 aircraft), and Canada (18,406 aircraft). The countries with the least observations in
the data are Bosnia and Herzegovina (44 aircraft), Albania (49 aircraft), Niger (51 aircraft), and
Togo (62 aircraft).

C.     Airline Level Data

Finally, we match aircraft information to airline ﬁnancial data where available. Information on
airline ﬁnancial data is obtained from Compustat Global. We collect all ﬁrms in SIC codes 4500-
4580 and manually match them to the aircraft level data from Ascend CASE. We also supplement
the information with data from Compustat North America for U.S. airlines. After matching Ascend
CASE to Compustat Global and Compustat North America and restricting the sample to the
countries covered by Djankov et al. (2007), we are left with a subsample of 72 airlines from 29
countries, representing a panel of 94,272 aircraft-year observations.


III.     Aircraft Vintage and Usage

We assume that assets of an older vintage are less eﬃcient, either because they are less techno-
logically advanced or due to physical depreciation. We therefore begin our empirical analysis with
motivational evidence testing this assumption in the context of aircraft. Measuring individual air-
craft eﬃciency requires information on inputs (number of seats, men hour, fuel costs, operating
times, routes, etc.) and outputs (number of passengers, revenue, arrival times). We cannot measure
aircraft eﬃciency directly since we do not have access to these data at the individual aircraft level.
Instead, we utilize data from the Ascend Case database on aircraft usage as an approximation of
aircraft eﬃciency.13 Spanning the period 1996-2006, the data provides hourly utilization rates for
25,009 aircraft worldwide. For each aircraft in the sample, the data tallies the number of hours
  13
     Airline ﬂights commonly have what is known as a “break-even load” which is the percentage of passenger seats
that must be sold to justify the ﬂight actually occuring (Morrel 2007). Among other factors, the break-even load is
inﬂuenced by the cost of ﬂying operations (fuel costs being an important component), which implies that less eﬃcient
aircraft have higher break-even loads. Aircraft of lower eﬃciency are therefore ﬂown less often.



                                                        12
ﬂown each year, as well as the aircraft type and year of build.
       We hypothesize that if aircraft eﬃciency is indeed decreasing with aircraft vintage, airlines will
tend to decrease the operating times of their older vintage aircraft. Thus, for example, if older
vintage aircraft are less fuel-eﬃcient airlines will shift their operations to the newer vintage aircraft
in their ﬂeet to the extent possible. Moreover, older aircraft require more maintenance and engines
overhauls that would ground older aircraft for longer periods of time compared to newer ones.
       Table 2 reports the results from estimating the relation between annual hourly usage and both
aircraft age and aircraft technological age for all aircraft with non-zero usage.14 For each aircraft-
year pair, we calculate the age of an aircraft as the time that elapsed from its year of build and
the aircraft’s technological age as the time elapsed from the year in which the aircraft’s model type
was ﬁrst introduced.
       As can be seen from the ﬁrst column of the table, the coeﬃcient on aircraft age is negative
(-57.61) and is statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level. Thus, consistent with our underlying as-
sumption that older vintage aircraft are less eﬃcient, we ﬁnd that aircraft usage declines with age.
This result is robust to the addition of both aircraft type and aircraft ﬁxed eﬀects (not reported).
The economic magnitude of this eﬀect is signiﬁcant: a one-standard-deviation increase in aircraft
age of 8.62 years decreases aircraft yearly usage by approximately 450 hours, representing an 18
percent decline relative to the sample mean hourly usage of 2,466 hours. In column 2 we add the
log of jet fuel price (averaged through the year) as a regressor, and in column 3 we also add the
interaction term between jet fuel price and aircraft age.15 As column 3 demonstrates, the interac-
tion term is negative and signiﬁcant, implying that old aircraft are utilized less when jet fuel price
is high. This is very much consistent with the notion that older aircraft are less fuel eﬃcient. A
one-standard deviation increase in jet fuel price reduces the utilization of a 20-year old aircraft by
124.9 hours per year compared to a 5-year old aircraft.
       Similarly, as column 4 shows, aircraft technological age is negatively related to annual hourly
usage, with a one standard deviation increase in technological age reducing annual usage by 312
hours.16 Finally, as the last column of Table 2 shows, the use of old technology aircraft is more
  14
     Since aircraft may drop out of the sample when they are retired from active service, we analyze the relation
between usage and age only for aircraft that have been utilized during the year. Thus, we analyze the intensive,
rather than extensive, margin, and as such our results can be viewed as a lower bound on the relation between age
and utilization.
  15
     We use the New York Harbor Kerosene-Type Jet Fuel Spot Price FOB (Cents per Gallon).
  16
     When using technological age as a dependent variable, we do not employ aircraft-type ﬁxed eﬀects since this



                                                       13
sensitive to jet fuel price than the use of new technology aircraft, consistent again with the notion
that old technology aircraft are less fuel eﬃcient.
     Figure 3 provides a graphical representation of this monotonic relation between age and usage.
To construct the ﬁgures we regress yearly aircraft usage on the set of indicator variables deﬁned for
each possible value of aircraft age, while including year and aircraft-type ﬁxed eﬀects as well. The
ﬁgure graphs the coeﬃcients on the age indicator-variables along with their 95 percent conﬁdence
interval calculated by clustering at the aircraft-type level.17 The graph illustrates the evolution of
aircraft usage with aircraft age. Consistent with our assumption that aircraft eﬃciency improves
over time, aircraft usage declines with aircraft age. We also used aircraft age as an explanatory
variable instead of the set of indicator variables that were used to construct Figure 3. In unreported
results we ﬁnd that the coeﬃcient on aircraft age is consistently negative and is statistically signif-
icant at the 1% level whether we cluster the standard errors by aircraft-type or at the individual
aircraft level. Thus, consistent with our underlying assumption that older vintage aircraft are less
eﬃcient, we ﬁnd that aircraft usage declines with age.


IV.      Creditors Rights and Aircraft Vintage
A.     Baseline Results

Our simple model shows that the eﬀects of ﬁnancial constraints should be exacerbated in countries
with poor creditor rights, where the availability of debt capital may be limited and its cost much
higher. We therefore predict that airlines that operate in countries with poorer investor protection
operate older vintage aircraft with older technologies.
     To test this prediction, we calculate the age and the technological age (using both the narrow
and broad measures described above) of every aircraft in the 129 countries that are in our sample
during the period 1978-2003. We then run the following speciﬁcation:

                  V intageiact = α × Creditor rightsct + Xct λ + ytθ + zac ψ + iact ,                              (4)

where the dependent variable, Vintageiact, is either the age or the technological age of aircraft i
regression would not be well identiﬁed – for any given year, all aircraft of the same type have equal technological age.
Adding aircraft-type ﬁxed eﬀects is thus equivalent to identifying oﬀ of a simple linear time trend. Further, we do
not report technological age results with aircraft ﬁxed eﬀects, as clearly, the coeﬃcient on technological age in this
speciﬁcation is identical to that on age in the speciﬁcation with aircraft ﬁxed eﬀects (Columns 3 and 4).
  17
     The indicator variable for age equaling one is omitted, so that all coeﬃcients are calculated in relation to the
usage of aircraft of age one.


                                                          14
operated by operator a in country c in year t. Creditor rights is the creditor rights score of country
c in year t, as measured by Djankov, et al. (2007). Xc is a vector of country-speciﬁc control
variables which includes the logarithm of country c’s GDP, GDP per capita, and annual rates of
growth of both GDP and GDP per capita, the logarithm of its population and the logarithm of
its area. In addition, in all speciﬁcations that do not include country ﬁxed eﬀects we include as
control variables a set of indicator variables indicating the legal origin of the country – common
law, French, German, Nordic, or Socialist.18 Finally, all regressions include year ﬁxed eﬀects, y t,
and depending on the speciﬁcation may also include country and operator ﬁxed eﬀects represented
by the vector of variables z. Since aircraft operators maintain their aﬃliation with the country of
operation throughout the sample, country and operator ﬁxed eﬀects are always applied separately
in each speciﬁcation. All regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors
which are clustered by country. In our data, standard errors that are clustered by country are
tenfold larger than simple robust standard errors. Thus, when we do not cluster we get a t-statistic
on creditor rights that is between 19.0 and 26.8. Since our variable of interest is creditor rights
which is determined at the country level, we use the higher hurdle of clustering by country. The
magnitudes of the diﬀerences between the standard errors when we cluster compared to simple
robust standard errors are consistent with Kloek (1981) who shows that clustered standard errors
                                                                       √
are proportional to the squared root of the number of clusters which is 129 = 11.4 in our sample.
    Table 3 provides results of regression (4) over the entire sample. As hypothesized, we ﬁnd that
enhanced creditor rights are consistently negatively associated with both aircraft age as well as
aircraft technological age. As the ﬁrst column of Table 3 demonstrates, with year ﬁxed eﬀects,
increasing a country’s creditor rights score from 0 to 4, reduces the age of aircraft by 1.78 years,
or 13.7% of the mean aircraft age of 13 years. Adding either country or operator ﬁxed eﬀects
(representing the 129 countries in the sample and 5,987 diﬀerent operators) increases the magnitude
of the negative impact of creditor rights on ﬂeet aircraft age. With these ﬁxed eﬀects, a movement
from a creditor rights score of 0 to a score of 4 reduces aircraft age by between 2.7 and 3.2 years,
representing an approximately 20% reduction in the sample mean aircraft age.
    Columns 4 to 6 of Table 3 show that enhanced creditor rights is also negatively related to aircraft
technological age constructed using the broad aircraft classiﬁcation scheme. This result holds when
  18
     Country ﬁxed eﬀects naturally preclude using legal origin controls as there is no time series variation in legal
origin in our sample period. For brevity of exposition, tables do not exhibit the coeﬃcients on the legal origin dummy
variables.


                                                         15
using year, country and operator ﬁxed eﬀects. The impact of creditor rights is signiﬁcant: moving
the creditor rights score from 0 to 4 reduces average technological age of aircraft in an airline’s ﬂeet
by between 1.6 and 2.8 years representing between 7.2 and 12.7 percent of the average technological
age.19 Finally, as columns 7-9 show, repeating the analysis using technological age deﬁned at the
narrow classiﬁcation scheme yields similar results. In sum, consistent with our prediction, aircraft
are younger and embody newer technology in countries with better creditor rights, controlling for
GDP per capita, population, area, and a battery of ﬁxed-eﬀects at the operator, country and year
level. We repeat the analysis in Table 3 by calculating average aircraft age within a country for each
of the years, thereby collapsing the data to the country level, and estimating weighted least-squares
regressions. These regressions which are not reported for brevity yield similar results.
       The negative relation between creditor rights and both aircraft age and aircraft technological
age points to a ﬁnancing channel through which improved investor protection and its associated
reduction in ﬁnancial frictions aﬀects ﬁrm investment policy and ultimately real outcomes. Ac-
cording to this, the ability to raise external ﬁnance is an important determinant of ﬁrm’s capacity
to invest in newer technologies which is a key driver of economic growth.

B.       Identification Strategy

As is usually the case in cross-country analysis, the main empirical challenge is endogeneity and,
in particular, an omitted variable bias problem. Speciﬁcally, the creditor rights score could be
correlated with other unidentiﬁed variables, such as investment opportunities, which are in turn
inﬂuencing asset vintage choices. The relation between creditor right and vintage could then be
explained by eﬀects other than the ﬁnancing channel proposed in this paper. Most of the analysis
that follows is aimed, therefore, at addressing the direction of causality in the empirical ﬁndings of
Table 3.
       To overcome the omitted variables problem we ﬁrst utilize the panel nature of our data and the
changes in creditor rights over time. By including country and operator ﬁxed eﬀects, we control for
unobserved and non-time varying heterogeneity of operators and countries. In these speciﬁcations
we identify oﬀ of changes in creditor rights over time within a country. Indeed, we ﬁnd that in
speciﬁcations which include country ﬁxed eﬀects, the negative association between creditor rights
  19
    As in columns 1 to 3, the magnitude of the eﬀect is larger when either operator or country ﬁxed eﬀects are
included.




                                                     16
and age is the largest, which is consistent with a large eﬀect of changes in creditor rights within a
country.
   However, while country ﬁxed-eﬀects help to mitigate concerns about unobserved heterogene-
ity, including these ﬁxed-eﬀects raises the issue of the endogeneity of creditor protection laws
themselves. For example, a country may revise its corporate and bankruptcy laws precisely when
underlying economic conditions improve. In this case the correlation between creditor rights and
aircraft vintage may merely reﬂect increased demand for better aircraft driven by improvements in
economic conditions.
   One solution for the endogeneity concern is to use an instrumental variable approach. However,
variables that are correlated with creditor rights are also potentially correlated with aircraft age
through channels other than the law, and hence will not meet the ‘exclusion’ restriction. Consider,
for example, legal origins (as in La Porta et. al 1998) as an instrument for creditor rights. While
correlated with creditor rights, legal origins are potentially correlated with aircraft vintage through
other legal and economic mechanisms such as safety regulation or engineering quality. Djankov et.
al (2007) raise similar concerns about the validity of legal origin as an instrument for creditor rights
in general.
   In the absence of an instrument, we identify the causal eﬀect of creditor rights on aircraft age
by splitting our sample into aircraft that are expected to be treated by stronger creditor rights and
those that should not. Our identiﬁcation strategy is threefold. First, we split the sample between
commercial and military aircraft and show that, as expected, military aircraft are not treated by
creditor rights. Second, we focus on commercial aircraft and split the sample between leased and
owned aircraft. Since prior literature has shown that leasing allows ﬁrms to relax ﬁnancial frictions
(see e.g. Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2009), the ﬁnancing channel predicts that the negative relation
between creditor rights and vintage should be concentrated amongst non-leased aircraft. Our
empirical results conﬁrm the prediction that leased aircraft are not treated by the creditor rights
index similarly to non-leased aircraft. Finally, we study the diﬀerential eﬀect of creditor rights
on commercial aircraft conditional on the ﬁnancial health of the airline. The ﬁnancing channel
predicts, and we indeed ﬁnd, that the relation between creditor rights and vintage is concentrated
amongst airlines that are in poorer ﬁnancial health.




                                                  17
C.       Commercial vs. Military Aircrafts

In Table 4, for every country, we divide our sample into aircraft operated by commercial airlines
and private operators, and those operated by militaries, armed forces and government agencies.
For example, as of December 31, 2003 there are ten U.S. federal agencies or military operators
in our sample: Federal Aviation Administration, NASA, US Air Force, US Air National Guard,
US Army, US Army National Guard, US Coast Guard, US Customs Service, US Marine Corps,
and the US Navy. Likewise, as of December 31, 2003, there are four military operators and one
government agency in the Islamic Republic of Iran: Iran National Cartographic Center, Iranian Air
Force, Iranian Army, Iranian Navy, and the Iranian Revolutionary Guard.
       We expect the negative relation between aircraft age and creditor protection to be concentrated
in commercial and private aircraft operators, since these are the ﬁrms which would be required
to raise funds from external investors in cases of ﬁnancial shortfalls. In addition, commercial
and private ﬁrms would fall under the bankruptcy provisions of the local corporate bankruptcy
laws which are the essence of the creditor protection score. In contrast, government agencies,
militaries and other armed forces obtain funding from their governments that are in turn subject
to international law. However, when sovereign governments default on their debt creditors cannot
eﬀectively seize the country’s assets.20 Instead, creditors litigate with their sovereign borrowers
using international law. Sovereign borrowers are then induced to settle with their creditors as they
want to maintain access to capital markets (Bulow and Rogoﬀ (1989a,b)). In summary, corporate
and bankruptcy law do not apply to aircraft operated by militaries, armed forces and government
agencies.
       To formally test the hypothesis that the negative relation between aircraft age and creditor
protection will be concentrated in commercial and private aircraft operators, Table 4 reports the
results of running regression 4 separately for commercial aircraft and aircraft operated by militaries
and other government agencies.21 The dependent variable is aircraft age and the explanatory
variables are as in Table 3 with the addition of the country’s airforce size.
       Consistent with the results in Table 3, in all speciﬁcations, the age of commercial aircraft is
  20
      Although lenders can potentially grab commercial or military and government-owned aircraft, this strategy is
not very useful except as a strategy of harassment (Shleifer 2003).
   21
      This speciﬁcation is identical to running one regressions with all the explanatory variables interacted with a
military dummy. We prefer to report the results separately for commercial and military aircraft as the exposition
is clearer. Table 10 reports tests on the statistical signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence between commercial and military
aircraft.


                                                        18
statistically negatively related to creditor rights with a similar economic impact found in Table 3,
while the age of military aircraft is unrelated to the creditor rights score in a statistically signiﬁcant
manner.22 Table 5 repeats the analysis, separating the sample into commercial aircraft and aircraft
operated by militaries and other government agencies, but this time using aircraft technological
age as the dependant variable. Again, we ﬁnd that while aircraft technological age, deﬁned using
either the narrow or broad classiﬁcation, is negatively related to creditor rights in the subsample
of commercial aircraft, there is no statistically signiﬁcant relation between the technological age of
military aircraft and country creditor rights scores. Interestingly, while not statistically signiﬁcant,
we ﬁnd that in the subsample of military aircraft, the coeﬃcients on creditor right scores are
actually positive.

D.       Creditor Rights and Aircraft Leasing

In the analysis above, we do not distinguish between airlines that lease aircraft instead of purchasing
them through debt ﬁnancing.23 Eisfeldt and Rampini (2009) show that, in the U.S., since the
repossession of leased assets is easier than foreclosure on collateral of secured debt, lease ﬁnancing
allows for higher debt capacity than secured debt. Put diﬀerently, lease ﬁnancing aids ﬁrms to
circumvent some of the ﬁnancial frictions associated with debt ﬁnancing. To the extent that this
result generalizes to other countries outside the U.S. (for example, because the title to the asset
remains with the lessor but is not in the possession of a secured creditor) and too the extent that
as creditor protection improves, the wedge between the availability of debt and lease ﬁnancing
decreases, we would expect two implications to arise. First, airlines operating in countries with
poor creditor rights should be more likely to use lease ﬁnancing rather than plain debt because of
the associated reduction in ﬁnancial frictions. Second, if leasing reduces ﬁnancial frictions, then the
results found in Tables 3 - 5 showing that creditor rights is negatively related to aircraft vintage
should be stronger for non-leased aircraft.
       To test the ﬁrst conjecture, we run a probit regression on the sample of all commercial aircraft,
  22
     We note that the main beneﬁt of comparing military to commercial aircraft is not the comparison of their average
aircraft vintage – this could be driven by technological diﬀerences – but rather the comparison of the sensitivity of
their aircraft vintage to creditor protection. Showing that military aircraft vintage is not related to creditor protection
can be thought of as a ﬁrst test that the data should pass.
  23
     Lease ﬁnancing of aircraft is fairly common, particularly in the United States (See e.g. Benmelech and Bergman
2008 and Gavazza 2007).




                                                            19
relating a country’s creditor rights score to the likelihood of an individual aircraft being leased:

                   P r(leased = 1) = Φ(−0.026 ∗ Creditor Rightsct + Xct λ + yt θ),                                  (5)

where Φ(·) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function, Creditor rights is the creditor
rights score of country c in year t as measured by Djankov et al. (2007), Xc is the vector of control
variables used in regression 4, and yt is a vector of year ﬁxed eﬀects. The point estimate of -0.026
(p-value=0.04) implies that airlines in countries with poor creditor rights are indeed more likely
to lease their aircraft. This eﬀect is economically signiﬁcant: moving from a creditor rights score
of 4 to a creditor rights score of 0 increases the likelihood that an aircraft will be leased by 10.4
percentage points, representing an increase of 24.2 percent relative to the unconditional mean.
Thus, the data do indeed suggest that airlines operating in countries with low creditor protection
are more likely to resort to lease ﬁnancing.24
       To test the second conjecture, that the negative relation between creditor rights and aircraft
vintage should be stronger for non-leased aircraft, we repeat the analysis in regression 4 separately
for leased and non-leased aircraft.25 Results are reported in Table 6.
       Consistent with our conjecture, we ﬁnd that the negative relation between aircraft vintage and
creditor rights is indeed concentrated amongst owned, rather than leased, aircraft. For owned
aircraft, a zero to 4 increase in creditor rights associated with a reduction of between 2.6 and 3.9
years in aircraft vintage. In contrast, in the leased aircraft subsample, in all of the speciﬁcations
the coeﬃcient on creditor rights is not statistically diﬀerent from zero.
       Another beneﬁt to examining the eﬀect of creditor right on leased and non-leased aircraft
separately is that it alleviates the concern that our results are driven by variation in omitted
variables and in particular variation in investment opportunities correlated with variation in creditor
rights. While this concern is partly addressed by our battery of GDP-based controls, and operator
and country ﬁxed eﬀects speciﬁcations, to the extent that time series variation in creditor rights is
correlated with investment opportunities – for example because bankruptcy reform may be enacted
simultaneously with other economic reforms (see e.g. Acharya and Subramanian, 2008) – we
  24
     As an aside, there must be some added cost associated with lease ﬁnancing, since otherwise it would be the
dominant form of raising external capital. One cost associated with leasing that is typically considered is the extra
associated agency costs. These will be paid for up front by the lessee.
  25
     As before, this speciﬁcation is isomorphic to running one regressions with all the explanatory variables interacted
with a leasing dummy. Table 9 reports test on the statistical signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence between leased and
non-leased aircraft.



                                                          20
cannot completely rule out the possibility that variation in investment opportunities is driving the
results. However, the fact that the negative relation between creditor rights on aircraft vintage is
concentrated in non-leased aircraft alleviates this concern. There is little reason to suspect that
increased investment opportunities should diﬀerentially impact the vintage of leased as compared to
non-leased aircraft, while the ﬁnancing channel provides a clear prediction regarding the diﬀerential
impact of creditor rights on the two methods of aircraft ﬁnancing.
       One concern with our analysis in this section is that while the ability to foreclose and repossess
assets is in general unique to lessors, there is one exception that also allows secured creditors to
foreclose on assets in the event of bankruptcy. Section 1110 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code provides
relief from the automatic stay of assets in bankruptcy to creditors holding a secured interest in
aircraft, strengthening the creditor rights of these creditors.26 Given that many non-leased aircraft
are likely to be ﬁnanced through secured ﬁnancing, our measures of creditor rights – which includes
automatic stay as one of its components – may be biased downwards for the case of the U.S.
       However, we use in our empirical analysis the entire score of the creditor rights index, and given
that the incidence of automatic stay is highly correlated with the general leniency towards borrow-
ers, our results are unlikely to be driven by the provision of Section 1110 of the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code. Nevertheless, we rerun our regressions by excluding all aircraft from the U.S. and ﬁnd (in
unreported results available upon request) that our results are unchanged even when the U.S. is
excluded from the sample; our results are therefore not driven by Section 1110.

E.      Creditor Rights and Aircraft Leasing: Poor vs. Rich Countries

Table 7 revisits the results of the previous table for richer (higher or equal to GDP per capita
median) and poorer (below GDP per capita median) countries separately. This allows us to control
better for economic development, by not only including all four GDP-based measures of develop-
ment, but also allowing for a more ﬂexible functional form in the relation between aircraft age and
economic development. As can be seen in the table, we ﬁnd that among the development variables,
GDP per capita is the strongest predictor of aircraft age across most of the speciﬁcations with
higher GDP per capita growth associated with younger aircraft.
       More importantly, we ﬁnd that the negative relation between creditor rights and aircraft age is
  26
    The U.S. Bankruptcy Code began to treat aircraft ﬁnancing favorably in 1957, but it was not until 1979 that
Congress amended the Bankruptcy Code and introduced Section 1110 protection which provides creditors relief from
the automatic stay.



                                                      21
driven by rich countries (the coeﬃcient on creditor rights is between -0.648 and -1.017), while for
poor countries the coeﬃcient is between -0.025 and 0.345 and is not statistically diﬀerent from zero.
There are fewer aircraft in the poor countries sample compared to the rich countries sample (35,313
vs. 177,937 observations). However, since we cluster the standard errors by country and given that
there are roughly the same number of countries in each of the sub-samples, the results are not
driven by lack of statistical power in the poor countries regressions. Column 7 of Table 7 focuses
on non-leased aircraft of rich countries excluding all U.S. aircraft, which account for 37.58% of all
aircraft in our sample. We exclude U.S. aircraft as a robustness check to verify that our results are
not driven by speciﬁc characteristics of U.S. airlines that are potentially correlated with creditor
rights. The coeﬃcient of creditor rights is very similar to our previous estimates that include the
U.S. and thus our results are not driven by speciﬁc features of the U.S. airline industry.
      Taken together, our results thus suggest that creditor rights are more important in richer coun-
tries which is consistent with Djankov et al. (2007) who ﬁnd that creditor rights have an impact on
credit markets only in richer countries. In contrast, creditor rights in poorer countries have little
impact on credit market development, possibly due to their lack of enforcement.
      We now turn to test the roles that creditor rights and contract enforcement play in the alleviation
of ﬁnancial constraints and the resultant investment in vintage capital. We follow Djankov et al.
(2003) and use the enforceability of contracts index developed by Business Environmental Risk
Intelligence. The index is on the scale of 0 (low enforcement) to 10 (high enforcement) and is
deﬁned as the “The relative degree to which contractual agreements are honored and complications
presented by language and mentality diﬀerences.”27 The index is available as a cross section of 52
countries (37 rich and 15 poor) for which we have micro-level data on aircraft. Since the index
averages enforcement during the 1990s and early 2000s we restrict the analysis in regressions using
contract enforcement to data for aircraft-years from 1990 onwards. The mean enforcement index
in our sample is 7.48, with rich countries having higher level of enforcement compared to poor
countries (7.84 compared to 4.65 with the diﬀerence signiﬁcant at the 1% level). As the last two
columns of Table 7 clearly show, creditor rights has a strong and signiﬁcant negative relation with
aircraft age in rich countries while enforcement is not statistically signiﬁcant. In contrast, in poor
countries, enforcement is more important than creditor rights. An increase of one point in the
enforcement index lowers aircraft age by 3.9 years in poor countries while the eﬀect of creditor
 27
      See Knack and Keefer (1995) for the exact deﬁnition.


                                                         22
rights is not statistically signiﬁcant. The results in the last two columns of Table 7 support the
conjecture that creditor rights in poorer countries have little impact as they are unlikely to be
enforced.

F.      Robustness Tests: Government Ownership and Regulation

We now turn to check the robustness of our results in several ways. First since many commercial
airlines are either fully or partially state-owned we need to control directly for government ownership
in our regressions. One concern about government ownership is that it is correlated with creditor
rights and hence potentially biasing our point estimates. Similarly, diﬀerences in aviation regulation
may inﬂuence aircraft vintage while at the same time be correlated with a country’s creditor rights
index. Thus, we need direct measures of both government ownership at the airline level, and
aviation regulation quality at the country level.

F.1      Government Ownership, Creditor Rights and Aircraft Vintage

The ﬁnancing channel would predict that commercial airlines with government ownership can utilize
the government as a source of capital to ease ﬁnancing constraints. Commercial airlines wholly or
partially owned by the government may have a ‘soft’ budget constraint and as a result should have
ﬂeets of younger vintage. Furthermore, governments may be willing to invest more in new aircraft
in their ‘ﬂag carriers’ as they represent the country internationally. According to Littlejohns and
McGairl (1998): “Because a new aircraft symbolizes not only the nation’s prestige, but also the
skill of its leaders, it is easy for politicians to value these symbols far above mere prudence.”28
We collect data on government ownership in airlines from Ascend Case, and supplement it with
information from airline web sites and Lexis-Nexis to construct a dummy variable taking on the
value of 1 for airlines with some government ownership in a particular year, and zero otherwise.
      We then run regressions similar to the speciﬁcation in regression 4 for all commercial aircraft
with the government ownership dummy as an additional control. The sample is divided into
leased and non-leased aircraft, and results are presented in Table 8. First, as hypothesized, and
consistent with a ﬁnancing channel for vintage capital, government ownership is negatively related
to aircraft vintage, suggesting that governments do indeed relieve some of the ﬁnancial constraints
of the airlines which they own. Moreover, even after controlling for government ownership, creditor
 28
      Littlejohns and McGairl (1998) p. 216.



                                                    23
rights is negatively related to both aircraft age and technological age of non-leased aircraft. The
coeﬃcients of creditor rights in the diﬀerent speciﬁcations (between -0.619 and -1.067) are generally
higher than those found in the panel data regressions.

F.2      Aviation Regulation, Creditor Rights and Aircraft Vintage

As an additional robustness test, in Table 9, we add to the regressions in Table 8 a measure of the
quality of aviation regulation for country c at year t. We construct this measure using information
from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that ranks the overall quality of a country’s civil
aviation authority. FAA inspectors assess civil aviation authorities around the world based on
their authorities to license and oversee air carriers in accordance with International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) aviation safety standards. The FAA classiﬁes countries into two: those that
are compliant with ICAO standards and those that are not compliant with ICAO standards.29
       We were able to obtain data on FAA classiﬁcations for 67 countries for the years 1994-2003,
resulting in a total of 188,142 aircraft. We construct a dummy variable measuring aviation quality
which takes on the value of 1 for countries that comply with ICAO standards in a particular year,
and zero for those that fail to comply. We then run similar speciﬁcations to regression 4 adding
the aviation quality dummy as an explanatory variable.30 Column 1 reports results using the
sample of all the commercial aircraft, in columns 2 and 3 the sample is divided into leased and
non-leased aircraft, and in column 4 we use only military aircraft. The ﬁrst four columns of Table
9 conﬁrm our previous ﬁndings. After controlling for both government ownership and aviation
regulation quality, it is only the vintage of non-leased commercial aircraft which is related to the
creditor rights index while the vintages of leased commercial aircraft and military aircraft are not.
Furthermore, controlling for government ownership and aviation regulation increases the impact of
creditor rights as compared to our previous estimates – moving from a creditor rights score of 0 to
a creditor rights score of 4 reduces non-leased commercial aircraft age by 7.38 years.
       In the last 2 columns of Table 9 we test the signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence between the coeﬃcient
on creditor rights in: (i) the military and commercial non-leased aircraft subsamples; and (ii)
  29
     According to the FAA a country fails to comply if one the following deﬁciencies are identiﬁed: (i) lack of laws
or regulations necessary to support the certiﬁcation and oversight of air carriers, (ii) lack of the technical expertise,
resources, and organization to license or oversee air carrier operations; (iii) lack of adequately trained and qualiﬁed
technical personnel; (iv) lack of enforcement or compliance with, minimum international standards; and (v) insuﬃcient
documentation and records of certiﬁcation of air carrier operations.
  30
     We do not include operator or country ﬁxed-eﬀects in these regressions since the aviation quality measure hardly
changes over time within a country.


                                                           24
the commercial leased and non-leased aircraft subsamples. To do so, we ﬁrst add an interaction
coeﬃcient between the creditor rights score and a dummy variable capturing whether an aircraft
is a military aircraft to the previous regressions (Columns 1-4). As can be seen, the interaction
coeﬃcient is positive and signiﬁcant at the 10% level, indicating that the negative relation between
creditor rights and the vintage of non-leased aircraft is statistically diﬀerent than that between
creditor rights and the vintage of military aircraft. In Column 6 we add an interaction term
between creditor rights and a dummy variable taking on the value of one if an aircraft is leased.
Again, the positive coeﬃcient on the interaction term demonstrates that the diﬀerence between the
coeﬃcients on the creditor rights variable in the leased and non-leased subsamples (Columns 2 and
3) is statistically signiﬁcant.

G.     Creditor Rights, Financial Constraints and Aircraft Vintage

We now turn to analyze the eﬀect of creditor rights on aircraft age conditional on the ﬁnancial
condition of the operator. According to Prediction 3 of the model, since airlines with greater
internal funds are less likely to rely on external ﬁnancing, they should be less aﬀected by the legal
system in which they operate or local ﬁnancial development. Thus, we expect the eﬀect of creditor
rights on aircraft age to be larger for more ﬁnancially constrained airlines.
     Similar to the previous section, testing this prediction alleviates the concern that creditor rights
are positively correlated with unobserved investment opportunities, and that it this correlation
which is driving the negative relation between creditor rights and aircraft vintage. This is be-
cause there is little reason to suspect that increases in creditor rights are more strongly correlated
with improved investment opportunities in ﬁnancially constrained ﬁrms as compared to ﬁnancially
unconstrained ﬁrms.
     To test this prediction, we obtain information on airline ﬁnancial data from Compustat Global.
We are able to match 67 airlines from 28 countries to the countries covered by Djankov et al. (2007),
representing a panel of 63,036 non-military aircraft. We then employ in our regression speciﬁcation
interaction terms between the country’s creditor rights index and airline-level measures of ﬁnancial
distress. Our approach is similar to Rajan and Zingales (1998) who identify the eﬀects of ﬁnancial
development on growth using interaction terms between ﬁnancial development (at the country
level) and ﬁnancial dependence (at the industry level). Our analysis focuses on two measures of
ﬁnancial constraints: leverage and long-term debt, both used by Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007) which


                                                   25
were found empirically to be determinants of used capital investment. We obtain similar results
using other measures such as proﬁtability. We estimate the following regression for both leased and
non-leased aircraft separately:

         V intageiact = α × Creditor rightsct + β × F inConstact                                             (6)

                        + γ × Creditor rightsct × F inConstact + Xct λ + yt θ + zac ψ + iact ,

Where F inConstact is a measure of the airline ﬁnancial constraints (either leverage deﬁned as total
debt divided by the book value of assets, or long-term debt deﬁned as long-term debt divided
by the book value of assets), and Creditor rightsct × F inConstact is an interaction term between
creditor rights and airline ﬁnancial constraints. Regression are estimated with heteroscedasticity
robust standard errors clustered by country. Results using aircraft age as the dependent variable
are presented in Table 10.31
    Consistent with the ﬁnancing channel, the interaction term between creditor rights and lever-
age and the interaction term between creditor rights and long-term debt in the non-leased aircraft
subsample (Columns 1, 3, 5, 7) are negative, indicating that the eﬀect of creditor rights on air-
craft age is indeed concentrated in ﬁnancially constrained airlines. In contrast, consistent with our
previous results and consistent with a ﬁnancing channel, we do not ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant
interaction coeﬃcient between creditor rights and measures of ﬁnancial constraints in the leased
aircraft subsample. While both leverage and long-term debt are clearly endogenous, our identiﬁ-
cation strategy in Table 10 relies on the interaction between country and ﬁrm characteristics. By
focusing on interaction eﬀects we reduce the number of potential alternative explanations for our
ﬁndings.
    Focusing on the ﬁrst column of Table 10, we ﬁnd that reducing a country’s level of investor
protection from a creditor-rights score of 4 to a creditor rights score of 0, increases the average age
of aircraft operated by airlines in the 25th percentile of leverage by 0.95 years. In contrast, for
airlines in the 75th leverage percentile, i.e. those that are arguably more ﬁnancially constrained,
we ﬁnd that reducing creditor rights from a score of 4 to a score of 0 increases average age by
four times as much – 3.98 years, representing a 30 percent increase compared to the sample wide
average of aircraft age.
  31
     We obtain similar results using aircraft technological age as the dependent variable. We do not report these
results for brevity.



                                                       26
H.     Creditor Rights and Fleet Size

We now analyze the relation between creditor rights and ﬂeet size. According to Prediction 2
of the model, ﬁrms operating in countries with better creditor rights should operate larger ﬂeets
on average. This is because operator scale will not be constrained by the availability and cost
of external ﬁnance. This prediction is broadly consistent with the empirical ﬁndings in Kumar,
Rajan, and Zingales (2002) who ﬁnd that the average ﬁrm size is larger in countries with better
institutional development.
     In order to test this prediction we need a measure of ﬂeet size. This is somewhat complicated
by the fact that airline ﬂeets include multiple aircraft types of diﬀerent size and use. Thus, a
measure of ﬂeet size must weigh aircraft of diﬀerent variety in an appropriate manner. Rather
than committing to one particular weight system, we test Prediction 2 using a number of weighing
schemes. To do so, for each aircraft type in our sample, we gather information on that aircraft
type’s maximal seat capacity, its maximal takeoﬀ weight, and the aircraft type’s wingspan. This
data is gathered from Singﬁeld (2005) as well as from a variety of Internet sources. Based on this
information, for each operator and year in our sample, we then construct four measures of ﬂeet size.
The ﬁrst is simply an equal-weighted sum of all aircraft operated. The remaining three measures
of ﬂeet size are: (1) the sum of the seat capacities of all aircraft in the ﬂeet, (2) the sum of the
maximal takeoﬀ weight of all aircraft in the ﬂeet, and (3) the sum of the wingspans of all aircraft
in the ﬂeet.
     Having constructed these four ﬂeet-size measures, we then run the following regression speciﬁ-
cation for all operator ﬂeets in our sample period of 1978-2003:

                 log(Sizeact) = α × Creditor rightsct + Xct λ + yt θ + za ψ + iact ,               (7)

The dependant variable, log(Sizeact), is the logarithm of each of our four ﬂeet-size measures for
operator a in country c in year t. As usual, Creditor rights is the creditor rights score of country
c in year t, and Xc is the standard vector of country-speciﬁc control variables. All regressions
include year ﬁxed eﬀects, y t, and operator ﬁxed eﬀects represented by the vector of variables za .
The regressions are estimated with heteroscedasticity robust standard errors clustered by country.
Finally, as in the case of aircraft age, regression 7 is estimated separately for commercial operators
and military operators.
     The results are provided in Table 11. As our results demonstrate, using all four ﬂeet-size proxies,

                                                   27
the coeﬃcient on the creditor rights index is consistently positive and statistically signiﬁcant in
the commercial operators regressions after controlling for GDP per capita, population, area, as
well as year and operator ﬁxed eﬀects. In contrast to commercial operators, and consistent with
our previous results, there is no robust relation between creditor rights and ﬂeet size of military
operators. None of the creditor rights coeﬃcients are statistically diﬀerent from zero in any of the
military operators regressions, and the point estimates in these regressions are always lower than
their commercial regressions counterparts (they are actually negative in 3 out of 4 regressions).
Thus, consistent with prediction 2 of the model, airlines in countries with higher creditor rights
do indeed operate larger ﬂeets. Given that we run a semi-log speciﬁcation with respect to creditor
rights, the coeﬃcient of creditor rights is equal to the percentage change in ﬂeet size associated with
a unit change in creditor rights (dlog(Size)act/dCRct ). This eﬀect is economically signiﬁcant. For
example, moving from the lowest creditor rights score of zero, to the highest score of four, increases
the number of aircraft in a commercial airline’s ﬂeet by 22 percent. Moving from the lowest to the
highest score of creditor rights increases total ﬂeet seat capacity by 72.8 percent. The eﬀect for the
remaining two ﬂeet size measures – total ﬂeet maximal takeoﬀ weight and total ﬂeet wingspan – is
73.2 and 55.2 percent, respectively.
   In addition, we study the relation between ﬂeet size and creditor rights conditional on the
ﬁnancial constraints that an airline is facing. In results not reported, we ﬁnd no evidence that
the positive relation between creditor rights and ﬂeet size exhibited in Table 11 is concentrated
amongst ﬁnancially constrained airlines. This could stem from a selection bias arising from the fact
that accounting data availability constrains our analysis to publicly traded airlines, which tend to
be the largest airlines in each country. Alternatively, this could be driven by the positive relation
which arises between leverage and ﬂeet size when airlines use debt to purchase additional aircraft.
   As a ﬁnal test, we analyze the relation between ﬂeet age and ﬂeet size. The model predicts that
constrained ﬁrms should operate both smaller and older ﬂeets. We test therefore whether smaller
ﬂeets are indeed comprised of older vintage aircraft. We regress aircraft age on the logarithm of
our four measures of ﬂeet size – the number of aircraft operated in the ﬂeet, the sum of the seat
capacities of all aircraft in the ﬂeet, the sum of the maximal takeoﬀ weight of all aircraft in the
ﬂeet, and the sum of the wingspans of all aircraft in the ﬂeet – while including our standard control
variables. The results are presented in Table 13. As can be seen, in all speciﬁcations we ﬁnd a
statistically signiﬁcant negative relation between ﬂeet size and aircraft age; as the model predicts,

                                                  28
smaller ﬂeets tend to operate older aircraft. This result is very much consistent with Eisfeldt and
Rampini (2007) who show that smaller ﬁrms are more likely to employ used, as opposed to new,
capital.


V.      Conclusion

We provide novel evidence linking creditor rights and vintage capital using a panel of aircraft-level
data around the world. Consistent with theories that emphasize the protection of property rights as
essential for economic development, we ﬁnd that better creditor rights are associated with aircraft
of a younger vintage and ﬁrms with larger aircraft ﬂeets. Further, consistent with a ﬁnancing
channel, we ﬁnd that the association between creditor rights and aircraft vintage is concentrated
amongst non-leased commercial aircraft. Finally, we ﬁnd that airlines with lower leverage ratios
and airlines with less debt overhang, are less sensitive to creditor rights as they may use internal
funds, rather than external capital, to ﬁnance investment.
     The evidence in our paper shows that legal protection of creditor rights aﬀects both capital
vintage, technological diﬀusion and ﬁrm scale. Better creditor protection helps airlines to miti-
gate ﬁnancial short-falls and enhance investment in newer, more eﬃcient and more technologically
advanced aircraft. While we study the relation between vintage aircraft and creditor rights, our re-
sults propose a broader link, not conﬁned only to the airline industry, between investor protection,
real corporate investment and economic growth; legal protection of creditors facilitates the ability
of ﬁrms to make large capital investments, adapt advanced technologies and fosters productivity.




                                                 29
Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 1. Deﬁne z(qnew ) = pold ∗ h(qnew ) to be the price of obtaining income
f (qnew ) using a ﬂeet of old technology aircraft. For simplicity in what follows we drop the subscript
and denote qnew by q. If z  (0) ≥ 1, from the convexity of z we have that z(q) > q for all q > 0 and
the proposition trivially holds with µ̄ = 0. Similarly, if z  (0) < 1 and z(q) < q for all q > 0 the
proposition trivially holds with µ̄ = 1. Assume then that z  (0) < 1 and that there exists a q > 0
with z(q) = q. By the convexity of z, this q is unique, and we denote it by q ∗ . Clearly z(q) < q for
q < q ∗ and z(q) > q for q > q ∗ .

Now, for any µ we deﬁne the ‘ﬁnancable set’ to be all q with c(q) ≤ µf (q), where c(q) = min(z(q), q).
Since f is concave, z is convex, f (0) = 0, and z(0) = 0 it is easy to see that for any µ the ﬁnancable
set equals [0, q] for some q. Now, deﬁne µ∗ to satisfy µf (q ∗ ) = q ∗ . By deﬁnition of q ∗ , the ﬁnancable
set at µ∗ is [0, q ∗]. Since in this region z(q) < q for all q which are ﬁnancable, a ﬁrm operating in
a country with creditor protection µ∗ chooses the old technology ﬂeet. Similarly, for any µ < µ∗ ,
the ﬁnancable set equals [0, q ] for some q  < q ∗ , so that again, z(q) < q for all ﬁnancable q. Thus,
again, any ﬁrm operating in a country with creditor protection µ < µ∗ chooses the old technology.

Deﬁne q uc to be the solution to the unconstrained problem M axq [f (q) − c(q)]. Since by assumption
the new technology is preferred to the old when µ = 1, we have that c(q uc ) = q uc , so that q uc > q ∗ .
Deﬁne µ∗∗ to satisfy µf (q uc ) = q uc . Clearly, for any µ ≥ µ∗∗ , q uc is ﬁnancable, so that a ﬁrm op-
erating in a country with µ > µ∗∗ chooses the unconstrained solution and hence the new technology.

Now, for all µ∗ < µ < µ∗∗ the ﬁnancable set equals [0, q̄(µ)] for some q∗ < q̄(µ) < q uc . Deﬁne
V (µ) to be the solution to the maximization problem of a ﬁrm operating in a country with creditor
protection µ∗ < µ < µ∗∗ . That is, V = M axq [f (q) − c(q)] s.t. q ≤ q̄(µ). Further, deﬁne V1 as
the solution to the maximization problem M axq [f (q) − c(q)] s.t. q ≤ q ∗ , and V2 (µ) as the solution
to the maximization problem M axq [f (q) − c(q)] s.t. q ∗ ≤ q < q̄(µ). Clearly, V = max[V1 , V2(µ)]
and a ﬁrm in country µ will choose the new technology iﬀ V2 (µ) > V1 . Now, it is easy to see that
V2 (µ) is increasing in µ. Also, since the new technology is preferred to the old with no constraints,
we have that V2 (µ∗∗ ) > V1 . Thus, since V1 is independent of µ, there exists a µ∗ ≤ µ̄ < µ∗∗ such
that for all µ∗ ≤ µ ≤ µ̄, V1 ≥ V2 (µ) and for all µ̄ ≤ µ ≤ µ∗∗ , V2 (µ) ≥ V1 . Thus, ﬁrms in countries
with µ∗ ≤ µ ≤ µ̄ choose the old technology, while ﬁrms in countries with µ̄ < µ ≤ µ∗∗ choose the
new technology. This, combined with the fact that ﬁrms in countries with µ ≤ µ∗ choose the old
technology, while ﬁrms in countries with µ ≥ µ∗∗ choose the new technology proves the proposition.

Proof of Propositions 2 and 3. Proposition 2 is a direct consequence of Proposition 1, and
Proposition 3 is a direct consequence of the fact that as µ tends to zero, the ﬂeet size that is
ﬁnancable under the constrained maximization problem tends to zero as well.

Proof of Proposition 4. Following the proof of Proposition 1, deﬁne q ∗ to solve z(q) = q and
deﬁne V1 as the solution to the maximization problem M axq [f (q) − c(q)] s.t. q ≤ q ∗ . Note that to
obtain V1 a ﬁrm will choose the old technology ﬂeet since in the region q ≤ q ∗ this is the eﬃcient
means of production (c(q) < q). Deﬁne now V2 (q̄) as the solution to the maximization problem
M axq [f (q) − c(q)] s.t. q ∗ ≤ q < q̄. Since f is concave, V2 is increasing in q̄ up to q uc , the solution

                                                    30
to the unconstrained problem. Further, since V2 (q uc ) > V1 – i.e. the new technology is preferred
to the old technology under the unconstrained solution – by continuity of V2 and by the fact that
V2 (q ∗ ) ≤ V1 there exists a q ∗∗ ≥ q ∗ such that V2 (q ∗∗ ) = V1 . Since V2 is increasing in the range
[q ∗∗ , quc), if q ∗∗ is ﬁnancable, the optimal solution of the ﬁrm’s maximization problem, q opt , will
satisfy q opt ≥ q ∗∗ . Since in this region the new technology ﬂeet is the eﬃcient means of production
(i.e. q < c(q)), the ﬁrm will then choose the new technology ﬂeet. In contrast, if q ∗∗ is not ﬁnanca-
ble, then q opt will be smaller then q ∗∗ . By deﬁnition of q ∗∗ , V1 will then be greater than V2 (q opt).
In this case, therefore, the ﬁrm will choose the old technology ﬂeet to obtain V1 .

Consider now a ﬁrm operating in a country with creditor protection µ. Suppose ﬁrst that c(q ∗∗ ) ≤
µf (q ∗∗ ), so that a ﬁrm with no internal wealth can ﬁnance q ∗∗ . As described above, since q ∗∗ is
ﬁnancable, the ﬁrm will employ the new technology ﬂeet. Further, since any ﬁrm with positive
internal wealth will also be able to ﬁnance q ∗∗ , the proposition will then trivially hold with Ā = 0.
Consider now the case where c(q ∗∗ ) > µf (q ∗∗ ), so that q ∗∗ is not ﬁnancable for a ﬁrm with no
internal wealth. Deﬁne A(µ) = c(q ∗∗ ) − µf (q ∗∗ ). By deﬁnition, any ﬁrm with internal wealth
A ≥ A(µ) will be able to ﬁnance q ∗∗ , and so, as above, will choose to employ the new technology
ﬂeet. Finally, since q ∗∗ is independent of µ, the threshold level A(µ) is decreasing in µ.



Economies of Scale and the Convexity of the Equivalency Function
In this subsection, we provide an analysis showing how economies of scale in the operation of new
technology aircraft will drive the equivalency function to be convex. While we formulate the dis-
cussion by referring to aircraft, so long as a new technology provides greater economies of scale
in operating costs as compared to an old technology, our results clearly generalize to other industries.

Consider an airline deciding on its scale of operation and whether to use new or old technology
aircraft. New and old aircraft diﬀer only in their associated cost structures. Marginal revenues
associated with operating either an old or new ﬂeet are assumed to be equal, for example, because
passengers do not place much emphasis on the vintage of the aircraft in which they ﬂy. Denote
therefore by p(q) the marginal revenue associated with operating q aircraft, whether employing
a new or old aircraft ﬂeet. As usual, marginal revenue is decreasing in the quantity of aircraft
operated, p < 0; For example, because when an airline operates a larger ﬂeet, it will serve more
marginal markets.

Assume that operating a ﬂeet of new aircraft involves economies of scale, for example due to the
lower maintenance costs of the associated new, more homogenous aircraft. In contrast, operating
a ﬂeet of old technology aircraft does not exhibit such economies of scale, for example, because a
ﬂeet of old aircraft is more heterogenous which does not allow operating eﬃciencies in maintenance.
Formally, we assume that the marginal cost of the old technology aircraft is constant at cH , while
the new technology’s marginal cost is c(q) with c < 0 and c(0) = cH .
                                                        q
The proﬁt from operating q new technology aircraft is 0 (p(x) − c(x))dx. Equivalently, the proﬁt
                                           h
from operating h old technology aircraft is 0 (p(x) − cH )dx. The equivalency function h(q) is then
deﬁned by

                                                    31
                                 q                             h(q)
                                      (p(x) − c(x))dx =                 (p(x) − cH )dx            (8)
                              0                              0



To investigate the conditions under which h is convex, we diﬀerentiate with respect to q to obtain


                                      p(q) − c(q) = (p(h(q)) − cH )h (q)                         (9)



Rearranging yields h (q) = p(h(q))−c
                             p(q)−c(q)
                                       . Since a ﬁrm will never choose to operate at a scale where
                                     H
marginal cost is greater than marginal revenue, we have that both numerator and denominator are
greater than zero, implying that h > 0. Further, from (8), it is easy to see that h(q) > q (i.e. a
ﬂeet of new aircraft is equivalent to a larger ﬂeet of old aircraft), which together with c(q) ≤ cH
implies that h > 1.

Diﬀerentiating (9) with respect to q once more and rearranging yields:

                                             p (q) − c (q) − p (h(q))(h(q))2
                              h (q) =                                                          (10)
                                                        p(h(q)) − cH

Since the denominator is positive, the equivalency function h is convex when:

                                      p (q) − c (q) − p (h(q))(h (q))2 > 0                   (11)

It is therefore easy to see that as the economies of scale associated with the new technology ﬂeet
increase – i.e. c becomes more negative – the right hand side of equation (11) increases and the
equivalency function h is more likely to be convex. Indeed, if the economies of scale are suﬃciently
large, h will be convex. The intuition is straightforward: because of the economies of scale, the
relative advantage of the new aircraft ﬂeet increases with its size. Therefore, as the size of a new
aircraft ﬂeet increases, the marginal increase in old aircraft required to replicate the new ﬂeet will
be ever increasing – i.e. h is convex.

As an aside, from the additional terms in (11), it is readily seen that while economies of scale
create convexity, they are not required. Indeed, assume that both new and old aircraft have ﬁxed
marginal costs and that the marginal cost of new aircraft, cL is lower than that of old ones, cH –
for example, because of new aircraft’s higher fuel eﬃciency.

From 11, the condition for the convexity of h becomes p (q) − p (h(q))(h(q))2 > 0. A suﬃcient
condition for convexity of h is then than the marginal revenue p is weakly concave. To see this
recall that h > 1, and that since h(q) > q, we have that 0 > p (q) ≥ p (h(q)).

The intuition is as follows. Since a new aircraft ﬂeet has lower marginal cost, the ‘equivalent’ old
ﬂeet will always be larger in size (i.e. h(q) > q). As the new ﬂeet increases in size, the equivalent

                                                        32
old ﬂeet must increase as well, and further, it must do so at a faster rate than that of the new ﬂeet
(i.e. h (q) > q). This is due to two eﬀects: ﬁrst, new aircraft are (by assumption) advantaged in
that they have lower marginal cost. Second, because the old ﬂeet is larger than the new ﬂeet, the
marginal revenue that it obtains when it expands is smaller than that obtained by the expansion of
the new ﬂeet. To make up for these two disadvantages, when the new ﬂeet expands, the equivalent
old ﬂeet must expand by a greater amount. Now, when the marginal revenue function is weakly
concave, the severity of the second eﬀect (i.e. of diﬀerential marginal revenues) increases with
the size of the new ﬂeet. This is because the diﬀerence between the size of the new ﬂeet and its
equivalent old ﬂeet increases with the size of the new ﬂeet (h(q) − q increases). Since the marginal
revenue is weakly concave, this implies that the diﬀerence in marginal revenue of the old and the
new ﬂeet will increase as well. Thus, since the severity of the second eﬀect increases with ﬂeet size,
the marginal amount by which the equivalent old ﬂeet needs to expand is increasing in new ﬂeet
size – that is, the equivalency function h is convex.




                                                 33
Appendix B
                                    Table B1
                     Countries with Most and Least Aircraft


                                    Countries with Most Aircraft 1978-2003
                    Country               Commercial       Military         Total                                 Share
1.                  United States           147,880        36,242          184,122                               37.58%
2.                Russian Federation         24,129        13,778          37,907                                 7.74%
3.                 United Kingdom            15,396         4,160          19,556                                 3.99%
4.                     Canada                15,356         3,050          18,406                                 3.76%
5.                      France               10,441         3,359          13,800                                 2.82%
6.                      China                9,499          3,061          12,560                                 2.56%
7.                      Brazil               6,741          4,662          11,403                                 2.33%
8.                      Japan                9,530          1,561          11,091                                 2.26%
9.                    Germany                10,120          793           10,913                                 2.22%
10.                     Spain                 6,053         3,119           9,172                                 1.87%

                                  Countries         with Least Aircraft 1978-2003
120.                 Macedonia                       90              0                       90                  0.018%
121.                  Burundi                        87              0                       87                  0.018%
122-3.                 Haiti                         71             11                       82                  0.017%
122-3.                 Benin                         82              0                       82                  0.017%
124.                  Rwanda                         79              0                       79                  0.016%
125.          Central African Republic               67              0                       67                  0.014%
126.                   Togo                          18             44                       62                  0.013%
127.                   Niger                         17             34                       51                  0.010%
128.                  Albania                        49              0                       49                  0.010%
129.          Bosnia and Herzegovina                 44              0                       44                  0.009%



This table ranks countries based on the total number of aircraft in the sample. Share is total aircraft divided by total aircraft
in the sample.




                                                             34
References
Acharya, Viral V., and Krishnamurthy Subramanian, “Bankruptcy Codes and Innovation,” Review
of Financial Studies, Forthcoming (2008).
Acharya, Viral V., Yakov Amihud, and Lubomir Litov, “Creditor Rights and Corporate Risk-
taking,” Working Paper (2008).
Air Transport Association, “The Airline Handbook”, 2007
Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza, “Finance and the Sources of Growth,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 2000.
Benhabib, Jess and Aldo Rustichini, “Vintage Capital, Investment, and Growth,” Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory, 55 (1991), 323-339.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K., Bergman, “Liquidation Values and the Credibility of Financial
Contract Renegotiation: Evidence from U.S. Airlines ,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,(2008),
123(4) 1635-1677..
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman “Collateral Pricing,” Journal of Financial Economics,
(2009), 91(3) 339-360.
Bergman, Nittai, K., and Daniel Nicolaievsky “Investor Protection and the Coasian View,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 2007.
Braun, Matias, “Financial Contractibility and Assets’ Hardness,” Mimeo, 2003.
Boucekkine, Raouf, David de la Croix, and Omar Licandro, “Vintage Capital,” New Palgrave
Dictionary in Economics, Second Edition, (2008) Forthcoming.
Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt,” Journal
of Political Economy, 1989a, 97(1) 155-178.
Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?” American Economic
Review, 1989b, 79(1) 43-50.
Chari, V. V., and H. Hopenhayn, “Vintage Human Capital, Growth and the Diﬀusion of New
technology,” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (1991), 1142-1165.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic, “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,” Journal of
Finance, 53(6) (1998), 2107-2137.
Djankov, S., R., La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Courts,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, (2003), 453-517.
Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, “Private Credit in 129 Countries,” Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics, (2007).
Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Adriano Rampini, “New or Used? Investment with Credit Constraints,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (2007) 2656-2681.
Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Adriano Rampini, “Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and Debt Capacity,” Re-
view of Financial Studies, (2009), 1621-1657.
Esty, Benjamin, and William Megginson, “Creditor Rights, Enforcement, and Debt Ownership
Structure: Evidence from the Global Syndicated Market,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 38(1) (2003), 37-59.



                                              35
Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love, “Financial Development and Intersectoral Allocation: A New
Approach,” Journal of Finance, 59(6) (2004), 2785-2807.
Gavazza, Alessandro, “Asset Liquidity and Financial Contracts: Evidence from Aircraft Leases,”
Working paper, Yale University (2007).
Greenwood J., Z., Hercowitz, and P. Krusell, “Long-Run Implications of Investment Speciﬁc Tech-
nological Change,” American Economic Review, 87 (1997), 342-362.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Does Local Financial Development Matter?,”
Quarterly journal of Economics, 119(3) (2004), 929-969.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, “Endogenous Growth and Obsolescence,” Journal of Development Economics,
66 (2001), 153-171.
Jovanovic, Boyan, “Vintage Capital and Inequality,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1 (1998) 497-
530.
King, Robert, and Ross Levine, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108 (1993), 717-738.
Kloek, T., “OLS Estimation in a Model where a Microvariable is Explained by Aggregates and
Contemporaneous Disturbances are Equicorrelated,” Econometrica 49 (1981), 205-207.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country Tests
Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics and Politics VII (1995), 207-227.
Kumar, Krishna B., Raghuram G., Rajan, and Luigi Zingales, “What Determine Firm Size?,”
Working Paper University of Chicago GSB, (2002).
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Legal Determinants of
External Finance,” Journal of Finance, (1997).
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Law and Finance,” Journal
of Political Economy, (1998).
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Economic Consequences of Legal
Origin,” Working Paper Harvard University, (2007).
Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, “Does Legal Enforcement Aﬀect Financial Transactions? The
Contractual Channel in Private Equity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1) (2005), 223-246.
Liberty, Jose, and Atif Mian, “Collateral Spread and Financial Development,” Working paper,
University of Chicago (2007).
Littlejohns, Andrew, and Stephen McGairl, eds., Aircraft Financing (third edition), (Euromoney
Books, England), 1998.
Peter S. Morrel, Airline Finance (second edition), (Ashgate, USA), 2007
Ongena, Steven, and David Smith, “What Determines the Number of Bank Relationships? Cross-
Country Evidence,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 9(1) (2000), 26-56.
Qian, Jun, and Philip E., Strahan. “How Law and Institutions Shape Financial Contracts: The
Case of Bank Loans,” Journal of Finance, (2007) Forthcoming.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, “Financial Development and Growth,” American Eco-
nomic Review, 88 (1998), 559-586.
Solow, R., “Investment and Technological Progress,” In K. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes (eds.)
Mathematical Methods in Social Sciences 1959, (1960), 89-104. Stanford University Press.

                                               36
Shleifer, Andrei, “Will the Sovereign Market Survive?,” American Economic Review, 93(2) (2003),
85-90.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equi-
librium Approach,” Journal of Finance, 47 (1992), 143-66.
Singﬁeld, Tom, ”Airliners Worldwide – 2nd Edition,” Midland Publishing, 2005
Wurgler, Jeﬀrey, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 58 (2000), 187-214.




                                              37
                                   f (qnew)

                                                   qnew




                           q*new                                qnew

   Figure 1:   Combined cost and revenue functions of new and old technologies.




Value                                               V New(µ)

                                                   V Old(µ, pOld)




                                                                     1.0     µ
         Old Tech                           New Tech


   Figure 2:   New and old technology value functions.




                                                           38
                     0
                         1    4    7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46
                  -500

              -1000
          Hours




              -1500

              -2000

              -2500

              -3000
                                                            Age (years)




Figure 3:          Annual hourly utilization as a function of aircraft age. Regression coeﬃcients are calculated using year and
aircraft-type ﬁxed eﬀects. 95% conﬁdence intervals are calculated using standard errors that are clustered by aircraft type.




                                                               39
                                                  Table 1:
                                              Summary Statistics


                                                     Panel A: Aircraft Age
                              1978-1979        1980-1989   1990-1999   2000-2003            Full Sample     Commercial         Military
Aircraft age
   Minimum                        0                0                0             0              0                 0               0
   25th Percentile                4                5                5             6              6                 5               8
   Mean                          9.2              11.0             13.5         14.7           13.0              12.0            16.0
   Median                         10               11               12           13             12                11              15
   75th Percentile                13               17               21           22             19                18              23
   Maximum                        32               42               52           56             56                56              47
   Standard deviation            5.5              7.4              9.4          10.6            9.2               8.8             9.8
   # of Aircraft types            96              136              196           202            219              161             200
   # of Operators                969             2,134            4,051         3,133          5,987            5,437            893
   # of Countries                 89              102              129           129            129              129             115
   # of Observations            18,854          128,455          235,860       106,747        489,916          373,261         116,655

                                       Panel B: Technological Age
                      1978-1979   1980-1989    1990-1999   2000-2003                        Full Sample     Commercial         Military
Broad technological age (Narrow technological age)
  Minimum                0 (0)       0 (0)       0 (0)        0 (0)                             0 (0)           0 (0)           0 (0)
  25th Percentile        13 (9)     15 (10)     14 (11)      16 (13)                           14 (11)         13 (10)         20 (15)
  Mean                16.1 (12.6) 19.3 (15.3) 22.7 (19.0)  24.2 (20.7)                       21.9 (18.2)     20.2 (16.7)     27.1 (22.7)
  Median                16 (12)     20 (16)     24 (19)      22 (19)                           21 (17)         20 (16)         27 (22)
  75th Percentile       20 (17)     24 (20)     30 (27)      34 (30)                           29 (25)         27 (23)         35 (30)
  Maximum               32 (32)     43 (43)     52 (52)      56 (56)                           56 (56)         56 (56)         47 (47)
  Standard deviation   5.2 (5.1)   7.3 (6.9)   9.9 (9.5))  11.6 (11.1)                        9.8 (9.4)       9.1 (8.8)      10.1 (10.0)
  # of Aircraft types      96         136         196          202                               219             161             200
  # of Operators          969        2,134       4,051        3,133                             5,987           5,437            893
  # of Countries           89         102         129          129                               129             129             115
  # of Observations     18,854     128,455      235,860     106,747                           489,916         373,261         116,655

                                          Panel C: Country Characteristics
                                            GDP      English     French                        German          Nordic          Socialist
                       Creditor rights per capita legal origin legal origin                  legal origin    legal origin    legal origin
   Minimum                    0            $82.16       0            0                             0               0               0
   25th Percentile            1           $2,122.3      0            0                             0               0               0
   Mean                     1.64          $17,037.1    0.57        0.22                          0.10            0.02            0.10
   Median                     1           $19,591.6     1            0                             0               0               0
   75th Percentile            2           $28,262.6     1            0                             0               0               0
   Maximum                    4           $45,390.5     1            1                             1               1               1
   Standard deviation       1.01          $12,410.4    0.50        0.41                          0.30            0.12            0.31
   Number of Observations by legal origin            276,601     107,587                        47,070          7,676           50,982

This table reports summary statistics for aircraft age, technological age (broad and narrow), and country characteristics. The summary
statistics for aircraft age are reported for the periods 1978-1979, 1980-1989, 1990-1999, 2000-2003, as well as for the entire period. The
table also reports summary statistics separately for commercial and military aircraft.




                                                            40
                                                 Table 2:
                                       Aircraft Vintage and Usage


Dependent                   Hours           Hours           Hours            Hours           Hours            Hours
Variable=                 (per year)      (per year)      (per year)       (per year)      (per year)       (per year)

Age                        -57.61 a        -57.54 a         -4.287
                            (6.219)         (6.207)        (29.662)

Tech Age                                                                   -31.964 b        -31.896 b         27.010
(broad)                                                                     (13.799)         (13.763)        (23.422)

Jet Fuel                                    84.456        276.341 b                         119.151         330.397 a
                                           (63.858)       (137.546)                         (72.515)         (95.056)

Age× Jet Fuel                                              -11.951 c
                                                            (6.407)

Tech Age× Jet Fuel                                                                                          -18.457 a
                                                                                                             (4.726)

Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                          Yes             No              Yes             Yes              No              Yes
# of Aircraft Types            76             76               76             76               76              76
# of Aircraft                25,009         25,009          25,009          25,009           25,009          25,009
Adjusted R2                   0.20           0.20             0.23           0.09             0.09            0.22
Observations                179,836         179,836         179,836         179,836         179,836          179,836

The dependent variable is aircraft yearly usage in hours. Age is the age of the aircraft. Tech Age is the technological
age of the aircraft. Jet Fuel is the logarithm of the average annual jet fuel price. All regressions include an intercept
(not reported). Standard-errors, reported in parenthesis, are clustered by aircraft type.




                                                          41
                                                     Table 3:
                                            Creditor Rights and Aircraft Vintage


Dependent               Age         Age          Age       Tech Age      Tech Age      Tech Age      Tech Age      Tech Age         Tech Age
Variable=                                                   (broad)       (broad)       (broad)      (narrow)      (narrow)         (narrow)

GDP                     0.021       0.125        0.094        0.007         0.124        0.075          -0.039        0.037            0.054
                      (0.150)      (0.162)      (0.142)      (0.144)       (0.142)      (0.156)        (0.122)       (0.134)         (0.138)
GDP growth             -0.056      0.090 a      0.056 c       0.005        0.073 a      0.050 c         -0.038      0.073 a          0.049 b
                      (0.061)      (0.032)      (0.031)      (0.048)       (0.031)      (0.027)        (0.045)       (0.027)         (0.024)
GDP per capita       -0.476 c     -2.245 a     -1.444 c     -0.806 a      -1.890 a      -1.263 c      -0.917 a      -2.719 a        -1.681 b
                      (0.242)      (0.571)      (0.862)      (0.284)       (0.583)      (0.710)        (0.212)       (0.581)         (0.774)
GDP per               0.095 b      0.053 a      0.050 a       0.025        0.039 a      0.031 b        0.069 b      0.042 a          0.037 a
capita growth         (0.048)      (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.027)       (0.016)      (0.014)        (0.029)       (0.014)         (0.012)
Population           -0.531 b     10.610 a     2.959 b      -0.647 c       8.366 a       1.567        -0.511 c      7.851 a            1.776
                      (0.258)      (2.005)      (1.352)      (0.330)       (2.208)      (1.279)        (0.263)       (2.092)         (1.369)
Area                    0.362       6.993        -0.483       0.398      -17.035 a       0.530         0.413 c        -2.330           0.303
                      (0.211)      (5.497)      (1.317)      (0.245)       (4.659)      (1.082)        (0.225)       (4.477)         (1.234)
Creditor rights      -0.446 b     -0.791 b     -0.668 b     -0.395 c      -0.696 b      -0.443 c      -0.548 b      -0.527 c          -0.301
                      (0.218)      (0.339)      (0.305)      (0.232)       (0.302)      (0.257)        (0.229)       (0.301)         (0.285)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes
Country                No           Yes           No          No            Yes            No           No            Yes               No
Operator               No            No          Yes          No             No           Yes           No             No              Yes
# of Countries         129          129          129          129           129           129           129           129              129
# of Operators        5,883        5,883        5,883        5,883         5,883         5,883         5,883         5,883            5,883
Adjusted R2           0.09          0.12         0.45        0.11           0.15          0.51         0.15           0.18             0.51
Observations         489,407      489,407      489,407      489,407       489,407       489,407       489,407       489,407          489,407

The dependent variable is aircraft age (columns 1-3), broad technological age (columns 4-6), and narrow technological age (columns 7-9).
GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP, GDP growth is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of
real GDP per capita, GDP per capita growth is the annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the
population. Area is the natural logarithm of the country surface in sq. km. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following
Djankov et al. (2007). The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for
every year from 1978 to 2003. Columns without country or operator ﬁxed eﬀects also include dummies for French legal origin, German
legal origin, Nordic legal origin, and Socialist legal origin (not reported for brevity). All regressions include an intercept (not reported) and
year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard-errors are clustered by country and reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                               42
                                          Table 4:
             Creditor Rights and Aircraft Age: Commercial Vs. Military Aircraft


                             Commercial        Military     Commercial       Military      Commercial            Military
                                Age             Age            Age            Age             Age                 Age

GDP                               0.180          -0.153         0.242          -0.064          0.142               -0.038
                                (0.387)         (0.147)        (0.154)        (0.153)         (0.115)             (0.173)
GDP growth                       -0.059          -0.206       0.092 a        -0.132 c         0.058 a            -0.150 b
                                (0.053)         (0.164)        (0.026)        (0.068)         (0.020)             (0.070)
GDP per capita                 -0.756 c         1.464 a       -2.390 a          1.056        -1.815 a               1.003
                                (0.387)         (0.353)        (0.623)        (1.189)         (0.640)             (1.293)
GDP per capita growth          0.059 b          0.284 c       0.032 a         0.167 a         0.030 a             0.178 a
                                (0.029)         (0.166)        (0.011)        (0.065)         (0.010)             (0.067)
Population                     -0.919 a          -0.254       9.251 a           1.732          1.800                2.381
                                (0.289)         (0.343)        (2.361)        (4.402)         (1.395)             (4.488)
Area                           0.546 b            0.071         2.611        83.003 b          0.857               -9.820
                                (0.255)         (0.249)        (5.878)       (37.051)         (1.126)             (6.390)
Airforce size                    -0.177        -1.160 b       -0.774 c       -5.538 a        -0.986 b            -5.100 a
                                (0.389)         (0.453)        (0.413)        (0.863)         (0.412)             (0.972)
Creditor rights                -0.512 b          -0.351       -0.731 c         -0.293        -0.619 b              -0.490
                                (0.240)         (0.409)        (0.412)        (0.597)         (0.312)             (0.646)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                              Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes                  Yes
Country                            No             No            Yes             Yes             No                   No
Operator                           No             No             No             No             Yes                  Yes
# of Countries                    129            114            129             114            129                  114
# of Operators                   5,435           733           5,435            733           5,435                 733
Adjusted R2                       0.10           0.15           0.14           0.20            0.49                 0.32
Observations                    372,897        116,510        372,897         116,510        372,897              116,510

The dependent variable is aircraft age of either commercial or military aircraft. GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP,
GDP growth is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per
capita growth is the annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the population. Area is
the natural logarithm of the country surface in sq. km. Airforce size is the fraction of military aircraft as a percentage of all
aircraft in a country. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et al. (2007). The index ranges
from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year from 1978 to 2003.
The ﬁrst two columns also include dummies for French legal origin, German legal origin, Nordic legal origin, and Socialist legal
origin (not reported for brevity). All regressions include an intercept (not reported) and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard-errors
are clustered by country and reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.




                                                             43
                                        Table 5:
             Creditor Rights and Technological Age: Commercial Vs. Military Aircraft


                     Commercial       Military       Commercial       Military      Commercial       Military      Commercial        Military
                      Tech Age        Tech Age        Tech Age        Tech Age       Tech Age        Tech Age       Tech Age         Tech Age
                       (broad)         (broad)         (broad)         (broad)       (narrow)        (narrow)       (narrow)         (narrow)

GDP                      0.246 c         -0.040          0.093           -0.046         0.169         -0.176 c          0.095          -0.141
                         (0.140)        (0.150)         (0.125)         (0.163)        (0.145)         (0.103)         (0.121)        (0.125)
GDP growth               0.076 a       -0.097 a         0.044 a        -0.114 a        0.069 a        -0.105 a         0.041 a       -0.115 a
                         (0.024)        (0.033)         (0.018)         (0.030)        (0.022)         (0.035)         (0.016)        (0.033)
GDP per capita          -2.066 b         0.422         -1.423 b          0.380        -2.664 a          0.047         -1.874 a         0.131
                         (0.893)        (1.086)         (0.626)         (1.202)        (0.725)         (1.061)         (0.605)        (1.231)
GDP per                  0.022 b        0.102 a         0.016 c        0.110 a         0.025 a         0.125 a         0.021 a       0.127 a
capita growth            (0.009)        (0.031)         (0.009)         (0.025)        (0.007)         (0.029)         (0.006)        (0.027)
Population               8.562 a       -5.885 c           0.659        -5.480 c        7.231 a          -3.058          0.974          -2.490
                         (2.562)        (3.110)         (1.309)         (3.006)        (2.436)         (2.878)         (1.369)        (2.993)
Area                      -5.600       40.959 c          1.110           3.170          -1.877       111.283 a          1.355          -3.474
                         (5.573)       (22.716)         (1.005)         (3.537)        (4.482)        (20.545)         (1.078)        (3.470)
Airforce size           -0.481 b       -5.588 a          -0.627        -5.309 a       -0.840 b        -5.047 a        -0.992 b       -4.619 a
                         (0.532)        (0.846)         (0.493)         (0.908)        (0.410)         (0.745)         (0.395)        (0.843)
Creditor rights         -0.804 b         0.487         -0.680 a          0.401        -0.678 c          0.629         -0.481 c         0.533
                         (0.371)        (0.639)         (0.260)         (0.706)        (0.381)         (0.557)         (0.280)        (0.632)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                      Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Country                   Yes            Yes              No              No            Yes             Yes              No              No
Operator                  No              No             Yes             Yes             No              No             Yes             Yes
# of Countries            129            114             129             114            129             114             129             114
# of Operators           5,437           893            5,437            893           5,437            893            5,437            893
Adjusted R2              0.18            0.31            0.48            0.49           0.23            0.26            0.53            0.41
Observations            372,897        116,510         372,897         116,510        372,897         116,510         372,897         116,510

The dependent variable is the broad technological age (columns 1-4), or narrow technological age (columns 5-8) of either commercial or
military aircraft. GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP, GDP growth is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the
natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per capita growth is the annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural
logarithm of the population. Area is the natural logarithm of the country surface in sq. km. Airforce size is the fraction of military
aircraft as a percentage of all aircraft in a country. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et al. (2007).
The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year from 1978 to
2003. All regressions include an intercept (not reported) and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard-errors are clustered by country and reported in
parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                               44
                                            Table 6:
                        Creditor Rights and Age: Leased Vs. Non-Leased Aircraft


                    Non-Leased       Leased      Non-Leased       Leased     Non-Leased       Leased     Non-Leased          Leased
                       Age            Age           Age            Age          Age            Age        Tech Age          Tech Age
                                                                                                           (broad)           (broad)

GDP                     0.408          -0.111      0.515 c           0.031      0.331 c        -0.115        0.315             -0.026
                       (0.271)        (0.137)      (0.278)         (0.146)      (0.180)       (0.136)       (0.287)           (0.124)
GDP growth            -0.245 b       -0.159 a     0.085 b          0.094 a       0.048        0.069 a      -0.231 b          -0.114 b
                       (0.113)        (0.057)      (0.036)         (0.028)      (0.036)       (0.026)       (0.112)           (0.061)
GDP per capita        -1.159 a       -0.778 b     -3.614 a        -2.129 a     -2.909 a        -2.322      -1.470 a          -1.332 a
                       (0.374)        (0.320)      (0.747)         (0.587)      (0.970)       (0.531)       (0.372)           (0.273)
GDP per                 0.168           0.029      0.067 a         0.016 a      0.063 b       0.016 a        0.140             0.021
capita growth          (0.230)        (0.018)      (0.025)         (0.005)      (0.029)       (0.002)       (0.119)           (0.019)
Population            -1.373 a       -1.026 a      9.949 a         8.020 b      5.106 b       2.169 c      -1.291 a          -0.789 c
                       (0.487)        (0.355)      (2.634)         (3.870)      (2.304)       (1.288)       (0.466)           (0.417)
Area                   0.938 a          0.926     42.389 a        10.853 b     -4.013 b       1.287 c       0.866 a           0.871 a
                       (0.287)        (0.202)     (16.105)         (5.161)      (1.719)       (0.701)       (0.312)           (0.271)
Creditor rights       -0.984 a         -0.155       -0.699          -0.320     -0.651 b        -0.237      -0.732 b            0.132
                       (0.376)        (0.243)      (0.475)         (0.450)      (0.323)       (0.418)       (0.357)           (0.226)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                     Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes               Yes
Country                   No            No           Yes            Yes           No            No            No                No
Operator                  No            No            No             No           Yes          Yes            No                No
# of Countries           128           129           128            129           128          129           128               129
# of Operators          3,750         3,600         3,750          3,600         3,750        3,600         3,750             3,600
Adjusted R2              0.11          0.05          0.20           0.11         0.52          0.53          0.17              0.07
Observations           213,250       159,647       213,250        159,647       213,250      159,647       213,250           159,647

The dependent variable is aircraft age or broad technological age of either non-leased or leased aircraft. GDP is the natural logarithm of
real GDP, GDP growth is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per
capita growth is the annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the population. Area is the natural
logarithm of the country surface in sq. km. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et al. (2007). The
index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year from 1978 to
2003. Columns without country or operator ﬁxed eﬀects also include dummies for French legal origin, German legal origin, Nordic legal
origin, and Socialist legal origin (not reported for brevity). All regressions include an intercept (not reported) and year ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard-errors are clustered by country and reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.




                                                             45
                                      Table 7:
         Creditor Rights and Age of Non-Leased Aircraft: Poor Vs. Rich Countries


                       Rich        Poor         Rich          Poor          Rich        Poor        Rich           Rich         Poor
                                                                                                    (U.S.
                                                                                                  Excluded)

                       Age          Age         Age           Age           Age         Age           Age           Age         Age



GDP                   0.483 c     0.351 a      0.655 a         0.014       0.368 c      0.148        -0.233        0.577         0.129
                      (0.274)     (0.132)      (0.250)       (0.112)       (0.189)     (0.115)      (0.316)       (0.372)      (0.168)
GDP growth           -0.033 b      -0.136     0.085 b        0.268 c        0.063       0.220       0.061 c        0.019         1.583
                      (0.091)     (0.264)      (0.039)       (0.159)       (0.039)     (0.142)      (0.034)       (0.099)      (1.143)
GDP per capita       -1.805 a      -1.553     -4.579 a      -3.380 a      -5.005 a    -2.695 a     -4.354 a      -2.625 b       -0.889
                      (0.329)     (1.037)      (1.620)       (0.735)       (1.677)     (0.427)      (1.534)       (1.222)      (2.184)
GDP per                0.106        0.042      0.064 a        -0.186      0.056 b       -0.168     0.066 b         -0.009       -1.602
capita growth         (0.087)     (0.286)      (0.024)       (0.162)       (0.027)     (0.143)      (0.026)       (0.041)      (1.195)
Population           -0.453 a    -2.118 a      9.023 a         0.370        2.743       -0.869     10.043 a        -0.579       -0.729
                      (0.447)     (0.515)      (2.896)       (6.180)       (2.031)     (4.260)      (2.949)       (0.600)      (1.017)
Area                  0.762 a       0.117     47.645 a     -731.985 b       -2.274    -1.904 c     44.943 a      0.884 b        -2.007
                      (0.252)     (0.522)     (14.562)      (336.94)       (1.418)     (3.924)     (16.585)       (0.353)      (1.893)
Creditor rights      -0.715 b       0.172     -1.017 a        -0.025      -0.648 b      0.345      -0.941 a      -0.803 b        0.489
                      (0.355)     (0.460)      (0.335)       (0.634)       (0.311)     (0.548)      (0.348)       (0.403)      (0.400)
Enforcement                                                                                                        0.893      -3.904 c
                                                                                                                  (0.643)      (2.258)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Country                No           No          Yes           Yes            No          No           Yes           No           No
Operator               No           No           No            No           Yes         Yes            No           No           No
# of Countries         66           72           66            72            66          72            65           37           15
# of Operators        2,963        845         2,963          845          2,963        845          2,093        1,649         269
Adjusted R2           0.12         0.26         0.16          0.37          0.51        0.58          0.25         0.08         0.36
Observations         177,937      35,313      177,937        35,313       177,937      35,313       106,027       86,058       13,492

The dependent variable is aircraft age in either rich or poor countries. Rich (poor) countries are deﬁned in each year as those with
GDP per capita greater (smaller) than the sample median of that year. GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP, GDP growth
is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per capita growth is the
annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the population. Area is the natural logarithm of
the country surface in sq. km. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et al. (2007). The index
ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year from 1978 to 2003.
Columns without country or operator ﬁxed eﬀects also include dummies for French legal origin, German legal origin, Nordic legal
origin, and Socialist legal origin (not reported for brevity). All regressions include an intercept (not reported) and year ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard-errors are clustered by country and reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.




                                                              46
                                           Table 8:
                      Creditor Rights Government Ownership and Aircraft Vintage


                     Non-Leased       Leased      Non-Leased        Leased     Non-Leased      Leased      Non-Leased           Leased
                        Age            Age           Age             Age          Age           Age         Tech Age           Tech Age
                                                                                                             (broad)            (broad)

GDP                      0.384         -0.122        0.511 c          0.021       0.330 c       -0.113         0.294             -0.036
                        (0.270)       (0.131)        (0.274)         (0.143)      (0.178)      (0.138)        (0.286)           (0.120)
GDP growth             -0.203 b      -0.144 b       0.084 b          0.097 a       0.048       0.069 a       -0.196 c          -0.139 b
                        (0.102)       (0.055)        (0.037)         (0.028)      (0.036)      (0.026)        (0.104)           (0.058)
GDP per capita         -1.326 a      -0.896 b       -3.356 a        -2.103 a     -2.904 a       -2.322       -1.611 a          -1.443 a
                        (0.386)       (0.324)        (0.722)         (0.583)      (0.958)      (0.530)        (0.377)           (0.280)
GDP per                  0.128        0.029 c        0.064 a         0.015 a     0.063 b       0.016 a         0.106             0.021
capita growth           (0.101)       (0.016)        (0.024)         (0.004)      (0.029)      (0.002)        (0.105)           (0.018)
Population             -1.398 a      -1.074 a       10.134 a         7.614 c     4.790 b       2.174 c       -1.312 a          -0.833 b
                        (0.495)       (0.340)        (2.780)         (3.959)      (2.226)      (1.288)        (0.469)           (0.407)
Area                    0.824 a       0.844 a        28.776           3.363      -3.785 b      1.285 c        0.771 b           0.794 a
                        (0.287)       (0.195)       (20.156)         (7.745)      (1.646)      (0.701)        (0.303)           (0.260)
Government             -2.760 a      -2.676 a       -2.797 a        -1.792 b       1.507        0.571        -2.304 a          -2.495 a
                        (0.431)       (0.826)        (0.390)         (0.895)      (0.973)      (0.833)        (0.430)           (0.925)
Creditor rights        -1.067 a        -0.297         -0.704          -0.282     -0.619 b       -0.249       -0.801 b           0.0001
                        (0.357)       (0.236)        (0.490)         (0.440)      (0.298)      (0.404)        (0.339)           (0.218)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                     Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes
Country                   No             No           Yes             Yes           No            No            No                 No
Operator                  No             No            No              No          Yes           Yes            No                 No
# of Countries           128            129           128             129          128           129           128                129
# of Operators          3,750          3,600         3,750           3,600        3,750         3,600         3,750              3,600
Adjusted R2              0.13           0.06          0.20            0.11         0.52          0.53          0.18               0.07
Observations           213,250        159,647       213,250         159,647      213,250       159,647       213,250            159,647

The dependent variable is aircraft age or broad technological age in either non-leased or leased aircraft. GDP is the natural logarithm of
real GDP, GDP growth is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per
capita growth is the annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the population. Area is the natural
logarithm of the country surface in sq. km. Government is a dummy variable that equals one if the airline operating the aircraft is at
least partially owned by the government and equals zero otherwise. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following
Djankov et al. (2007). The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for
every year from 1978 to 2003. Columns without country or operator ﬁxed eﬀects also include dummies for French legal origin, German
legal origin, Nordic legal origin, and Socialist legal origin (not reported for brevity). All regressions include an intercept (not reported)
and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard-errors are clustered by country and reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                               47
                                                 Table 9:
                                       Aircraft Age and Aviation Regulation


                    Commercial      Commercial      Commercial       Military     Military        Military       Commercial
                      Leased                                                        and             and            Leased
                       and                                                       Commercial      Commercial         and
                    Non-Leased      Non-Leased         Leased                       All          Non-Leased      Non-Leased

                        Age              Age             Age           Age           Age             Age             Age

GDP                     -0.026          0.255            -0.161        -0.175        -0.094          0.088           0.030
                       (0.256)         (0.425)          (0.176)       (0.173)       (0.240)         (0.321)         (0.272)
GDP growth              -0.170          -0.133         -0.209 a        -0.091        -0.113          -0.100          -0.162
                       (0.108)         (0.139)          (0.071)       (0.099)       (0.087)         (0.095)         (0.108)
GDP per capita        -1.134 a        -1.396 b           -0.640        0.067       -0.844 b        -0.915 b        -1.039 b
                       (0.506)         (0.605)          (0.443)       (0.386)       (0.414)         (0.449)         (0.504)
GDP per                  0.045          0.049           0.035 c        0.150          0.055          0.081           0.039
capita growth          (0.033)         (0.070)          (0.019)       (0.095)       (0.037)         (0.066)         (0.028)
Population            -1.567 a        -1.915 a         -1.114 a      -1.157 a      -1.468 a        -1.683 a        -1.522 a
                       (0.467)         (0.623)          (0.321)       (0.381)       (0.403)         (0.468)         (0.451)
Area                   1.353 a         1.310 a          1.016 a      0.745 a        1.244 a         1.168 a         1.185 a
                       (0.313)         (0.342)          (0.236)       (0.282)       (0.261)         (0.260)         (0.285)
Government            -3.854 a        -4.470 a         -3.564 a                    -3.627 a        -4.067 a        -4.119 a
                       (0.744)         (0.783)          (1.001)                     (0.698)         (0.757)         (0.691)
Aviation              -3.277 a        -3.858 a         -2.983 b       0.745        -2.453 a        -2.307 b        -3.397 a
                       (1.079)         (1.138)          (1.194)       (1.58)        (0.926)         (0.993)         (1.083)
Creditor rights       -0.820 b        -1.844 a           -0.290       0.171        -0.800 b        -1.780 a        -1.837 a
                       (0.388)         (0.522)          (0.274)      (0.829)        (0.356)         (0.465)         (0.461)
Military                                                                            4.122 a          0.995
                                                                                    (1.334)         (1.224)
Military×                                                                             0.601         1.604 c
Creditor rights                                                                     (0.958)         (0.843)
Leased                                                                                                             -5.444 a
                                                                                                                    (0.439)
Leased×                                                                                                            1.556 a
Creditor rights                                                                                                     (0.246)

Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                    Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes
# of Countries          67               67              67             64            67              67              67
# of Operators         3,254           2,226            2,170          520          3,774           2,746           3,254
Adjusted R2            0.10             0.13            0.06           0.04          0.13            0.11            0.13
Observations          188,142          93,871          94,271         51,696       239,838         145,567         188,142

The dependent variable is aircraft age of commerical non-leased aircraft, commercial leased aircraft, or military aircraft. GDP is the
natural logarithm of real GDP, GDP growth is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP
per capita, GDP per capita growth is the annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the population.
Area is the natural logarithm of the country surface in sq. km. Government is a dummy variable that equals one if the airline operating
the aircraft is at least partially owned by the government and equals zero otherwise. Aviation is a dummy variable that equals one for
aircraft in countries that comply with ICAO standards and equals zero otherwise. Military is a dummy variable that equals one for
military aircraft and zero otherwise. Leased is a dummy variable that equals one for leased aircraft and zero otherwise. Creditor rights
is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et al. (2007). The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong
creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year from 1978 to 2003. All regressions include an intercept (not reported),
legal origins dummies, and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard-errors 48are clustered by country and reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote
statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                       Table 10:
         Creditor Rights, Leverage and Aircraft Age: Leased vs. Non-Leased Aircraft


                     Non-Leased       Leased     Non-Leased         Leased      Non-Leased       Leased      Non-Leased       Leased

                         Age           Age            Age             Age            Age           Age           Age            Age

GDP                    0.982 b       -0.328 c       0.839 c           -0.261       0.942 a       -0.396 b       0.852 c        -0.325
                        (0.437)       (0.179)       (0.440)          (0.213)       (0.431)        (0.184)       (0.432)       (0.220)
GDP growth                0.102        -0.023        164 c            -0.011         0.089         -0.025       0.171 c         0.008
                        (0.108)       (0.036)       (0.084)          (0.036)       (0.114)        (0.036)       (0.087)       (0.038)
GDP per capita            0.025      0.994 a         0.022            -1.404        -0.016        0.944 a        -0.269        -1.203
                        (0.839)       (0.285)       (2.366)          (2.154)       (0.836)        (0.294)       (2.339)       (2.255)
GDP per                  -0.023      0.020 a         -0.020          0.020 a        -0.023        0.021 a        -0.023       0.019 a
capita growth           (0.016)       (0.005)       (0.029)          (0.003)       (0.015)        (0.006)       (0.030)       (0.003)
Population               -0.119      0.614 b        -14.966           9.332         -0.085        0.654 b       -16.029         9.234
                        (0.332)       (0.264)      (17.276)          (9.441)       (0.310)        (0.251)      (16.878)       (9.266)
Area                      0.399        0.023         7.281         -102.413 a        0.404          0.046         4.121      -97.970 a
                        (0.255)       (0.206)      (63.774)          (5.306)       (0.258)        (0.203)      (62.968)       (5.591)
Government               -1.507        0.123         1.537            1.421         -1.564         -0.020         1.594         1.420
                        (1.378)       (0.556)       (1.042)          (1.232)       (1.444)        (0.571)       (1.068)       (1.258)
Aviation                 -8.643      -6.415 a       4.474 a          1.614 a      -8.969 b       -6.880 a       4.606 a       1.630 a
                        (3.240)       (1.548)       (1.399)          (0.419)       (3.303)        (1.569)       (1.467)       (0.428)
Creditor rights           0.426        -0.029        1.342            0.275          0.315         -0.115         0.910         0.104
                        (0.686)       (0.572)       (0.793)          (0.854)       (0.783)        (0.511)       (0.805)       (0.789)
Leverage               6.581 b       4.330 a        9.038 a          3.947 b
                        (3.224)       (1.546)       (2.923)          (1.538)
Creditor rights        -3.158 b        -0.279      -5.067 a           0.204
×Leverage               (1.378)       (0.946)       (1.626)          (1.020)

LT Debt                                                                             5.719        3.786 a        9.412 b       3.140 b
                                                                                   (4.381)       (1.350)        (3.648)       (1.399)
Creditor rights                                                                   -3.212 c        -0.116       -5.737 b        0.510
×LT Debt                                                                           (1.782)       (0.899)        (2.178)       (1.007)

Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                     Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
Country                   No            No           Yes             Yes             No             No           Yes            Yes
# of Countries            28            28            28              28             28             28            28             28
Adjusted R2              0.11          0.05          0.13            0.06           0.11           0.04          0.13           0.06
Observations            33,652        29,384        33,652          29,384         33,652         29,384        33,652         29,384

The dependent variable is aircraft age of either leased or non-leased aircraft. GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP, GDP growth
is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per capita growth is the
annual growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the population. Area is the natural logarithm of the
country surface in sq. km. Government is a dummy variable that equals one if the airline operating the aircraft is at least partially
owned by the government and equals zero otherwise. Aviation is a dummy variable that equals one for aircraft in countries that
comply with ICAO standards and equals zero otherwise. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et
al. (2007). The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year
from 1978 to 2003. Leverage is total debt divided by total assets. LT Debt is long-term debt divided by total assets. Columns 1,2,5
and 6 also include dummies for French legal origin, German legal origin, Nordic legal origin, and Socialist legal origin (not reported
for brevity). All regressions include an intercept (not reported) and year ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard-errors are clustered by country and
reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                              49
                                           Table 11:
                  Creditor Rights and Fleet Size: Commercial Vs. Military Aircraft


                     Commercial       Military    Commercial        Military   Commercial       Military     Commercial       Military
Size=                 Number          Number        Seats            Seats       Weight         Weight         Wings          Wings

GDP                     0.024 b         0.022        0.060 b        0.116 b       0.088 b         0.070        0.061 b           0.073
                        (0.011)        (0.097)       (0.026)         (0.052)      (0.038)        (0.055)       (0.025)          (0.044)
GDP growth               -0.006       -0.006 a        -0.011          0.001        -0.011       -0.047 b        -0.012         -0.014 a
                        (0.004)        (0.036)       (0.020)         (0.005)      (0.010)        (0.006)       (0.009)          (0.005)
GDP per capita          0.227 a       0.328 b        0.616 a          0.597       0.611 a       0.921 b        0.508 a         0.775 b
                        (0.056)        (0.129)       (0.154)         (0.477)      (0.166)        (0.439)       (0.129)          (0.309)
GDP per                  -0.001       0.002 b        -0.0003        -0.007 b      0.007 a        0.005 c        -0.001          0.004 c
capita growth           (0.003)        (0.001)       (0.007)         (0.003)      (0.006)        (0.003)       (0.006)          (0.002)
Population                0.047         0.047          0.217          0.113         0.244         -0.323        0.096            0.036
                        (0.133)        (0.213)       (0.324)         (0.763)      (0.337)        (0.921)       (0.298)          (0.574)
Area                     -0.106         0.360         -0.202          0.411        -0.104         1.354         -0.184           0.746
                        (0.105)        (0.286)       (0.271)         (0.923)      (0.297)        (1.091)       (0.251)          (0.726)
Government               -0.007                        0.310                        0.118                       0.077
                        (0.027)                      (0.218)                      (0.214)                      (0.234)
Creditor rights         0.055 b        -0.061        0.182 a         0.009        0.183 b         -0.029       0.138 b          -0.058
                        (0.027)       (0.049)        (0.062)        (0.118)       (0.091)        (0.126)       (0.059)         (0.101)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                      Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
Operator                  Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
# of Countries            129           110            129            110            129           110           129             110
# of Operators           5,284          616           5,284           616           5,284          616          5,284            616
Adjusted R2              0.85           0.93          0.87            0.91          0.83           0.92          0.86            0.94
Observations            32,913         6,164         32,913          6,164         32,913         6,164         32,913          6,164

The dependent variable is ﬂeet size deﬁned as the logarithm of either 1) the sum of all aircraft operated, (2) the sum of the seat
capacities of all aircraft in the ﬂeet, (3) the sum of the maximal takeoﬀ weight of all aircraft in the ﬂeet, and (4) the sum of the
wingspans of all aircraft in the ﬂeet. GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP, GDP growth is the annual growth rate of GDP, GDP
per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per capita growth is the annual growth rate of GDP per capita.
Population is the natural logarithm of the population. Area is the natural logarithm of the country surface in sq. km. Government is
a dummy variable that equals one if the airline operating the aircraft is at least partially owned by the government and equals zero
otherwise. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et al. (2007). The index ranges from 0 (weak
creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year from 1978 to 2003. All regressions include
an intercept (not reported), year ﬁxed eﬀects and operator ﬁxed-eﬀects. Standard-errors are clustered by country and reported in
parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                               50
                                                     Table 12:
                                               Aircraft Age and Fleet Size


Size=                 Number        Number          Seats           Seats       Wings          Wings         Weight          Weight

Fleet size            -1.231 a      -1.286 a       -0.428 a        -0.433 a     -0.521 a        -0.533      -0.311 a        -0.311 a
                       (0.148)       (0.139)        (0.041)         (0.038)      (0.058)       (0.053)       (0.044)         (0.043)
GDP                     0.407         0.476           0.398          0.472        0.403         0.474         0.408          0.493 c
                       (0.272)       (0.308)        (0.263)         (0.293)      (0.265)       (0.298)       (0.263)         (0.289)
GDP growth              -0.080       0.072 b         -0.067        0.078 b        -0.071       0.077 b        -0.069        0.081 b
                       (0.092)       (0.031)        (0.089)         (0.032)      (0.090)       (0.031)       (0.091)         (0.033)
GDP per capita        -0.581 c      -3.611 a       -0.600 c        -3.451 a     -0.574 c      -3.573 a      -0.733 b        -3.439 a
                       (0.348)       (0.835)        (0.356)         (0.765)      (0.344)       (0.818)       (0.346)         (0.750)
GDP per                 0.088        0.051 b          0.081         0.054 a       0.083        0.052 a        0.085          0.057 a
capita growth          (0.080)       (0.019)        (0.077)         (0.020)      (0.078)       (0.019)       (0.078)         (0.021)
Population              -0.221       8.592 a         -0.276         8.688 a       -0.233       8.557 a        -0.417         8.916 a
                       (0.354)       (2.550)        (0.355)         (2.487)      (0.349)       (2.505)       (0.347)         (2.565)
Area                    0.051       39.458 b          0.027        40.613 b       0.026       38.865 b        0.064         36.789 c
                       (0.311)      (19.130)        (0.305)        (18.938)      (0.305)      (18.697)       (0.309)        (19.389)
Government            -1.665 a      -1.018 b       -1.551 a        -0.958 b     -1.588 a      -0.979 b      -1.911 a        -1.442 a
                       (0.505)       (0.459)        (0.500)         (0.434)      (0.505)       (0.455)       (0.506)         (0.467)
Creditor rights       -0.980 a      -0.653 c       -0.951 a        -0.669 c     -0.956 a      -0.655 c      -0.930 a        -0.676 c
                       (0.281)       (0.359)        (0.279)         (0.374)      (0.279)       (0.362)       (0.280)         (0.388)
Fixed-Eﬀects
Year                    Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
Country                  No            Yes            No             Yes           No           Yes             No             Yes
# of Countries          129            129           129             129          129           129            129             129
Adjusted R2             0.18          0.23           0.18            0.23         0.17          0.23           0.17            0.22
Observations          213,250        213,250       213,250         213,250      213,250       213,250        213,250         213,250

The dependent variable is is aircraft age of non-leased aircraft. Fleet size deﬁned as the logarithm of either 1) the sum of all aircraft
operated, (2) the sum of the seat capacities of all aircraft in the ﬂeet, (3) the sum of the maximal takeoﬀ weight of all aircraft in the
ﬂeet, and (4) the sum of the wingspans of all aircraft in the ﬂeet. GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP, GDP growth is the
annual growth rate of GDP, GDP per capita is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita, GDP per capita growth is the annual
growth rate of GDP per capita. Population is the natural logarithm of the population. Area is the natural logarithm of the country
surface in sq. km. Government is a dummy variable that equals one if the airline operating the aircraft is at least partially owned by
the government and equals zero otherwise. Creditor rights is an index aggregating creditor rights, following Djankov et al. (2007).
The index ranges from 0 (weak creditor rights) to 4 (strong creditor rights) and is constructed as of January for every year from 1978
to 2003. All regressions include an intercept (not reported), year ﬁxed eﬀects and operator ﬁxed-eﬀects. Standard-errors are clustered
by country and reported in parentheses. a, b and c denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                              51
