                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SECURITIZATION WITHOUT RISK TRANSFER

                                           Viral V. Acharya
                                           Philipp Schnabl
                                           Gustavo Suarez

                                         Working Paper 15730
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15730


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2010




Authors are grateful to Matt Richardson and faculty members at Stern School of Business, New York
University for discussions on the topic and to research staff at Moody’s and Fitch Ratings for detailed
answers to our queries. We thank David Skeie and Dennis Kuo for advice on bank call report data.
 We are also grateful to Christa Bouwman, Florian Heider, and Amit Seru (discussants) and seminar
participants at the 2010 Meeting of the American Finance Association, the Stockholm Institute of Financial
Research Conference on the Financial Crisis of 2007-09, the European Winter Finance Conference
2010, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Richmond, the University
of Southern California, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. This paper represents
the views of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System, its Board of Governors,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Viral V. Acharya, Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Securitization without risk transfer
Viral V. Acharya, Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez
NBER Working Paper No. 15730
February 2010
JEL No. G01,G21,G28

                                                 ABSTRACT

We analyze asset-backed commercial paper conduits which played a central role in the early phase
of the financial crisis of 2007-09. We document that commercial banks set up conduits to securitize
assets while insuring the newly securitized assets using credit guarantees. The credit guarantees were
structured to reduce bank capital requirements, while providing recourse to bank balance sheets for
outside investors. Consistent with such recourse, we find that banks with more exposure to conduits
had lower stock returns at the start of the financial crisis; that during the first year of the crisis, asset-backed
commercial paper spreads increased and issuance fell, especially for conduits with weaker credit guarantees
and riskier banks; and that losses from conduits mostly remained with banks rather than outside investors.
These results suggest that banks used this form of securitization to concentrate, rather than disperse,
financial risks in the banking sector while reducing their capital requirements.


Viral V. Acharya                                         Gustavo Suarez
Stern School of Business                                 Federal Reserve Board
New York University                                      20th & C St., NW
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84                           Washington, DC 20551
New York, NY 10012                                       Gustavo.A.Suarez@frb.gov
and NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Philipp Schnabl
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, Room 9-76
New York, NY 10012
schnabl@stern.nyu.edu
         Securitization was traditionally meant to transfer risks from the banking sector to

outside investors and thereby disperse financial risks across the economy. However, in

the period leading up to the financial crisis of 2007-09, banks increasingly devised

securitization methods that allowed them to concentrate risks on their balance sheets

which eventually led to the largest banking crisis since the Great Depression.

         In this paper, we analyze one form of securitization, namely asset-backed

commercial paper conduits (henceforth, conduits), as an example of how banks exposed

themselves to such risks. Conduits are structured purpose vehicles set up by large banks.

Conduits typically hold medium- to long-term assets claims, such as mortgages, which

are financed by issuing short-term asset-backed commercial paper. Similar to regular

banks, conduits thus exhibit a significant maturity mismatch between assets and

liabilities.

         As shown in Figure 1, before the financial crisis asset-backed commercial paper

was an important funding source for commercial banks growing from US$650 billion in

January 2004 to US$1.2 trillion in June 2007. However, the rise in asset-backed

commercial paper came to an abrupt end in August 2007. On August 9, 2007, the French

bank BNP Paribas halted withdrawals from three funds invested in mortgage-backed

securities and suspended calculation of net asset values.5 Even though defaults on

mortgages had been rising throughout 2007, the suspension of withdrawals had a

5
  The announcement read: “[T]he complete evaporation of liquidity in certain market segments of the US
securitization market has made it impossible to value certain assets fairly regardless of their quality or
credit rating […] Asset-backed securities, mortgage loans, especially subprime loans, don't have any buyers
[…] Traders are reluctant to bid on securities backed by risky mortgages because they are difficult to sell
on […] The situation is such that it is no longer possible to value fairly the underlying US ABS assets in the
three above-mentioned funds.” (Source: “BNP Paribas Freezes Funds as Loan Losses Roil Markets,”
Bloomberg.com, August 9, 2008).

                                                     -1-
profound effect on the asset-backed commercial paper market. Apparently investors in

asset-backed commercial paper, primarily money market funds, became concerned about

the collateral backing asset-backed commercial paper and stopped refinancing maturing

asset-backed commercial paper. As a result, as shown in Figure 2, the interest rate spread

of overnight asset-backed commercial paper over the Federal Funds rate increased from

10 basis points to 150 basis points within one day of the announcement. Subsequently,

the market experienced the modern-day equivalent of a bank run and asset-backed

commercial paper outstanding dropped from $1.2 trillion in August 2007 to $833 billion

in December 2007.

           Our analysis shows that the crisis in the asset-backed commercial paper market

had a profoundly negative effect on commercial banks because banks had insured outside

investors in asset-backed commercial paper. The reason is that banks had provided credit

guarantees to conduits, which required banks to pay off maturing asset-backed

commercial paper independently of underlying asset values. These guarantees were

explicit legal commitments to repurchase maturing asset-backed commercial paper in

case of disruptions to liquidity in the market for such paper, not a voluntary form of

implicit recourse.6 The guarantees were mostly structured as “liquidity enhancements”, a

design that would help reduce their regulatory capital requirements to at most a tenth of

capital required to hold for on-balance sheet assets. For the majority of conduits, the

credit guarantees were strong enough to cover all possible losses of outside investors.

For a minority of conduits, the credit guarantees were weaker and required banks to cover

only a share of the losses.


6
    However, there was some scope for implicit recourse in the case of weaker credit guarantees.
                                                      -2-
       We establish these findings using a hand-collected panel dataset on the universe

of conduits from January 2001 to December 2008. We document and describe the

structure of the credit guarantees that effectively created recourse from conduits back to

bank balance sheets. We refer to conduits as securitization without risk transfer because

outside investors would suffer losses only if the credit guarantees provided by the banks

and the value of the conduit assets were both insufficient to repay the asset-backed

commercial paper. Hence, this form of securitization did not transfer the risks of the

securitized assets risk from banks to outside investors.

       Consistent with the motive for setting up conduits being one of “regulatory

arbitrage”, we find that most credit guarantees were structured as liquidity enhancements

to avoid bank’s regulatory requirements while exposing banks to the same risks as on-

balance sheet financing. In fact, we show that conduit sponsors other than commercial

banks (which among financial institutions are subject to the most stringent capital

requirements) were far less likely to use such structures. Also, we note that banks based

in countries such as Spain and Portugal that do not allow such regulatory arbitrage do not

sponsor conduits. These results suggest, and indeed we document, that the effective

leverage of commercial banks was significantly larger than that implied by their on-

balance sheet leverage or their capitalization from a regulatory standpoint.

       In our empirical analysis, we test whether conduits were a form of securitization

without significant risk transfer and find three main empirical results. First, we show that

commercial banks with larger exposure to conduits had larger declines in stock returns at

the start of the financial crisis on August 9, 2007. An increase in conduit exposure

(measured as the ratio of asset-backed commercial paper to bank equity) from 0% to

                                             -3-
100% (e.g., moving from Wells Fargo to Citigroup) reduced stock returns by 1.5

percentage points in a three-day window around the start of the financial crisis. The

effect of conduit exposure on stock returns increases to 2.9 percentage points when we

expand the event-window to one month. The result is robust to using alternative

measures of conduit exposure and controlling for a large set of observable bank

characteristics. We also show that there is no relationship between conduit exposure and

stock returns in the pre-crisis period.

        Second, we use a novel conduit-level data set to study daily issuances and spreads

of asset-backed commercial paper both before and during the financial crisis. We find

that conduits with weaker credit guarantees have a larger decline in issuances and a larger

increase in spreads after the start of the financial crisis. This finding is robust to

controlling for unobservable time-invariant conduit characteristics and unobservable

time-variant sponsor characteristics. We further find that the results are stronger for

riskier banks (as measured by credit default swap spreads), which suggests that the

differential effect across different types of credit guarantees is determined by the

financial strength of the sponsor and that credit guarantees are an important part of

conduits’ ability to issue asset-backed commercial paper after the start the financial crisis.

        Third, we examine the extent of realized risk transfer by analyzing whether

investors could rely on the credit guarantees offered by financial institutions during the

crisis. We take the perspective of an investor that was holding asset-backed commercial

paper at the start of the crisis and examine whether the investor suffered losses by not

refinancing maturing asset-backed commercial paper. Using announcement data from

Moody’s Investors Services, we identify all conduits that defaulted on asset-backed

                                               -4-
commercial paper in the period from January 2007 to December 2008. We find that all

investors in conduits with strong credit guarantees were repaid in full. We find that

investors in conduits with weak credit guarantees suffered small losses. In total, only

2.5% of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding as of July 2007 entered default in the

period from July 2007 to December 2008. Hence, most of the losses on conduit assets

remained with sponsoring banks. Assuming a loss rate of 10%, we estimate that

commercial banks suffered losses of $102 billion on conduit assets.

       These results raise the question why banks used conduits for the purpose of

securitization. We note that asset-backed commercial paper is different from other forms

of securitization, such as mortgage-backed securities, in which most of assets’ credit risk

is transferred to other investors. Instead, conduits are similar to on-balance sheet

financing because the conduit assets’ credit risk effectively remains with the bank. The

main difference between on-balance sheet financing and financing via conduits is that

conduit assets are considered off- balance sheet for the purpose of capital regulation and

therefore banks need to hold far less regulatory capital against assets in conduits relative

to assets on the balance sheet.

       Finally, we emphasize that all of our evidence on the performance and effects of

conduits is necessarily ex post. It is possible that ex ante the risks of credit guarantees

were ignored by bank management due to poor risk management that did not keep pace

with that of financial engineering, or ineffective corporate governance, or simply short-

termism – phenomena that may have been the result of deeper underlying causes such as

increased competition in banking activities, resulting erosion of margins and franchise

values, and the moral hazard due to government guarantees such as deposit insurance and

                                              -5-
the too-big-to-fail doctrine. Investigating these underlying causes is an important

question for future work. It is to be noted, however, that the lack of ex-post risk transfer

coupled with the ex-ante structure of credit guarantees that allowed close to zero capital

requirements is highly suggestive of leverage-seeking or capital-reducing incentives on

parts of commercial banks.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the

related literature. Section 3 discusses the institutional background. Section 4 presents

the data and our main empirical results. Section 5 analyzes the incentives of banks to set

up conduits. Section 6 concludes.



2. Related literature

        Gorton and Souleles (2005), Gorton (2008), Brunnermeier (2009), and

Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2009) provide examples of maturity transformation outside the

regulated banking sector. Our focus, in contrast to theirs, is to provide an in-depth

analysis of the structure of asset-backed commercial paper conduits: how risk transfer

was designed to take place through conduits and how it materialized and contributed to

the start of the financial crisis of 2007-09.

        Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008) present a detailed description of the process of

securitization of subprime mortgages, of which conduits were one component. Nadauld

and Sherland (2008) study the securitization by investment banks of AAA-rated tranches

– “economic catastrophe bonds” as explained by Coval et al. (2008) – and argue that the

change in the SEC ruling regarding the capital requirements for investment banks spurred

them to engage in excessive securitization. Nadauld and Sherland (2008) view the banks

                                                -6-
as warehousing these risks for further distribution whereas Shin (2009) argues that banks

were concentrating highly-leveraged risk exposures (given the low capital requirements)

by so doing.

       Our view in this paper is more along the lines of Shin (2009), Acharya and

Richardson (2009), and Acharya and Schnabl (2009a), that banks were securitizing

without transferring risks to outside investors, and in particular, conduits were a way of

taking on systemic risk of the underlying pool of credit risks. In an analysis focused on

the economic causes of the increasing propensity of the financial sector to take such risks

(in one class of conduits – the “credit arbitrage” vehicles), Arteta et al. (2008) provide

evidence consistent with government-induced distortions and corporate governance

problems being the root causes (see also the arguments in Calomiris (2009)). Covitz et

al. (2009) use data on asset-backed commercial paper and show that the decline in

securitized assets was driven by both market-wide factors and program fundamentals.

       Our results on the difficulty in rolling over asset-backed commercial paper and

the rise in their spreads are somewhat akin to the analysis of the run on the repo market

by Gorton and Metrick (2009). They document that a counterparty risk measure for the

banking sector as a whole, the “LIB-OIS” spread, explained over time the variation in the

credit spreads of a large number of securitized bonds and the rise in repo haircuts, that is,

the difference between the market value of an asset and its secured borrowing capacity.

However, there are important differences between our “laboratory” and theirs. While

conduits resemble repo transactions to some extent, the presence of explicit credit

guarantees in conduits establishes a direct linkage between the ability to issue

commercial paper and the guarantees provided by the sponsor. We can therefore test

                                             -7-
directly for the impact of the guarantees on commercial paper issuance and spreads using

variation across and within conduit sponsors over time.



3. Institutional Background

3.1. Conduit Structure

        Figure 3 illustrates the typical conduit structure. A conduit is set up by a

sponsoring financial institution (henceforth, sponsor). The sole purpose of a conduit is to

purchase and hold financial assets from a variety of asset sellers. The conduit finances

the assets by selling asset-backed commercial paper to outside investors such as money

market funds or local governments.

        Conduits typically exhibit a significant maturity mismatch. Most of the conduit

assets are medium- to long-term assets with maturities of three to five years. Most of the

conduit liabilities are asset-backed commercial paper with a maturity of 30 days or less.

Conduits thus regularly roll over their liabilities and use proceeds from new issuances of

asset-backed commercial paper to pay off maturing asset-backed commercial paper.

        Most conduits minimize their credit risk by holding a diversified portfolio of high

quality assets. Typically, they are restricted to purchasing AAA-rated assets or unrated

assets of similar quality. Some conduits exclusively purchase unrated assets originated

by their sponsoring financial institutions. Other conduits mostly purchase securitized

assets originated by other financial institutions. Many conduits combine the two

strategies by purchasing both securitized and unsecuritized assets from several financial

institutions.



                                             -8-
       Outside investors consider asset-backed commercial paper a safe investment for

three reasons. First, the pool of conduit assets is used as collateral to secure the asset-

backed commercial paper. Second, the conduit’s sponsor provides credit guarantees to

the conduit, which ensures that the sponsor repays maturing asset-backed commercial

paper in case the conduit is unable to repay itself. Third, asset-backed commercial paper

is very short-term, so that investors can easily liquidate their investment by not rolling

over maturing asset-backed commercial paper.

       Conduits can generate significant risks for the sponsor. The sponsor’s credit

guarantees typically covers the conduit’s roll-over risk, which is the risk that a conduit

cannot refinance maturing commercial paper, possibly because of a deterioration of

conduit asset values. In that case, the sponsor has to assume the losses from lower asset

values, because under the credit guarantee sponsors are required to repurchase assets at

face value or repay asset-backed commercial paper at par value. In exchange, the

sponsor usually receives the entire conduit’s profit.

       From an incentive perspective, the use of credit guarantees to align risk and

rewards within the sponsor is consistent with the optimal allocation of control rights

under asymmetric information. Sponsors often use conduits to purchase assets originated

by their customers or by themselves and may be better informed about asset quality than

outside investors. The use of credit guarantees thus avoids the incentive problem inherent

in other forms of securitization, in which the asset originator transfers most of the risks

associated with the assets to outside investors. Instead credit guarantees ensure that

sponsors have strong incentives to screen the conduit’s asset purchases (e.g. see

Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984), Calomiris and Mason (2004) and Keys et al. (2009)).

                                              -9-
       The credit guarantees are also important because they ensure that asset-backed

commercial paper qualifies for the highest available rating from accredited national rating

agencies. In turn, the high ratings ensure that money market funds are legally permitted

to invest in asset-backed commercial paper (Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2009)).

       Conduit sponsors use four different types of credit guarantees which provide

different level of insurance to outside investors. The four types of guarantees, ranked

from strongest to weakest, are full credit guarantees (“full credit”), full liquidity

guarantees (“full liquidity”), extendible notes guarantees (“extendible notes”), and

guarantees arranged via structured investment vehicles (“SIV”). We briefly describe the

structure of each credit guarantee.

       Full credit guarantees are guarantees that require the sponsor to pay off maturing

asset-backed commercial paper independent of the conduit assets’ value. Full liquidity

guarantees are similar to full credit guarantees with the main difference being that the

sponsor only needs to pay off maturing asset-backed commercial paper if conduits assets

are not in default. In theory, full liquidity guarantees can expire before the asset-backed

commercial matures, namely if the conduit assets are in default. In practice, however,

full liquidity guarantees provide the same strength as full credit guarantees because the

definition of asset default is chosen such that the asset-backed commercial paper matures

before the assets are declared in default.

       For example, default of unrated assets is usually a function of a slow-moving

variable such as a delinquency rate. Hence, if outside investors expect that conduits

assets may default in the future, they stop refinancing maturing asset-backed commercial

paper. As we show below, throughout the first year of the financial crisis, asset-backed

                                             -10-
commercial paper supported by full liquidity guarantees was always repaid in full prior to

the expiration of the full liquidity guarantees.

       Extendible notes guarantees are similar to full liquidity guarantees with the main

difference being that the conduit issuer has the discretion to extend maturing commercial

paper for a limited period of time (usually 60 days or less). By extending the maturity of

the commercial paper, it is more likely that the conduits assets are in default before the

commercial paper matures. From the investor’s viewpoint, extendible notes guarantees

are therefore riskier than full liquidity guarantees.

       SIV guarantees are also similar to full liquidity guarantees with the main

difference being that SIV guarantees only cover a share of the conduit liabilities (usually

around 25%). In exchange, conduits with SIV guarantees issue longer-maturity debt such

as medium-term notes and subordinated capital. Since SIV guarantees only cover some

of a conduit’s liabilities, we consider SIV guarantees as providing partial insurance to

outside investors.

       The partial retention of risk, as in the case of extendible notes and SIVs

guarantees, is consistent with security design models. In contrast, lack of any risk

transfer, as in the case of full credit and full liquidity conduits is at odds with such models

unless the underlying assets are mostly all of low quality, an unlikely scenario especially

when these conduits were set up. While the desire to get asset-backed commercial paper

to be rated highly could explain why sponsor banks provide substantial guarantees to

conduits, we explain below that reducing capital requirements explains why they are

primarily structured in the form of full liquidity guarantees.



                                             -11-
3.2. Capital Requirements

       Bank regulators have developed extensive regulation to deal with risks from off-

balance sheet exposure such as conduits. Since almost all conduits were sponsored by

banks based in the United States and European countries, we focus on bank regulation in

these countries.

       In the United States, bank regulators historically made a distinction between full

credit and full liquidity guarantees. Full credit guarantees were considered to be

equivalent to on-balance sheet financing. Hence, assets covered by full credit guarantees

required the same regulatory capital charges as assets on the balance sheet. In contrast,

full liquidity guarantees were considered to be of lower risk and required no capital

charges.

       In 2001, bank regulators in the United States started a formal review of its

regulatory treatment of full credit and full liquidity guarantees. The review was triggered

by the bankruptcy of the large energy company Enron, which had sponsored off-balance

sheet vehicles similar to conduits. In response, some observers suggested that conduits

should have capital charges similar to on-balance sheet financing, independent of whether

they were covered by full credit or full liquidity guarantees. Regulators discussed this

issue for two years and, as shown in Figure 1, total asset-backed commercial paper

remained stable during that period.

       In late 2003, the Financial Accounting Standard Board issued a directive which

required commercial banks to consolidate special purpose vehicles in which it was the

main beneficiary. This new directive implied that sponsors had to consolidate conduits to

which they provided credit guarantees. In late 2004, a consortium of bank regulators,

                                           -12-
namely the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve Board, the

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision, declared

asset-backed commercial paper conduits as being exempted from this directive. Under

the exemption, assets in conduits were not considered assets for the purpose of

calculating capital requirements. Instead, bank regulators required that banks had to hold

capital at a conversion factor of 10% against the amount covered by full liquidity

guarantees. This implied that regulatory charges for conduit assets were 90% lower than

regulatory charges for on-balance sheet financing (Gilliam (2005)). As shown in Figure

1, asset-backed commercial paper grew rapidly after the exemption was issued.

          In Europe, most countries had similar capital requirements as in the United States

until 2004. Full credit guarantees had full regulatory charges, but full liquidity

guarantees had no capital charges. The only exceptions were Spain and Portugal which

required full capital charges for both full credit and full liquidity guarantees (Acharya and

Schnabl, 2009b).

          The main difference between the United States and Europe was that European

banks started to adopt International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in the early

2000s. IFRS, contrary to U.S. General Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), do not

recognize asset transfers to conduits as a true sale. As a result, European banks were

required to consolidate conduits on their balance sheets. However, most European

regulators did not update capital regulation following IFRS. Hence, for the purpose of

computing regulatory requirements and risk weighted assets, conduits were considered

off-balance sheet and European banks did not have to hold any capital against conduit

assets.

                                             -13-
       Another difference between the United States and European countries was that

European bank regulators were in the process of adopting the Basel II framework (U.S.

commercial banks were still operating under Basel I). Under the Basel II standardized

approach, the capital requirements for conduit assets increase from 0% to 20% relative to

on-balance sheet financing. Moreover, Basel II assumes lower risk weights for AAA-

rated securities, which reduces the level of regulatory charges for both off-balance sheet

and on-balance sheet financing. At the time of financial crisis, several European banks

had adopted Basel II rules, while others were still operating under Basel I. Importantly,

both Basel I and Basel II rules allowed for “regulatory arbitrage” of capital requirements,

although it was smaller under the new regime.



3.3. Market Statistics

       Panel A of Table 1 shows the ten largest conduits ranked by asset-backed

commercial paper outstanding as of January 1, 2007. Nine out of ten conduits are

structured with full liquidity guarantees, which is consistent with the regulatory arbitrage

motive. We note that most conduits hold AAA-rated assets originated in the United

States or the United Kingdom and that most conduits are diversified across several asset

classes, with the main ones being residential mortgages and asset-backed securities.

       Panel B of Table 1 shows the ten largest sponsors ranked by the guaranteed

amount of asset-backed commercial paper outstanding as of January 1, 2007. In the

United States, the largest sponsor is Citigroup with conduit assets of $92.7 billion. For

comparison, Citigroup’s regulatory capital (Tier 1 Capital) is $90 billion. In Europe, the

largest sponsor is ABN Amro with $68 billion of conduits assets, which is twice the size

                                            -14-
of its regulatory capital (ABN Amro later merged with Royal Bank of Scotland). All

sponsors are large multinational banks based in the United States and European countries.

       Table 2 provides summary statistics for all conduits authorized to issue asset-

backed commercial paper as of January 1, 2007. Panel A shows that there are 301

conduits with total paper outstanding of $1,236 billion. The average conduit size is $4.1

billion with a standard deviation of $5.1 billion. Regarding credit guarantees, 61% of

asset-backed commercial paper is covered by full liquidity guarantees, 13% is covered by

full credit guarantees, 18% is covered by extendible notes guarantees, and 7% is covered

by SIV guarantees.

       The largest conduit type is multiseller conduits with $548 billion in asset-backed

commercial paper. Multiseller conduits purchase assets from more than one seller. The

assets are typically not securitized and the sellers are often clients of the sponsor. The

main asset types held by multiseller conduits are trade receivables (15%), securities

(12%), auto loans (11%), credit card receivables (10%), and commercial loans (9%). The

second-largest type is credit arbitrage conduits with $213 billion in asset-backed

commercial paper. Credit arbitrage conduits usually purchase securitized assets from

many sellers. The main asset types held by arbitrage conduits are residential mortgage

loans (26%), collateralized loan obligations and collateralized bond obligations (21%),

commercial mortgage loans (12%), and commercial loans (11%). The third-largest type is

single-seller conduits with $173 billion in asset-backed commercial paper. Single-seller

conduits are often used by mortgage originators to warehouse assets before they are

securitized. Most asset-backed commercial paper is issued in U.S. dollars ($922 billion)



                                            -15-
and Euro ($219 billion). The remainder is issued in Yen, Australian dollars, and New

Zealand dollars.

       Panel B of Table 2 presents summary statistics for all sponsors as of January 1,

2007. We define a sponsor as a single consolidated company and aggregate asset-backed

commercial paper at the holding level. In total, there are 127 sponsors, each of which, on

average, sponsors $9.7 billion of asset-backed commercial paper. The largest sponsor

type is commercial banks, which sponsor $911 billion of asset-backed commercial paper.

The second largest type is structured finance groups with $156 billion in asset-backed

commercial paper. Contrary to commercial banks, structured finance groups usually do

not have the financial resources to provide credit guarantees. Instead they purchase credit

guarantees from other financial institutions. Unfortunately our data do not contain

information to identify the provider of credit guarantees to conduits of structured finance

groups. Other large sponsor types are mortgage lenders ($76 billion), investment

managers ($18 billion) and investment banks ($11 billion).

       In terms of location, the majority of conduits are sponsored by financial

institutions based in the United States with $491 billion of asset-backed commercial

paper. A large number of sponsors are based in Germany and the United Kingdom with

asset-backed commercial paper of $204 billion and $195 billion, respectively. The

remaining $347 billion are sponsored by financial institutions based in other countries,

including financial institutions based in Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Netherlands,

and Japan.

       In Table 3 we provide a breakdown of credit guarantees by sponsor type. We find

that more than 74% of conduits sponsored by commercial banks had full liquidity

                                            -16-
guarantees. In contrast, 6% of conduits sponsored by structured finance groups had full

liquidity guarantees. Similarly, other sponsor types are also far less likely to provide full

liquidity guarantees to conduits. This evidence is consistent with the regulatory arbitrage

motive because, as described above, commercial banks has a stronger incentive to reduce

capital requirements using this specific structure, whereas the regulation typically does

not apply to other sponsor types.

       We also note that the geographic distribution of sponsors is consistent with the

regulatory arbitrage motive. As mentioned above, bank regulators in Portugal and Spain

had the same capital requirements for assets on the balance sheet and conduit assets.

Interestingly, we find that banks located in these two countries do not sponsor asset-

backed commercial paper conduits.



4. Empirical Analysis

4.1. Data

       We use several different data sources for the analysis in this paper. For the first

part of the empirical analysis, we use ratings reports from Moody’s Investors Service for

the period from January 2001 to March 2009. During this period, Moody’s Investors

Service rated 938 conduits. The rating reports are typically three to five pages and

contain information on conduit sponsor, conduit type, conduit assets, credit guarantees,

and a verbal description of the conduit. Moody’s Investors Service publishes the first

report when a conduit is first rated and subsequently updates the reports annually. For

some larger conduits, Moody’s Investors Service also publishes monthly monitoring

reports. Monthly reports are typically one page and comprise information on conduit

                                             -17-
size, credit guarantees, and conduit assets. In addition, Investors Service publishes a

quarterly spreadsheet that summarizes basic information on all active conduits.

       To construct our data set, we start with the universe of conduits collected from

Moody’s Investors Service’s quarterly spreadsheets. We merge conduits that have more

than one funding operation (79 out of 9536 observations). We drop asset-backed

commercial paper issued by collateralized debt obligations because their credit

guarantees are not comparable to the rest of the sample (292 out of 9536 observations).

       For each conduit, we aggregate asset-backed commercial paper at level of the

consolidated financial company (e.g., we aggregate paper sponsored by Citibank South

Dakota and Citibank New York). We use data from Bankscope and Osiris to identify

sponsors. Once we identify a potential match, we verify the information using the

company website. If we cannot identify a sponsor via Bankscope or Osiris, we conduct

an internet search.

       We construct a panel of the 300 largest banks as of January 2007 using the

Bankscope database. If a consolidated company and its subsidiaries have more than one

entry in Bankscope, we only keep the consolidated company. We use the ISIN identifier

to match Bankscope data to share price data and stock return data from Datastream. If a

bank does not have an ISIN identifier, we verify with the company website that the bank

is not listed on a stock exchange. We then match the Bankscope data to the Moody’s

Investors Service’s data.

       For the second part of the empirical analysis, we use a proprietary data set on all

asset-backed commercial paper transactions conducted in the United States from January

2007 to February 2008. The data set contains 777,758 primary market transactions by

                                            -18-
349 conduits over 292 trading days. The data are provided by the Depository Trust and

Clearing Corporation (DTTC), the agent that electronically clears and settles directly- and

dealer-placed commercial paper. For each transaction, DTCC provides the identity and

industry of the issuer, the face and settlement values of the transaction, and the maturity

of the security.

        Using the DTCC data, we compute prices and quantities for asset-backed

commercial paper. We compute overnight spreads as the yield on asset-backed

commercial paper minus the federal funds target rate. We calculate the conduit-level

weekly growth as the percentage change in asset-backed commercial paper. We merge

the DTCC data set with the Moody’s Investors Service data set.

        For the third part of the empirical analysis, we use Moody’s Investors Service

Weekly Announcement Reports of rating downgrades from January 2007 to December

2008. We identify all conduits that were downgraded or withdrawn during the analysis

period. For all such conduits, we search for an affirmative statement by Moody’s

Investors Service that all outside investors were repaid prior to the downgrade or

withdrawal. If there is no such affirmative statement we use announcements by the

sponsor or other rating agencies to determine whether investors were repaid. If we do not

find an affirmative statement that all investors were repaid, we assume that the conduit

entered default. We note that this coding procedure may overestimate the extent of

investor liquidation because investors may have been repaid without an affirmative

announcement by either the sponsor or the rating agencies.




                                            -19-
4.2. Effect of Conduit Exposure on Sponsor Stock Returns

        This section analyzes whether banks with higher conduit exposure experienced

lower stock returns at the start of the financial crisis. The difficulty in testing this

hypothesis is that the financial crisis also affected banks in other ways, some of which

may be correlated with conduit exposure. Hence, if we observe that banks with higher

conduit exposure have lower returns, then this result may be driven by other bank

activities that negatively affect stock prices and are correlated with conduit exposure.

        To address this identification issue, we focus on the start of the crisis in the asset-

backed commercial paper market on August 9, 2007. We believe this provides a good

setting to identify the impact of conduit exposure for two reasons. First, the financial

crisis arguably started with the announcement of difficulties in the subprime mortgage

market. As shown in Figures 1 and 2, starting on August 9, 2007, investors drastically

reduced refinancing of maturing asset-backed commercial paper and, as a result,

overnight spreads jumped from 10 basis points to 150 basis points. Hence, it is unlikely

that the event study is confounded by other events that happened just prior to August 9,

2007. Second, our analysis focuses on the narrow three-day window around August 9,

2007. This short event window reduces the likelihood that the results may be confounded

by other events that happen around the same time.

        We start by examining observable characteristics of banks with and without

conduit exposure. We restrict our sample to banks with assets of $5 billion or more as of

January 1, 2007, because only these banks had the financial strength to support conduits

(our results are robust to including smaller banks). We further restrict our analysis to

commercial banks based in Europe and the United States and to banks for which share

                                              -20-
price data is available. We choose this restriction because some countries outside the

United States and Europe (in particular Canada) allowed for differently structured credit

guarantees which are not comparable.

        Table 4 shows the distribution of banks by conduit exposure. We measure

conduit exposure as asset-backed commercial paper outstanding relative to equity capital

as of January 1, 2007. We sort banks into three groups: banks without conduits, banks

with low conduit exposure, and banks with high conduit exposure. Consistent with our

main hypothesis, we find that stock returns were lower for banks with higher conduit

exposure. In fact, the data suggest that stock returns monotonically decrease in conduit

exposure.

        Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4 show that banks with low conduit exposure and

banks with high conduit exposure are fairly similar in observable characteristic such as

total assets and equity. The main difference is that banks with low conduit exposure have

slightly higher equity ratios and slightly more short-term financing than banks with high

conduit exposure. Also, banks with low conduit exposure are more likely to be located in

the United States than banks with high conduit exposure.

        To control for difference in observable characteristics, we estimate the baseline

specification:



where       is the cumulative stock return of bank i computed over the three-day period

from August 8, 2007, to August 10, 2007,                   is bank i’s conduit exposure,

are bank i’s observable characteristics as of January 1, 2007, and    is a bank-specific



                                             -21-
error term. We estimate this specification using robust standard errors to allow for

correlation across error terms.

          Table 5 presents the results. Column (1) shows that an increase in conduit

exposure from 0% to 100% (e.g., Wells Fargo to Citibank) reduces the stock return

during the three-day event window by 2.6 percentage points. Column (2) controls for

banks size using the natural logarithm of assets and the natural logarithm of equity. The

coefficient on conduit exposure decreases to 1.4 percentage points but remains

statistically significant. Column (3) adds controls for the equity ratio and the result

remains unchanged. Columns (4) and (5) add control variables for funding sources such

as the share of deposit funding and the share of short-term debt funding and the results

are unaffected. Column (6) adds indicator variables for the country of the sponsoring

institution’s headquarters. Again, the coefficient of conduit exposure is unaffected and

remains statistically significant.

          We interpret these results as evidence that banks with higher conduit exposure

were more negatively affected by the crisis in the asset-backed commercial paper market.

The coefficient is probably a lower bound of the impact, because investors may have

underestimated the severity of the downturn or may not have been fully aware of the

(relatively opaque) credit guarantees provided to conduits. Also, investors may have

anticipated some of the losses because of prior announcements about losses on subprime

assets.

          To ensure that the results are not driven by outliers, we construct an alternative

measure of exposure. We compute the mean exposure of all banks with positive

exposure to conduits and divide the banks in two groups: banks with low exposure

                                              -22-
(below mean) and banks with high exposure (above mean). We estimate the baseline

specification using indicator variables for banks with low exposure and bank with high

exposure and in unreported results find qualitatively and quantitatively similar effects.

We also drop outliers in terms of conduit exposure and banks with less than $50 billion in

assets and our results are qualitatively and qualitatively unchanged.

       Our results rely on the identifying assumption that there is no omitted variable

that is correlated with conduit exposure and that directly affects stock returns. We think

this assumption is plausible because we use to a tight estimation window to isolate the

impact of the crisis in the asset-backed commercial paper market. To check the

robustness of this assumption, we also estimate the base-line specification for the pre-

period. We use the results from this estimation to assess whether conduit exposure is

correlated with the outcome variables in the absence of a disruption in the asset-backed

commercial paper market.

       Table 6 presents the results using a window of 15 trading days before and 15

trading days after the event date. We compute the cumulative stock return in the three-

day window around each day and estimate the baseline specification using the full set of

controls. Column (2) reports the coefficients on conduit exposure and Column (3) reports

the standard errors of the coefficients. In the pre-period, all coefficients are close to zero

and statistically insignificant. Hence, there is no evidence that conduit exposure is

correlated with stock returns in absence of a disruption in the asset-backed commercial

paper market. In the post-period, we find five dates with a significant effect of conduit

exposure on stock returns. This finding suggests that stock returns of high exposure

banks were more correlated after the disruption in the asset-backed commercial paper

                                             -23-
market. One possible interpretation of this result is that investors continued to revise

their expectation about the negative impact of conduit exposure after the start of the

financial crisis.

        We also examine the relation of conduit exposure and stock returns in the months

prior to August 2007. For each month from January 2007 to August 2007, we estimate

the same set of regressions as in Table 4 including all controls. Table 7 present the

results. We find no statistically significant relationship between conduit exposure and

stock returns from January 2007 to July 2007. However, in the month of the crisis in the

asset-backed commercial paper market, August 2007, we find a negative and statistically

significant effect of conduit exposure on stock returns after controlling for the full set of

observables. The coefficient is twice as large as the coefficient in Table 4. Again, this

finding suggests that investors revised their expectation of the negative effect of conduit

exposure on stock returns upwards for several days after the start of the financial crisis.

However, we caution our interpretation because the estimation is over a longer event

window and therefore may be confounded by other factors.



4.3. Impact of Credit Guarantees on Spreads and Issuance

        As shown in Figure 1, asset-backed commercial paper declined dramatically after

the start of the financial crisis on August 9, 2007. By the end of year, the asset-backed

commercial paper market was roughly 30 percent smaller than it was at its peak in July.

Importantly for our analysis, the extent of the decrease varied substantially by type of

credit guarantee. Figure 4 shows that asset-backed commercial paper covered by

extendible guarantees or SIV guarantees decreased significantly more than asset-backed

                                             -24-
commercial paper covered by full credit and full liquidity guarantees. Similarly, Figure 5

shows that the overnight spread on asset-backed commercial paper covered by extendible

guarantees and SIV guarantees increased more than the spread on asset-backed

commercial paper covered by full credit and full liquidity guarantees.7

         Our hypothesis is that credit guarantees (full credit or full liquidity) are necessary

for sponsor banks to obtain highest rating on ABCP of conduits. If this were true, then

conduits with such guarantees should face lower rollover risk during the crisis compared

to extendible notes and SIVs which had weaker guarantees. To test this impact of credit

guarantees more formally, we compute issuances and spreads of overnight asset-backed

commercial paper both before and after the start of the financial crisis.

         We restrict our sample to the period from January 2007 to February 2008. We

choose this period because it captures the main decline in asset-backed commercial paper

but does not include later events that may confound our analysis (e.g., Bear Stearns

merger, Lehman bankruptcy). We restrict the sample to conduits sponsored by

commercial banks because we lack data on the provider of credit guarantees for other

conduits. We further restrict our sample to banks for which there is data on CDS spreads

(The main results are stronger if we include banks without CDS spreads).

         Table 8 presents summary statistics for spreads and growth rates before and after

the start of the financial crisis. We find that asset-backed commercial paper decreased

for all categories after the start of the financial crisis, but the decrease is stronger for

conduits with weaker guarantees. For example, conduits with extendible notes

7
 We focus on overnight spreads because most newly issued ABCP has maturities of 1 to 4 days.
According to data from the Federal Reserve Board, roughly 60 percent of newly issued ABCP in the U.S.
has maturities of one to four days prior to the crisis. Our results are similar when considering one-month
spreads (one month is the second most frequent maturity after overnight).
                                                   -25-
guarantees went from a weekly growth rate of 0.2% before August 2007 to a negative

growth rate of 12.5% after August 2007; in contrast, conduits with full liquidity

guarantees went from a weekly growth rate of 0.01% before August 2007 to a negative

growth rate of 3.4% after August 2007.

          Similarly, overnight spreads increased after the start of the financial crisis for all

types of guarantee, but it increased more for conduits with weaker guarantees. For

example, conduits with SIV guarantees went from paying the Federal Funds rate for

issuing overnight paper before the August 2007 to paying 72 basis points over the Federal

Funds rate after August 2007; by contrast, conduits with full liquidity guarantees went

from paying the Federal Funds rate before August 2007 to paying 43 basis points over the

Federal Funds rate after August 2007. 8

          Next, we test whether the patterns on issuance and spreads by type of guarantee

are statistically significant and robust to controlling for unobservable sponsor and conduit

characteristics. Our baseline specification is:



where ∆         represents the log change in the face value of commercial paper outstanding

of conduit i in week t.                    is a fixed effect by type of guarantee.               is an

indicator variable that equals one after the start of the crisis (after August 9, 2007) and

zero before the crisis.                and          represent fixed effects by sponsor and by

week, respectively. We also estimate regression in which we control for conduit fixed

effects             and sponsor-time fixed effects                    .

8
  We note that the summary statistics contain more observations for overnight spreads than growth rates
because spreads are reported daily but growth rates are reported weekly. We further note that the summary
statistics on overnight spreads comprise fewer conduits than the summary statistics for weekly growth rates
because some conduits only issue commercial paper with maturities longer than overnight.
                                                   -26-
        We are primarily interested in the coefficient       on the interaction of         and

             , which captures the average change in the growth of commercial paper

outstanding by credit guarantee after the start of the financial crisis. We cluster standard

errors at the sponsor level to allow for the correlation of error terms within sponsors.

        If the financial crisis makes investors more concerned about risks in conduits, we

expect the interactions between dummies for weaker guarantees and the                indicator

to be more negative than those for stronger guarantees. Furthermore, if full credit and

full liquidity support provide the same level of protection for investors during the crisis,

we expect the interaction between the dummy for full credit support with the

dummy to be statistically insignificant. Together these hypotheses are aimed at

uncovering whether credit guarantees were important for outside investors to roll over

maturing asset-backed commercial paper.

        Column (1) in Table 9 reports the results of estimating our baseline specification.

The significant coefficient on the interaction between the             indicator and the

dummies for programs with extendible notes and SIVs suggest that asset-backed

commercial paper decreased more for conduits with weaker guarantees compared to

conduits with stronger guarantees. We note that we include sponsor fixed effects and

therefore we compare conduits with different guarantees for the same sponsor (i.e., we

control for time-invariant unobservable sponsor characteristics). As shown in column

(2), the results are similar when we replace sponsor-fixed effects with conduit-fixed

effects. The insignificant dummy on the interaction of the after dummy and full credit

guarantees suggests that full liquidity and full credit support are statistically

undistinguishable after the start of the financial crisis.
                                              -27-
        In Column (3), we add the full set of interactions of sponsor and time fixed effects

to the regression. Hence, the fixed effects control for all unobserved time variation at the

sponsor level and the coefficients are identified off only variation within a sponsor across

conduits at a given point in time. We find that the coefficients are similar in sign and

magnitude but not statistically significant. However, we find it reassuring that our results

yield very similar results after controlling for unobserved variation at the sponsor level.

        An alternative measure of the strength of the guarantee is the riskiness of the

sponsor as measured, for example, by the sponsor CDS spread. We expect that the

decrease in asset-backed commercial paper of conduits with weaker credit guarantees is

more pronounced if the sponsor is risky. We test this hypothesis by adding sponsor CDS

spreads and their two-way interactions with the dummies for type of guarantee and the

        indicator to the baseline specification.

        Columns (4) to (6) of Table 9 report the results. We find a negative and

statistically significant effect on the interaction of sponsor CDS spreads with weaker

guarantees. This finding suggests that issuance is indeed determined by the strength of

the effective guarantee. We note that the result is robust to including conduit fixed

effects, sponsor fixed effects, and sponsor-time fixed effects.

        We also estimate the impact of credit guarantees on overnight spreads of asset-

backed commercial paper. Again, our baseline specification is:



where            is the overnight spread (1 to 4 days of maturity) over the Federal Funds

rate on new issues by conduit i on day t. All right-hand side variables have the same



                                             -28-
interpretation as in the issuance regression, but time-dependent variables are now

measured daily.

        Columns (1) to (3) of Table 10 show that, after controlling for sponsor fixed-

effects, conduit-fixed effects, and sponsor-time fixed effects, conduits with SIV

guarantees have significantly higher spreads after the start of the crisis than other credit

guarantees. We also find a positive effect for extendible note guarantees, but the

coefficients are not always statistically significant. Columns (4) to (6) add sponsor CDS

spreads and their two-way interactions. We find that the increase in spreads for

extendible guarantees and SIV guarantees is more pronounced for conduits with riskier

sponsors, as measured by the sponsor CDS spread. The insignificant dummy for full

credit support suggests that investors price full credit and full liquidity similarly after the

start of the financial crisis.

        One possible concern with this analysis is that credit guarantees may be correlated

with unobservable characteristics that also affect spreads and issuance after the start of

the financial crisis. This may be the case if stronger credit guarantees cover assets which

perform better during the financial crisis. To the best of our knowledge, most conduits

were highly diversified but we cannot control directly for asset composition due to lack

of data. However, Moody’s Investors Service provides a classification according to

investment type, which groups conduits that follow similar investment strategies. In

particular, we want to use this classification to distinguish between conduits that invest

primarily in assets originated by their own clients (multiseller conduits) and conduits that

invest in securitized assets often originated by other banks (credit arbitrage conduits).



                                              -29-
           To ensure the robustness of our results, we therefore estimate the issuance and

spread regressions by conduit type. As shown in Table 2, multiseller conduits and credit

arbitrage conduits are the two largest conduit types and represent 62% of asset-backed

commercial paper outstanding as of January 2007. We estimate spreads and issuance

regressions separately. We note that multiseller conduits primarily use full liquidity, full

credit, and extendible notes guarantees and arbitrage conduits primarily use full liquidity

and SIV guarantees. We therefore focus our analysis on the main credit guarantees for

each conduit type.

           We report the main result in Table 11. We focus on regressions with conduit

fixed effects and sponsor-time fixed effects. We do not report regression with sponsor

fixed effects because they yield qualitatively and quantitatively similar results as

regressions with conduit fixed effects. Similarly, we do not report results for regressions

with interactions of CDS prices because they yield similar results as above.9

           For multiseller conduits, Columns (1) and (2) show that extendible notes conduits

experience a stronger decrease in commercial paper growth rates after the start of the

financial crisis than conduits with full liquidity guarantees or full credit guarantees. For

credit arbitrage conduits, Columns (3) and (4) show that conduits with SIV guarantees

have larger declines than conduits with full liquidity guarantees. Columns (5) to (8) find

similar results for the spread regressions. Among multiseller conduits, conduits with

extendible notes guarantees have larger spreads than conduits with full liquidity

guarantees or full credit guarantees and, among credit arbitrage conduits, conduits with

SIV guarantees have higher spreads than conduits with full liquidity guarantees after the


9
    The results are available upon request from the authors.
                                                      -30-
start of the financial crisis. Most coefficients are statistically significant except in some

of the specifications with sponsor-time fixed effects. Overall, these results suggest the

effect of credit guarantees on issuance and spreads is robust for conduits with similar

investment strategies.

       In summary, we find that after the start of the financial crisis conduits with

weaker guarantees decreased issuance more and paid higher spreads than conduits with

stronger guarantees. These patterns are stronger for weaker sponsors as measured by

CDS prices, suggesting that quantities and prices in the asset-backed commercial paper

market are indeed highly correlated with the strength of the sponsoring banks. Also, the

patterns suggest that the full credit guarantees and full liquidity guarantees were an

important part of rendering asset-backed commercial paper essentially risk-free from the

point of view of investors.



4.4. Realized Losses of Outside Investors

       This section examines the extent of realized risk transfer by analyzing whether

investors were repaid after the start of the financial crisis. We take the perspective of an

investor that was holding asset-backed commercial paper at the start of the crisis and

examine whether the investor suffered losses by not refinancing maturing asset-backed

commercial paper. We test the performance of credit guarantees using Moody’s

Investors Service announcement data from January 2007 to December 2008. Since all

conduits are rated, Moody’s Investors Service always issues an announcement if a

conduit fails to pay off maturing paper or if a conduit exits the market.



                                             -31-
       Table 12 presents the results on the realized performance of credit guarantees.

Column (1) shows asset-backed commercial paper outstanding per credit guarantee in

July 2007. Columns (2) to (4) show the value-weighted percentage in three categories:

conduits that were closed down and repaid all maturing asset-backed commercial paper

before December 2008, conduits that remained active and repaid all maturing commercial

paper up to December 2008, and conduits that have failed to repay maturing asset-backed

commercial paper and entered default by December 2008.

       The table shows that not a single conduit covered by full credit or full liquidity

guarantees defaulted by December 2008. In contrast, 7.4% of conduits covered by

extendible notes guarantees and 16.7% of conduits covered by SIV guarantees defaulted

by December 2008, respectively. Regarding the sponsor type, we find that conduits

sponsored by structured finance firms and mortgage companies were significantly more

likely to enter default than conduits sponsored by commercial banks. Overall, we note

that 97.5% of outside investors in asset-backed commercial paper were fully repaid.

       We also estimate bank losses on conduits. Losses depend on the loss rate on

conduit assets and unfortunately there is no publicly available information with respect to

loss rates on these assets. The AAA-tranche of ABX-index suggests that the value of

collateralized mortgage obligations backed by subprime mortgages dropped by up to 60

percent in months after the start of the financial crisis. The losses on conduit assets are

likely to be significantly smaller because most conduits were diversified across asset

classes. We therefore assume more conservative loss rates of 5% and 15%. Under this

assumption, we estimate total losses on conduit assets of $68 billion and $204 billion,

respectively. The estimated losses for outside investors are $1.8 billion and $30.4 billion

                                             -32-
respectively. Consistent with the lack of risk transfer, this analysis shows that most of

the losses were borne by sponsors rather than outside investors. However, the level of

the estimated losses is only suggestive because we lack the data to compute actual losses.



5. Benefits to banks of securitization without risk transfer

       The empirical analysis shows that banks suffered significant losses because

conduits were unable to roll over maturing asset-backed commercial paper. This raises

the question of how large was the benefit to banks from by setting up conduits.

        We can assess the benefits to banks by quantifying how much profit conduits

yielded to banks from an ex-ante perspective using a simple back-of-the-envelope

calculation. Assuming a risk weight of 100% for underlying assets, banks could avoid

capital requirements of roughly 8% by setting up conduits relative to on-balance sheet

financing. We assume that banks could finance debt at close to the riskless rate, which is

consistent with the rates paid on asset-backed commercial paper before the start of the

financial crisis. Further assuming an equity beta of one and a market risk premium of

5%, banks could reduce the cost of capital by 8%*5%=0.004 or 40 basis points by setting

up conduits relative to on-balance sheet financing.

       It is difficult to estimate the profits generated by conduits because only a few

banks report revenues from conduits. For example, Deutsche Bank reports in its annual

report in December 2007 that conduits generated fees of Euro 6 million relative to a total

commitment of Euro 6.3 billion. Similarly, Bank of New York Mellon reports in

December 2006 revenues of $3 million relative to a commitment of $3.2 billion (Arteta et



                                            -33-
al., 2008). Assuming that conduits have no costs and revenues are equal to profits, banks

earned about 10 basis points on conduit assets.

       Comparing this cost and benefit of conduits, it seems clear that conduits would

not have been profitable if banks had been required to hold equity against their assets in

conduits. In fact, banks would have made a loss of 30 basis points on each dollar

invested. However, given that banks were not required to hold equity, they could earn a

“profit” of 10 basis points. Conduits were thus a relatively low-return activity but offered

a way for banks to attract money-market savings and increase bank size without

increasing regulatory capital.

       Table 13 lists the 30 largest conduit sponsors. We find that missing capital - the

additional capital if conduit asset had been on bank balance sheet - was on average 6.1%

of total equity or about $68 billion in total across banks. This is not necessarily a large

amount of equity capital, but it masks considerable heterogeneity across banks as the

proportion of missing capital ranges from 1.7% to 79.9% of capital levels. The bank with

the largest exposure, Sachsen Landesbank, was the first large bank to be bailed out on 17

August 2007 because it was unable to provide the credit guarantees it had extended to its

conduits. Other banks with large exposure such as Westdeutsche Landesbank and ABN

Amro (later bought by Royal Bank of Scotland) also suffered large losses due to recourse

from conduits and had to be bailed out. Hence, for some smaller banks the conduit

activities were in fact large enough to wipe out the entire bank capital. For lager banks,

conduit activities were small enough to withstand the losses on conduit assets, but these

banks were weakened as the financial crisis continued.



                                             -34-
        In summary, we point out that an ex-ante capital requirement of 8% against

conduit assets would not have been sufficient to cover all possible losses from conduits

when the assets declined in value. However, the key observation is that a full capital

charge would have been sufficient to discourage banks from setting up conduits in the

first place.



6. Conclusion

        In this paper we analyze asset-backed commercial paper conduits and show how

the structure of risk-sharing in these conduits implies recourse back to bank balance-

sheets. We find that outside investors who purchased asset-backed commercial paper had

little loss even when collateral backing the conduits deteriorated in quality, supporting

our main finding that conduits were a form of securitization without risk transfer. We

also find that the stock price deterioration of banks at the start of the financial crisis was

linked to the extent of their conduit exposure relative to equity capital. Once the crisis

broke out, asset-backed commercial paper spreads rose and issuance fell, and more so

where guarantees were weaker and sponsoring banks were weaker.

        Our analysis makes it clear that from an economic standpoint conduits are

unregulated banks that operate in the shadow banking world, but with recourse to

regulated entities, mainly commercial banks, that have access to government safety net.

Our results also indicate that when these unregulated banks do not have such recourse

(extendible notes and SIVs), they struggle to survive a systemic crisis. While some may

interpret this finding to justify the accordance of government safety net to all those parts

of the shadow banking world that perform maturity mismatch like banks, the bigger

                                              -35-
lesson in our view is that the shadow banking world needs to be brought under the

purview of prudential regulations.

       In particular, the structure of credit guarantees to asset-backed commercial paper

conduits was designed by commercial banks precisely to arbitrage regulatory capital

requirements. Such possibilities – whereby government-insured banks effectively

operate at higher leverage by putting assets off-balance sheet but granting them recourse

– deserve regulatory scrutiny, especially when they operate at a scale that conduits did.




                                            -36-
References


Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew Richardson, 2009. “Causes of the Financial Crisis”,
Critical Review, 21(2–3), 195–210.

Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl, 2009a. “How Banks Played the Leverage
‘Game’”, Chapter 2 in Acharya, Viral V. and Matthew Richardson (editors), 2009.
“Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a Failed System”, New York University
Stern School of Business, John Wiley & Sons.

Acharya, Viral V. and Philipp Schnabl, 2009b. “Do Global Banks spread Global
Imbalances? The Case of Asset-Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of
2007-09”, Working Paper, New York University.

Arteta, Carlos, Mark Carey, Ricardo Corrrea, and Jason Kotter, 2008, “Revenge of the
Steamroller: ABCP as a Window on Risk Choices”, Working Paper, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve.

Ashcraft, Adam and Til Schuermann, 2008, “Understanding the Securitization of the
Subprime Mortgage Credit”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff reports.

Brunnermeier, Markus, 2009. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch of 2007-08”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 77-100.

Calomiris, Charles, 2009, “Financial Innovation, Regulation and Reform”, forthcoming,
the Cato Journal.

Calomiris, Charles and Joseph Mason, 2004, “Credit Card Securitization and Regulatory
Arbitrage”, Journal of Financial Services Research 26(1), 5-27

Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek and Erik Stafford, 2009, “Economic Catastrophe Bonds,”
forthcoming American Economic Review.

Covitz, Daniel, Nellie Liang and Gustavo Suarez, 2009, “The Anatomy of a Financial
Crisis: The Evolution of Panic-Driven Runs in the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper
Market,” Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.

Gilliam, Lee, 2005, “Accounting Consolidation versus Capital Calculation: The Conflict
Over Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Programs”, North Carolina Banking Institute
Journal, Volume 9

Gorton, Gary, 2008, “The Panic of 2007”, Yale University working paper.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, 2009, Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,
Working Paper, Yale University.
                                         -37-
Gorton, Gary and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2005, Special purpose vehicles and securitization,
NBER Working Paper No. 11190.

Kacperczyk, Marcin and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial
Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009”, Working Paper, New York University.

Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig, 2008. “Did
Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence form Subprime Loans?” forthcoming,
Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Nadauld, Taylor D. and Shane M. Sherlund, 2008. “The Role of the Securitization
Process in the Expansion of Subprime Credit”, Working Paper, Ohio State University.

Ramakrishnan, Ram T.S. and Anjan V. Thakor, Information reliability and a theory of
financial intermediation, Review of Economic Studies, 51, 415–432

Shin, Hyun Song, 2009, “Securitization and Financial Stability” paper presented as the
Economic Journal Lecture at the Royal Economic Society meeting, Warwick, March
2008.




                                          -38-
Figure 1: Asset-backed Commercial Paper Outstanding

This figure shows total asset-backed commercial paper outstanding in the U.S. market from January 2004 to April 2009. The figure is based on
weekly data published by the Federal Reserve Board.


            1300


            1200


            1100


            1000
  Billion




             900


             800


             700


             600


             500
              1/7/2004       1/7/2005             1/7/2006            1/7/2007             1/7/2008             1/7/2009
Figure 2: Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Spread

This figure shows the spread of overnight asset-backed commercial paper over the Federal Funds rate from January 2007 to December 2008. The
figure is based on market data published by the Federal Reserve Board.


    5




    4




    3




    2




    1




    0




    ‐1
Figure 3: Conduit Structure

This figure illustrates how a conduit is related to its sponsors, outside investors, and asset sellers.
Figure 4: Asset-backed Commercial Paper Outstanding by Credit Guarantee

This figure shows total asset-backed commercial paper outstanding in the period from January 2004 to June 2009 by type of credit guarantee. The
figure is based on quarterly data reports from Moody’s Investors Service.


  1,000
                USD billion
    900

    800

    700

    600

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Full Liquid
    500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Full Credit
    400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Extendible
    300                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SIV
    200

    100

      0
                                1‐May‐04
          1‐Jan‐04
                     1‐Mar‐04




                                                                                                  1‐May‐05
                                           1‐Jul‐04
                                                      1‐Sep‐04
                                                                 1‐Nov‐04
                                                                            1‐Jan‐05
                                                                                       1‐Mar‐05




                                                                                                                                                                    1‐May‐06
                                                                                                             1‐Jul‐05
                                                                                                                        1‐Sep‐05
                                                                                                                                   1‐Nov‐05
                                                                                                                                              1‐Jan‐06
                                                                                                                                                         1‐Mar‐06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1‐May‐07
                                                                                                                                                                               1‐Jul‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                          1‐Sep‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1‐Nov‐06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1‐Jan‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1‐Mar‐07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1‐May‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1‐Jul‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1‐Sep‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1‐Nov‐07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1‐Jan‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1‐Mar‐08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1‐Jul‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1‐Sep‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1‐Nov‐08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1‐Jan‐09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1‐Mar‐09
Figure 5: Asset-backed Commercial Paper Outstanding by Credit Guarantee

This figure shows total asset-backed commercial paper outstanding from April 2007 to December 2007 by the type of credit guarantee (indexed to
July 25=100). The figure is based on weekly data from DTCC and reports from Moody’s Investors Service.


  120
               Index (Jul 25 = 100)


  100



   80


                                                                                                                           Full credit support
   60                                                                                                                      Full liquidity
                                                                                                                           Extendible
                                                                                                                           SIV
   40



   20



    0
    4‐Apr‐07      4‐May‐07     4‐Jun‐07   4‐Jul‐07   4‐Aug‐07   4‐Sep‐07    4‐Oct‐07    4‐Nov‐07    4‐Dec‐07
Figure 6: Asset-backed Commercial Paper Spreads by Credit Guarantee

This figure shows the spread of overnight asset-backed commercial paper over the Federal Funds rate from July to September 2007 by type of
credit guarantee. The figure is based on weekly data from DTCC and reports from Moody’s Investors Service.

   1.40
             Percentage points

   1.20


   1.00


   0.80
                                                                                                                             Full credit support
                                                                                                                             Full liquidity
   0.60
                                                                                                                             Extendible
                                                                                                                             SIV
   0.40


   0.20


   0.00
      4‐Jul‐07           4‐Aug‐07           4‐Sep‐07           4‐Oct‐07           4‐Nov‐07           4‐Dec‐07

  ‐0.20
Table 1: Conduits and Sponsors

This table shows the ten largest conduits and sponsors as of 1/1/2007. The sample is restricted to bank-sponsored conduits. The information is
collected from Moody’s Rating Reports and Bankscope. “ABCP (bn)” denotes asset-backed commercial paper outstanding per conduit and
sponsor, respectively. “Asset Origin,” “Asset Rating,” and “Asset Type” denote characteristics of the main asset class owned by a conduit.

                                                   Panel A: Ten Largest Conduits
 Program Name            Sponsor        ABCP (bn)  Guarantee        Asset Origin             Asset Rating        Asset Type (Share %)
 Grampian Funding        HBOS             37.9    Full Liquidity   United States                AAA           Residential Mortgages (36%)
 Amstel Funding          ABN Amro         30.7    Full Liquidity    Netherlands                 AAA                 CDO/CLO (84%)
 Scaldis Capital         Fortis Bank      22.6    Full Liquidity   United States                AAA           Asset backed securities (77%)
 Sheffield Receivables   Barclays         21.4    Full Liquidity         n.a.                    NR                 Mortgages (43%)
 Morrigan TRR            Hypo Public      18.9     Full Credit           n.a.                    n.a.                 Bonds (51%)
 Cancara Asset           Lloyds           18.8    Full Liquidity    Great Britain               AAA           Residential Mortgages (43%)
 Solitaire Funding       HSBC             18.5    Full Liquidity   United States                AAA           Residential Mortgages (45%)
 Rhineland Funding       IKB              16.7    Full Liquidity   United States                AAA                 CDO/CLO (95%)
 Mane Funding            ING              13.7    Full Liquidity         n.a.                   AAA           Asset backed securities (91%)
 Atlantis One            Rabobank         13.5    Full Liquidity   United States                 NR            Commercial Loans (100%)
                                                       Panel B: Ten Largest Sponsors
 Sponsor                 Country       ABCP (bn)       Assets (bn)   Tier 1 Capital (bn) ABCP/Tier1 (%)               Tier1 Ratio (%)
 Citigroup               United States   92.7            1,884.3            90.9            102.0%                         8.6%
 ABN Amro                Netherlands     68.6            1,300.0            31.2            219.5%                         8.5%
 Bank of America         United States   45.7            1,459.7            91.1             50.2%                         8.6%
 HBOS Plc                Great Britain   43.9            1,161.7            44.0             99.7%                         8.1%
 JP Morgan               United States   42.7            1,351.5            81.1             52.7%                         8.7%
 HSBC                    Great Britain   39.4            1,860.8            87.8             44.9%                         9.4%
 Deutsche Bank AG        Germany         38.7            2,070.0            31.0            125.0%                         8.5%
 Société Générale        France          38.6            1,260.2            98.3             39.3%                         7.8%
 Barclays Plc            Great Britain   33.1            1,956.7            45.2             73.2%                         7.7%
 Rabobank                Netherlands     30.7             732.9             34.8             88.3%                        10.7%
Table 2: Market Summary Statistics

This table includes all conduits that were rated by Moody's Investors Service as of 1/1/2007.
Panel A shows summary statistics by conduit. “# Conduits” denotes the number of conduits and
sponsors, respectively. “Risk Transfer” refers to the credit guarantees provided by the sponsor.
“Conduit Type” is conduit type as provided by Moody's Investors Service. “Currency” is the
issuing currency of the conduit. Panel B aggregates conduits by sponsor. “Sponsor Type”
denotes the type of sponsoring institution. “Country of Origin” denotes the headquarters of the
sponsoring institution.

                                       Panel A: Conduits
                                                   Total                   Per Conduit
                                          # Conduits     Size (bn)         Mean    Std.
       All Conduits                           301         1,236.2           4.1   (5.1)
       Risk Transfer
          Full Liquidity                       163           752.9          4.6      (5.7)
          Full Credit                           55           159.9          2.9      (4.6)
          Extendible Notes                      55           230.9          4.2      (4.5)
          SIV                                  28            92.6           3.3      (3.4)
       Conduit type
          Multi-Seller                         139           548.4          3.9      (4.4)
          Securities Arbitrage                  36           214.2          6.0      (8.4)
          Single-Seller                         62           173.5          2.8      (4.0)
          Other                                 64           300.0          4.7      (5.0)
       Currency
          USD                                  233           973.0          4.2      (4.6)
          EURO                                  33           220.0          6.7      (8.4)
          Other                                 35            43.2          1.2      (1.6)
                                       Panel B: Sponsors
                                                   Total                   Per Sponsor
                                          # Sponsors     Size (bn)         Mean    Std.
       All Programs                           127         1,236.2           9.7   (14.7)
       Sponsor type
          Commercial Banks                     67            911.4          13.6    (17.6)
          Structured Finance                   19            155.8          8.2     (13.7)
          Mortgage Lender                      18            75.5           4.2      (5.8)
          Investment Manager                    5            17.6           3.5      (3.3)
          Investment Banks                     4             11.0           2.7      (2.2)
          Other                                14            64.8           4.6      (6.2)
       Country of Origin
          United States                        67            491.8           7.3    (14.7)
          Germany                              15            204.1          13.6    (11.6)
          United Kingdom                       10            195.7          19.6    (17.0)
          Other                                35            344.5          9.8     (14.4)
Table 3: Asset-backed Commercial Paper by Sponsor Type and Credit Guarantee

This table includes all conduits that were rated by Moody's Investors Service as of 1/1/2007. The ‘Total’ shows total asset-backed commercial
paper outstanding as of 1/1/2007 per type of sponsor. The ‘Credit Guarantee’ shows the breakdown of asset-backed commercial paper by type of
credit guarantee.




                                                    Total                              Credit Guarantee
                                            # Sponsors Size (bn)        Full Liquidity Full Credit Extendible SIV

                      Commercial Banks               64      911.4             74.2%        10.9%         8.6% 6.3%
                      Structured Finance             19      155.8              7.0%        37.2%        34.7% 21.1%
                      Mortgage Lender                18       75.5             14.3%         0.0%        82.8% 2.9%
                      Investment Manager              5       17.6              0.0%         1.3%        98.7% 0.0%
                      Investment Banks                4       11.0             54.9%         0.0%        45.1% 0.0%
                      Other                          14       64.8             74.8%         2.3%        22.9% 0.0%
Table 4: Event Study Summary Statistics

This table shows summary statistics by conduit exposure. We sort banks in three groups: bank with no conduit exposure, banks with low conduit
exposure, and banks with high conduit exposure. We restrict the sample to commercial banks that (i) are among the 300 largest financial
institutions, (ii) are located in the Europe or the United States, and (iii) have share price data available. We measure ‘Stock Return’ as the total
stock return in the three-day window from August 8,2007, to August 10, 2007, ‘Exposure’ is the asset-backed commercial paper outstanding
relative to equity, ‘Log Assets’ is the natural logarithm of assets, ‘Log Equity’ is the natural logarithm of equity, ‘Equity Ratio’ is equity as share
of assets, ‘Share Deposits’ is deposits as share of assets, and ‘Share Short-Term Debt’ is short-term debt as share of assets. All variables are
measured as of January 1st, 2007. ‘United States’ is an indicator variable whether a bank is headquartered in the United States.

                                                                                                 Conduit Exposure
                 Sample:                             All                        No                 Low                 High
                                                     (1)                        (2)                (3)                 (4)
                 Stock return Aug 8th - Aug 10th     -0.004                     0.007              -0.028              -0.046
                                                     (0.052)                    (0.055)            (0.024)             (0.026)
                 Conduit Exposure                    0.169                      0.000              0.248               1.199
                                                     (0.532)                    0.000              (0.131)             (1.155)
                 Log(Assets)                         3.961                      3.154              6.379               6.325
                                                     (2.284)                    (1.987)            (1.077)             (1.280)
                 Log(Equity)                         1.355                      0.670              3.671               3.025
                                                     (2.043)                    (1.832)            (0.877)             (1.161)
                 Equity Ratio                        0.091                      0.101              0.076               0.043
                                                     (0.099)                    (0.111)            (0.038)             (0.026)
                 Share Deposits                      0.602                      0.63               0.530               0.504
                                                     (0.208)                    (0.223)            (0.112)             (0.145)
                 Share Short-Term Debt               0.073                      0.050              0.122               0.167
                                                     (0.084)                    (0.050)            (0.117)             (0.129)
                 US Indicator Variable               0.542                      0.613              0.400               0.250
                                                     (0.501)                    (0.490)            (0.507)             (0.452)
                 N                                   107                        80                 15                  12
Table 5: Effect of Conduit Exposure on Stock Returns (August 8, 2007 – August 10, 2007)

This table shows the effect of conduit exposure on stock return. We restrict the sample to commercial banks that (i) are among the 300 largest
financial institutions (ii) are located in the Europe or the United States, and (iii) have share price data available. The dependent variable is the total
stock return over the three-day period from August 8, 2007 to August 10, 2007. We measure ‘Conduit Exposure’ as asset-backed commercial
paper relative to equity. Columns (2) to (6) include control variables for the ratio of short-term assets to debt, the ratio of equity to assets,
log(Assets) and log(Equity). All control variables are measured as of January 1, 2007. Column (6) includes fixed effects for Germany, Great
Britain, and the United States. Robust standard errors are in parentheses below coefficients. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

                                                                              Dependent Variable: Stock Return
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)                  (5)               (6)
 Conduit Exposure                            -0.026           -0.014           -0.011         -0.013               -0.014            -0.015
                                             (0.007)**        (0.004)**        (0.003)**      (0.003)**            (0.003)**         (0.004)**
 Log(Assets)                                                  -0.007           -0.022         -0.024               -0.027            0.005
                                                              (0.005)          (0.008)**      (0.008)**            (0.009)**         -0.015
 Log(Equity)                                                  -0.004           0.012          0.013                0.015             -0.016
                                                              (0.007)          (0.009)        (0.009)              (0.009)           (0.015)
 Equity-Assets Ratio                                                           -0.099         -0.103               -0.137            -0.006
                                                                               (0.029)**      (0.031)**            (0.037)**         (0.065)
 Share Short Term Debt                                                                        0.066                0.063             0.039
                                                                                              (0.041)              (0.041)           (0.042)
 Share Deposits                                                                                                    -0.027            -0.017
                                                                                                                   (0.017)           (0.026)
 Constant                                    0.000            0.033             0.079            0.082             0.111             0.036
                                             (0.005)          (0.015)*          (0.025)**        (0.026)**         (0.032)**         (0.042)
 Country FE                                  N                N                 N                N                 N                 Y
 Observations                                107              107               107              107               107               107
 R-squared                                   0.068            0.277             0.289            0.297             0.303             0.359
Table 6: Conduit Exposure and Stock Return Around Market Freeze (+/- 15 Trading Days)

This table shows the effect of conduit exposure on stock returns for the period around the event
date of August 9, 2007. For each day, we construct the window one day before and one day after
and compute the stock return over the three-day period. We estimate the same regression as in
Table 5 using the full set of controls. We report the estimated coefficient and standard error for
the conduit exposure variable.



               Trading Days +/-        Conduit Exposure
               Event Date              Coefficient           Standard Error
               -15                     0.007                 (0.004)
               -14                     -0.005                (0.006)
               -13                     -0.009                (0.006)
               -12                     -0.006                (0.005)
               -11                     0.001                 (0.003)
               -10                     0.009                 (0.006)
               -9                      0.001                 (0.004)
               -8                      -0.002                (0.004)
               -7                      -0.006                (0.007)
               -6                      -0.001                (0.007)
               -5                      -0.001                (0.007)
               -4                      0.001                 (0.007)
               -3                      0.002                 (0.005)
               -2                      -0.001                (0.005)
               -1                      -0.009                (0.006)
               0                       -0.015                (0.004)**
               1                       -0.005                (0.004)
               2                       0.000                 (0.002)
               3                       -0.010                (0.005)*
               4                       -0.022                (0.010)*
               5                       -0.020                (0.012)
               6                       -0.009                (0.012)
               7                       0.001                 (0.010)
               8                       0.000                 (0.003)
               9                       0.003                 (0.003)
               10                      0.005                 (0.007)
               11                      0.008                 (0.003)**
               12                      0.000                 (0.002)
               13                      -0.003                (0.004)
               14                      -0.010                (0.004)*
               15                      -0.006                (0.002)**
Table 7: Conduit Exposure and Stock Return in Months before Start of Financial Crisis (January to August 2007)

This table shows the effect of conduit exposure on stock return in the months before the start of the financial crisis. We restrict the sample to
commercial banks that (i) are among the 300 largest financial institutions, (ii) are located in the Europe or the United States, and (iii) have share
price data available. The dependent variable is the total stock return for the month indicated at the top of each column. We measure ‘Conduit
Exposure’ as bank-sponsored ABCP outstanding relative to equity. All columns include control variables for the ratio of short-term assets to debt,
the ratio of equity to assets, log(Assets), and log(Equity), and geographic controls. All control variables are measures on 1/1/2007. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses below coefficients. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

                                                                    Dependent Variable: Stock Return
    Month                           Jan          Feb         Mar          Apr           May           Jun            Jul         Aug
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)
    Exposure                         0.008       -0.006         0.003       -0.005         0.004       0.006          0.014        -0.029
                                   (0.012)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.009)       (0.010)     (0.008)        (0.011)    (0.009)**
    Log(Assets)                     -0.026        -0.03        -0.033       -0.005        -0.042      -0.012         -0.037        -0.006
                                   (0.024)      (0.018)       (0.023)      (0.024)       (0.021)     (0.021)        (0.032)       (0.025)
    Log(Equity)                      0.033        0.031         0.029          0.02        0.043        0.01          0.043        -0.002
                                   (0.024)      (0.018)       (0.024)      (0.023)      (0.021)*     (0.022)        (0.031)       (0.026)
    Equity-Assets Ratio             -0.058       -0.117        -0.134        0.016           -0.2      0.105         -0.098        -0.058
                                   (0.120)      (0.082)       (0.099)      (0.112)       (0.110)     (0.078)        (0.172)       (0.115)
    Share Short Term Debt           -0.036       -0.081         0.096        0.078        -0.064       0.064          0.012         0.029
                                   (0.044)      (0.041)       (0.050)      (0.072)       (0.090)     (0.048)        (0.071)       (0.106)
    Share Deposits                  -0.053       -0.013        -0.005       -0.021        -0.055       0.071          0.057         0.008
                                   (0.036)      (0.028)       (0.035)      (0.046)       (0.052)     (0.056)        (0.086)       (0.052)
    Constant                          0.08        0.092         0.168          0.04        0.149      -0.077          0.082         0.009
                                   (0.067)      (0.051)    (0.059)**       (0.066)      (0.059)*     (0.050)        (0.092)       (0.068)
    Country FE                           Y            Y             Y             Y            Y           Y              Y             Y
    Observations                       107          107           107           107          107         107            107           107
    R-squared                        0.648        0.337         0.376        0.522         0.301       0.196          0.295         0.258
Table 8: Asset-backed Commercial Paper Summary Statistics

This table shows summary statistics for asset-backed commercial paper conduits before and after the crisis of August 2007. The sample is
restricted to the period from January to August 8, 2007 (Before) and the period from August 9, 2007 to February 2008 (After). “ABCP Growth” is
the weekly log change in commercial paper outstanding by conduit. “ABCP Spread” is the spread of overnight commercial paper over the Federal
Funds rate in percentage points. For both variables, we show means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the full sample and by type of
credit guarantee.


                                                              Issuances                         Spread
                                                         All    Before After             All   Before       After
                            All                        -0.017 0.001 -0.038              0.225   0.012       0.448
                                                      (0.174) (0.095) (0.232)          (0.352) (0.099)     (0.381)
                            By risk transfer
                                  Full Liquidity       -0.012    0.000    -0.026        0.229     0.010     0.448
                                                      (0.140)   (0.083)   (0.183)       (353)    (0.091)   (0.381)
                                  Full Credit          -0.003    0.004     -0.011       0.194     0.025     0.384
                                                      (0.210)   (0.129)   (0.269)      (0.326)   (0.155)   (0.362)
                                  Extendible           -0.036    0.001    -0.110        0.359     0.017     0.639
                                                      (0.271)   (0.120)   (0.429)      (0.436)   (0.081)   (0.407)
                                  SIV                  -0.053    0.010    -0.114        0.190     0.022     0.756
                                                      (0.214)   (0.097)   (0.271)      (0.346)   (0.040)   (0.323)

                            Observations               8,487    4.535     3,952        19,649    10,023    9,626
                            Conduits                    129      122       123          106        95       91
Table 9: Effect of Credit Guarantee on Asset-backed Commercial Paper Issuance

This table shows the effect of credit guarantees on issuance. The dependent variable is the weekly log change in asset-backed commercial paper
outstanding. “Full Credit,” “Extendible Notes,” and” SIV” are indicator variables for the type of credit guarantee. The indicator variable “After”
denotes the months after the crisis. “CDS” is the CDS Spread of the sponsor. All Columns include week fixed effects. Column (1) and (3) include
sponsor fixed effects. Column (2) and (4) include conduit fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) include all two-way interactions of “Sponsor
CDS”. Standard errors in brackets are clustered at the sponsor level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

                                                       (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                   Full credit x After                0.016        0.021        0.009         0.039        0.05        0.036
                                                     (0.016)      (0.020)      (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.038)      (0.061)
                   Extendible notes x After          -0.089*     -0.132**       -0.036       -0.016       -0.057     -0.109*
                                                     (0.046)      (0.057)      (0.038)      (0.038)      (0.059)      (0.056)
                   SIV x After                       -0.095*     -0.104**      -0.109        -0.048     -0.064**      -0.065
                                                     (0.054)      (0.051)      (0.071)      (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.046)
                   CDS x Full credit x After                                                 -0.102       -0.123      -0.174
                                                                                            (0.059)      (0.092)     (0.140)
                   CDS x Extendible x After                                                -0.110**        -0.07       0.136
                                                                                            (0.047)      (0.054)     (0.122)
                   CDS x SIV x After                                                      -0.201***     -0.212**     -0.195*
                                                                                            (0.070)      (0.086)     (0.110)
                   Constant                        -0.069***     1.495***    -0.013***      -0.051*     1.497***    -0.014***
                                                    (0.012)       (0.021)     (0.002)       (0.027)      (0.021)      (0.003)
                   Observations                       8487         8487         8487          8487         8487        8487
                   Time-fixed effects?                Yes           Yes          No            Yes          Yes         No
                   Sponsor-fixed effects?             Yes           No           No            Yes          No          No
                   Sponsor-time-fixed effects?         No           No          Yes            No           No          Yes
                   Conduit-fixed effects?              No           Yes          No            No           Yes         No
                   R-squared                         0.054         0.098       0.336          0.06        0.104        0.337
Table 10: Effect of Credit Guarantee on Asset-backed Commercial Paper Spreads

This table shows the effect of credit guarantees on asset-backed commercial paper spreads. The dependent variable is the asset-backed
commercial paper spread on overnight commercial paper in the primary market. The explanatory variables are defined the same way as in Table
9. Column (1) and (3) include sponsor fixed effects. Column (2) and (4) include conduit fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) include all two-way
interactions of “Sponsor CDS”. Standard errors shown are clustered at the sponsor level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%

                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)
              Full credit x After                  -0.028        -0.013        -0.03          0.025         0.03        -0.049
                                                  (0.068)       (0.071)       (0.145)       (0.094)      (0.081)       (0.190)
              Extendible notes x After              0.133       0.198*         0.128         -0.118        0.011        -0.067
                                                  (0.099)       (0.108)       (0.123)       (0.075)      (0.172)       (0.105)
              SIV x After                        0.347***      0.265***      0.395***        0.295        0.201       0.451**
                                                  (0.091)       (0.082)       (0.087)       (0.209)      (0.170)       (0.196)
              CDS x Full credit x After                                                   -0.266***       -0.049         0.005
                                                                                            (0.093)      (0.202)       (0.110)
              CDS x Extendible notes x After                                               0.634***          0.3      0.334***
                                                                                            (0.202)      (0.184)       (0.117)
              CDS x SIV x After                                                               0.123        0.169        -0.193
                                                                                            (0.435)      (0.337)       (0.437)
              Constant                           0.406***      0.208***      0.227***     0.402***      0.212***      0.227***
                                                  (0.075)       (0.023)       (0.008)       (0.072)      (0.023)       (0.007)
              Observations                        19,649        19,649        19,649        19,649       19,649        19,649
              Time-fixed effects?                   Yes           Yes           No             Yes          Yes           No
              Sponsor-fixed effects?                Yes           No            No             Yes           No           No
              Sponsor-time-fixed effects?           No            No            Yes            No            No           Yes
              Conduit-fixed effects?                No            Yes           No             No           Yes           No
              R-squared                            0.786         0.853         0.892         0.788        0.854          0.893
Table 11: Effect of Credit Guarantees on Issuance and Spreads by Conduit Type

This table shows the effect of credit guarantees on asset-backed commercial paper spreads separately for multiseller conduits and securities
arbitrage conduits. The dependent variables are the weekly growth in asset-backed commercial paper outstanding and the daily spread on
overnight commercial paper in the primary market. The explanatory variables are defined the same way as in Table 9. Columns (1), (3), (5), and
(7) includes conduit fixed effects and time-fixed effects. Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) include sponsor-time fixed effects. Standard errors shown
are clustered at the sponsor level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                            Issuance                                        Spreads
                                                Multiseller              Arbitrage            Multiseller                Arbitrage
                                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
            Full credit x After              0.051      0.095                              0.044    -0.088***
                                            (0.039)    (0.075)                            (0.119)     (0.001)
            Extendible notes x After       -0.194** -0.162*                                0.186     0.378***
                                            (0.084)    (0.080)                            (0.118)     (0.001)
            SIV x After                                            -0.119**      -0.029                           0.211***      0.091
                                                                    (0.049)     (0.028)                            (0.048)     (0.074)

            Constant                       0.185*** -0.016** -0.121*** -0.014 0.230***               0.227***     0.271*** 0.375***
                                            (0.039)  (0.006)  (0.008)  (0.014) (0.010)                (0.003)      (0.024)  (0.008)

            Observations                     2476        2476        1263        1263      7192        7192         1441        1441
            Time-fixed effects?               Yes         No          Yes         No        Yes         No           Yes         No
            Sponsor-time-fixed effects?       No          Yes         No          Yes       No          Yes          No         Yes
            Conduit-fixed effects?            Yes         No          Yes         No        Yes         No           Yes         No
            R-squared                        0.107       0.493       0.220       0.627     0.863       0.944        0.897       0.99
Table 12: Estimated Losses for Sponsors and Outside Investors

This table shows the ex-post risk transfer by credit guarantee. “Pre-crisis” denotes total asset-backed commercial paper outstanding as of
7/1/2007. Post-crisis denotes the value-weighted share that is “Active” (conduit continues to issue), “Repaid” (conduit closed and repaid
investors), and “In Default” (Conduit closed and investor not repaid). “Estimated losses” estimates the losses of sponsor and outside investors
assuming a recovery rate on conduit assets of 95% and 85%, respectively.



                                      Pre-Crisis                Post-Crisis                          Estimated Loss (bn)
                                                                                          Recovery Rate: 95%     Recovery Rate 85%
                                      ABCP (bn)        Active Repaid In Default           Sponsor Investor       Sponsor Investor
           All                          1,395.5        76.6% 20.8%       2.5%                 68.0        1.8       204.0      30.0
           Risk Transfer
                Full Liquidity              844.0      87.9%     12.1%         0.0%           42.2         0.0         126.6         0.0
                Full Credit                 204.2      70.9%     29.1%         0.0%           10.2         0.0          30.6         0.0
                Extendibles                 243.1      47.0%     45.5%         7.4%           11.2         0.9          33.7        15.4
                SIV                         104.1      65.7%     17.7%        16.6%            4.3         0.9          13.0        14.7
           Sponsor Type
                Commercial Bank           1,035.6      83.0%     16.4%         0.6%           51.5         0.3         154.4         5.3
                Structured Finance          199.2      58.1%     36.4%         5.5%            9.4         0.6          28.2         9.4
                Mortgage Lender              60.2      44.5%     40.2%        15.3%            2.5         0.5           7.6         7.8
                Other                       100.4      63.3%     24.4%         8.9%            4.6         0.4          13.7         7.6
Table 13: Missing Capital

This table lists the 30 largest banks sponsors of ABCP as of 1/1/2007. For each bank, we
compute the required capital assuming ABCP requires a capital charge of 8%, i.e.
ABCP*0.08=Total, expressed in billions of US dollars.. We also compute the ‘missing capital’ as
a share of a bank’s equity. We measure equity as Tier 1 Capital. If a bank does not report Tier 1
Capital, we multiply shareholder equity with the average Tier 1/equity shareholder ratio of banks
that report both shareholder equity and Tier 1 ratio.

                                                                                   Missing
                                                                                    Capital
 Name                                                         Tier 1   ABCP     Total %
 Citigroup Inc                                                  90.9   92.672     7.4     8.2%
 ABN Amro Holding NV                                            31.2   68.575     5.5 17.6%
 Bank of America Corporation                                    91.1   45.691     3.7     4.0%
 HBOS Plc                                                       44.0     43.9     3.5     8.0%
 JP Morgan Chase & Co.                                          81.1   42.714     3.4     4.2%
 HSBC Holdings Plc                                              87.8   39.426     3.2     3.6%
 Deutsche Bank AG                                               31.0   38.736     3.1 10.0%
 Société Générale                                               29.4   38.639     3.1 10.5%
 Barclays Plc                                                   45.2    33.07     2.6     5.9%
 Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group                                 68.5       32     2.6     3.7%
 Rabobank Nederland                                             34.8   30.773     2.5     7.1%
 WestLB AG                                                       9.5   29.946     2.4 25.1%
 ING Groep NV                                                   54.3   26.417     2.1     3.9%
 Dresdner Bank AG                                               18.7   23.191     1.9     9.9%
 Fortis                                                         16.4   22.596     1.8 11.0%
 Bayerische Landesbank                                          15.8   22.352     1.8 11.3%
 Bayerische Hypo-und Vereinsbank AG                             14.1   22.263     1.8 12.6%
 State Street Corporation                                       24.1   21.855     1.7     7.2%
 Crédit Agricole S.A.                                            6.5    19.48     1.6 24.1%
 Hypo Real Estate Holding AG                                     4.5   18.931     1.5 33.4%
 Lloyds Banking Group Plc                                        6.1   18.782     1.5 24.6%
 Countrywide Financial Corporation                              25.2   18.305     1.5     5.8%
 GMAC LLC                                                       15.4   17.539     1.4     9.1%
 Royal Bank of Scotland                                         75.2   15.847     1.3     1.7%
 Royal Bank of Canada RBC                                       52.3   15.602     1.2     2.4%
 Bear Stearns Companies LLC                                     19.1   13.845     1.1     5.8%
 KBC Group                                                      22.9   12.606     1.0     4.4%
 Sachsen Landesbank                                              1.3   12.528     1.0 79.9%
 BNP Paribas                                                    62.3   11.647     0.9     1.5%
 Bank of Montreal                                               45.3   11.528     0.9     2.0%
 Total                                                       1,124.0    861.5    68.9     6.1%
