                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          POLICIES TO CREATE AND DESTROY HUMAN CAPITAL IN EUROPE

                                          James J. Heckman
                                             Bas Jacobs

                                        Working Paper 15742
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15742


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2010




This paper was generously supported by the National Science Foundation (SES-0241858, SES-0099195,
SES-0452089); the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (R01HD43411); a
grant to the Committee on Economic Development PAES Group from the PEW Foundation; support
from the J.B. Pritzker Consortium on Early Childhood Development at the Harris School of Public
Policy, University of Chicago; and the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO Vidi
Grant No. 452-07-013,'Skill Formation in Distorted Labor Markets'). An extended version of this paper
was presented at the joint conference of CESifo and Center on Capitalism and Society, "Perspectives
on the Performance of the Continent's Economies," Venice International University, San Servolo,
21 - 22 July 2006. We especially thank Dennis Snower, Edmund Phelps, Hans-Werner Sinn and the
participants for their useful comments and suggestions. In addition we thank Lans Bovenberg, George
Gelauff, Coen Teulings and participants of the Netspar-SER-CPB conference, "Reinventing the Welfare
State," April 27-28, 2006, The Hague, The Netherlands, for their comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by James J. Heckman and Bas Jacobs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Policies to Create and Destroy Human Capital in Europe
James J. Heckman and Bas Jacobs
NBER Working Paper No. 15742
February 2010
JEL No. H2,H5,I2,I3,J2,J3

                                              ABSTRACT

Trends in skill bias and greater turbulence in modern labor markets put wages and employment prospects
of unskilled workers under pressure. Weak incentives to utilize and maintain skills over the life-cycle
become manifest with the ageing of the population. Policies to promote human capital formation reduce
welfare state dependency among the unskilled and offset inefficiencies in human capital formation.
Skill formation features strong dynamic complementarities over the life-cycle. Investments in the human
capital of children have higher returns than investments in the human capital of older workers. There
is no trade-off between equity and efficiency at early ages of human development but there is a substantial
trade-off at later ages. Later remediation of skill deficits acquired in early years often does not meet
the cost-benefit criterion. Positive returns to active labor market and training policies are doubtful.
Skill formation is impaired when the returns to skill formation are low due to low skill use and insufficient
skill maintenance later on in life. High marginal tax rates and generous benefit systems reduce labor
force participation rates and hours worked and thereby lower the utilization rate of human capital.
Tax-benefit systems redistribute resources from outsiders to insiders in labor markets, which can be
both distortionary and inequitable. Actuarially fairer early retirement and pension schemes reduce
the incentives to retire early and strengthen incentives for human capital investment by increasing
the time-horizon over which returns to human capital are harvested.


James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
aOVR University College Dublin
$PHULFDQ%DU)RXQGDWLRQ IZA
and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Bas Jacobs
Erasmus School of Economics
Erasmus University Rotterdam
PO box 1738
3000 DR Rotterdam
The Netherlands
bjacobs@ese.eur.nl
1    Introduction
The labor market prospects of unskilled workers are jeopardized by skill-biased technical
changes and the globalization of the world’s production activities (see, e.g., Katz and Au-
tor, 1999). Moreover, some argue that the position of unskilled workers has become more
vulnerable in recent, more turbulent labor markets (Ljungqvist and Sargent, 1998; 2002).
As the relative demand for unskilled labor diminishes, and governments or unions attempt
to protect workers with low skills through labor market regulations or minimum wages,
non-employment among the unskilled will increase (Bertola, 2003). Raising payroll taxes
to support such efforts also reduces demand. Human capital policy can help to avoid the
emergence of an underclass.
    All available evidence shows that welfare state dependency in Europe is heavily concen-
trated among unskilled persons. For example, unskilled persons have higher unemployment
rates, higher take-up rates of welfare benefits and larger participation rates in active labor
market programs (OECD 2005a; 2006a; 2006b). In addition, many social problems are asso-
ciated with lack of skill, such as deviant social behavior (drug use), working in the unofficial
economy, criminal behavior, teenage pregnancies, and so on (European Commission, 2005).
Social cohesion may be undermined further as migrant populations are predominantly low
skilled and their welfare dependency rates are high.
    Another feature of European labor markets is that European human capital stocks re-
main idle during large parts of the life-cycle due to non-employment and early retirement.
Human capital needs be utilized and maintained over the life-cycle for human capital in-
vestments to earn a sufficiently high return. High levels of taxation, generous social benefits
and strong labor market regulations reduce labor force participation rates, hours worked and
employment and thereby lower the utilization rates of human capital. Generous early retire-
ment and pension schemes make older people retire many years before statutory retirement
ages (Gruber and Wise, 1999). Low labor force participation rates of older workers imply
that the time-horizons over which investments in human capital are harvested are short.
In addition, there are often weak economic incentives to maintain skills through training
on-the-job. Insurance schemes for disability, unemployment, and sickness create important
moral hazard problems. Once out of work, older workers will often never be able to find a
new job. Due to population ageing, the utilization rate of European human capital falls and
substantial parts of human capital stocks will be written off as workers retire.
    Human capital policies can be efficient and equitable. In order to address the challenges
imposed by skill-biased labor demand shifts resulting in larger wage-premiums for skilled
workers, larger investments in human capital are efficient. Such a policy also contributes to


                                               3
equality by containing the growing divide between the skilled and the unskilled. Interventions
early on in the life-cycle have larger returns than interventions later on in the life-cycle. Once
individuals drop out of secondary school, labor market institutions or government policies
often prevent them from finding employment at established wage minimums. If the social
objective is to maintain high levels of minimum income support and redistribution towards
the poor, human capital policy helps to reduce dependency on welfare states. Only when
individuals acquire sufficient human capital at the beginning of their life-cycles, they can
avoid getting stuck in poverty and productivity traps later on in life.
    In addition, policies to foster human capital cannot be seen in isolation from labor market
policies, tax and benefit systems, and pension schemes. Current welfare state arrangements
often create substantial implicit tax burdens on human capital investments because the
incentives for investments in human capital are undermined by low utilization rates of human
capital and short time horizons over which investments in skill materialize. Labor force
participation, hours worked, training on-the-job and later retirement are all complementary
to human capital investments. Reforms in labor markets, pension systems and tax-benefit
systems may not only have beneficial static effects on labor market performance, but also
have important dynamic efficiency gains by lowering implicit tax wedges on skill formation
over the life-cycle.
    We ground our policy analysis in insights from previous research on the technology of
skill formation (Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov, 2006; Cunha and Heckman, 2007;
Heckman, 2007). Human capital accumulation is a dynamic process. The skills acquired in
one stage of the life-cycle affect both the initial conditions and the technology of learning
at the next stage. Human capital is produced over the life-cycle by families, schools, and
firms. Different stages of the life-cycle are critical to the formation of different types of
abilities. When the opportunities for formation of these abilities are missed, remediation is
costly, and full remediation is often prohibitively costly. These findings highlight the need
to take a comprehensive view of skill formation over the life-cycle so that effective policies
for increasing the low level of skills in the workforce can be devised.
    The present paper extends this line of reasoning to the entire life-cycle. We argue that,
due to the same dynamic complementarities in skill formation over the life-cycle, skill for-
mation is impaired when the returns to skill formation are low due to low skill use and
insufficient skill maintenance later on in life. We develop a theory of earnings, schooling,
training and retirement which is capable of describing some stylized features of Europe’s
labor markets and illustrates the impact of various policies. The consequences of low skill
formation both in the Anglo-Saxon world and mainland Europe are equally present. How-
ever, when it comes to skill use and skill maintenance, we show that mainland Europe differs


                                                4
markedly from the Anglo-Saxon world due to low skill use and poor skill maintenance. Eu-
rope’s future problems with low skills are therefore exacerbated by labor market institutions
and government policies that lower utilization rates of human capital and promote steep
depreciation of human capital over the life-cycle.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives some stylized facts on
trends and developments that are crucial for devising an appropriate human capital policy
for Europe. Section 3 summarizes the evidence on the technology of skill formation. Section
4 of develops a theory of skill formation, skill utilization and skill maintenance. Section 5
summarizes and gives some of the implications of our analysis for policy design.


2         Stylized facts on skill formation, skill use and skill
          maintenance in Europe
This section describes in detail some salient stylized facts on inequality, skill-formation,
skill use and skill maintenance, between countries and developments over time. Wherever
possible we distinguish among the Anglo-Saxon countries (United Kingdom, Australia, New
Zealand, Canada and the United States), the Nordic countries (Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
and Finland), Continental European countries (Netherlands, Belgium, France, and Germany)
and Mediterranean countries (Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Greece).


2.1         Economic environment
2.1.1        Growing earnings and income inequality

Davis (1992), Gottschalk and Smeeding (1996), Katz and Autor (1999) and Brandolini and
Smeeding (2006) analyze trends in earnings inequality and conclude that inequality has been
steadily increasing in Western countries during the last decades of the twentieth century
although the rapid growth in the 80’s appears to level off in the 90’s.1 The increase in
inequality is most notable in the Anglo-Saxon countries. The Nordic countries appear to
have contained the increase in inequality. As noted by Bertola (2003) and Atkinson (2008),
the rise in inequality countries is mainly concentrated in the upper part of the earnings
distribution and not so much in the lower part of the earnings distribution. Gottschalk
and Smeeding (1996) and Brandolini and Smeeding (2006) have shown that inequality in
net disposable household income did increase as well but to a much lesser extent than
labor earnings. Piketty and Saez (2003), and Atkinson and Salverda (2005) document large
    1
        This finding is also reported for the US by Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008).


                                                       5
increases in earnings inequality at the very top of the income distribution for the US and the
UK. Piketty (2003) and Atkinson and Salverda (2005) show that the income distribution at
the top did not change much in France and the Netherlands.

2.1.2   Minimum wages, inequality and trade-off between equality and incentives
        in the labor market

Falling real minimum wages appear to have caused growing inequality at the bottom of
the earnings distribution in the US, see also Autor, Katz and Kearny (2008). Minimum
wages reduce inequality for workers at the cost of lower employment. Indeed, inequality at
the bottom of the earnings distribution did not increase much for European countries but
unemployment rates among low income earners have been increasing instead (Davis, 1992).
Bertola (2003) shows that employment declines (unemployment rates increase) especially
in those countries where inequality in the lower part of the earnings distribution remained
rather constant. Increases in unemployment rates are disguised to an important extent
by enrolling unemployed workers in active labor market and training programmes. Figure 1
from Heckman, Ljunge and Ragan (2006) shows that many European countries and especially
corporatist countries (Denmark, Finland, Norway, and the Netherlands) almost halve their
open unemployment rates by placing more unemployed workers in Active Labor Market
(ALM)-programmes, where they are no longer counted as unemployed workers. Adding
these trainees back to the unemployed substantially boosts the unemployment rate.

2.1.3   Trade-off between equality and incentives for human capital investment

Low inequality may not only be a virtue, but may also be a vice when low inequality reflects
weak economic incentives. Figure 2 plots higher educational attainment rates of 25-34 year
old cohorts against earnings inequality as measured by the 90/10 percentile ratio. Both vari-
ables are taken from the OECD Labor Force Database. A clear positive correlation emerges
between earnings inequality and higher educational attainment. This positive correlation
remains robust using tertiary educational attainment rates of 25-65 year old cohorts, em-
ploying 90/50 or 50/10 percentile ratios for inequality or doing panel regressions that allow
for country-specific fixed effects. There is not only a trade-off between the quantity of em-
ployment and equality but also between the quality of employment and inequality. More
compressed wage distributions imply weaker incentives for skill formation. Frederiksson
(1997) is one of the few studies that directly estimates the effect of a larger skill-premium
on enrollment and finds very substantial effects for Sweden. The empirical general equilib-
rium model for the US of Heckman, Lochner, and Taber (1998) also predicts a quite elastic


                                              6
response of investments in human capital to larger skill premia.2

2.1.4    Rising returns to education

Income inequality is increasing in part because the returns to education display an upward
trend. Studies for the US have documented a strong and steady increase in the college-
premium during the 80’s and 90’s (Katz and Autor, 1999; Autor, Katz and Kearny, 2008).
Peracchi (2006) reviews a large number of country studies and shows that in general skill pre-
mia have been constant or increasing in recent years for most Western countries. Gottschalk
and Smeeding (1996) in their cross country comparison find that an important driving force
behind growing earnings inequality is the growing skill-premium. Using a panel of selected
OECD countries, Nahuis and De Groot (2003) show that rising skill-premia during the 80’s
and 90’s are not only present in the US but in the whole of the Western world.3
    By now there is a firmly established consensus that the mean rate of return to a year
of schooling, as of the 1990’s, exceeds 10 percent and may be as high as 17 to 20 percent
(see Heckman, Lochner and Todd, 2006). This return is higher for more able people (Taber,
2001; Carneiro and Heckman, 2003) and for children from better backgrounds (Altonji and
Dunn, 1996, present some evidence in support of this claim but their own interpretation
is more equivocal). Those from better backgrounds and with higher ability are also more
likely to attend college and earn a higher rate of return from doing so. This evidence is
robust to alternative choices of instrumental variables and to the use of alternative meth-
ods for controlling for self-selection. Both cognitive and noncognitive skills raise earnings
through promoting schooling and through their direct effects on earnings (see the evidence
in Taber 2001; Heckman, Hsee, and Rubinstein 2001; Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman 2001;
2003; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006; Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua, 2006;
Borghans et al., 2008).4
   2
      Numerous studies find only small impacts of larger tuition rates on enrollment (Kane, 1994, 1995; Hilmer,
1998; Heckman et al. 1998; Dynarski, 2003; Card and Lemieux, 2001; Cameron and Heckman, 2001). Part
of the explanation is that tuition costs are a relatively minor fraction of the total costs of education since
forgone labor earnings are by far the most important part (Becker, 1964). Another explanation is that
psychic costs play a substantial role in explaining college choices (Cunha, Heckman and Navarro, 2005).
    3
      Carneiro and Lee (2006) show that standard measures for skill-premia between higher and lower educated
workers are even biased downwards due to selection into higher education on non-observed characteristics.
    4
      Cunha and Heckman (2008) and Heckman, Lochner and Todd (2006) survey a large number of studies
that show that nonpecuniary factors (associated with psychic costs, motivations and the like) play a major
role in explaining why minorities and persons from low-income families do not attend college even though it
is financially profitable to do so. Returns to schooling for marginal entrants attracted into college by changes
in tuition are below those of the average participant. Returns to schooling are lower for people less likely to
attend college.




                                                       7
2.2     Skill creation
2.2.1    Slowing down of the growth in supply of skills

Educational attainment has grown enormously in most of the Western world. Figure 3 plots
higher educational attainment rates (as a fraction of each birth-cohort) over the 1960-1995
period for various countries from the De la Fuente and Domenech (2006) data set.5 Enroll-
ment rates doubled virtually everywhere. The development in the average number of years of
education is similar (not shown). A striking feature is the large heterogeneity between coun-
tries in higher educational attainment. The Mediterranean countries lag miles behind the
Nordic and Anglo-Saxon countries. The Continental European countries are somewhere in
the middle. We have to note here that institutional differences between countries make good
comparisons difficult due to, for example, differences in the duration of higher educational
programmes. Literacy scores indicate that high levels of educational attainment in some
countries do not necessarily match with high levels of literacy (Heckman and Jacobs, 2006).
Education systems differ across different countries and these comparable tests may provide
a better measure of the stock of skills of a country, at least for the purpose of international
comparisons. Hanushek and Kimko (2000) use these tests as a measure of the quality of the
labor force and argue that these are an important determinant of economic growth.
    The massive increase in the level of education of Europe’s workforces probably cannot be
maintained indefinitely. Figure 4 shows that there are strongly decreasing returns to raising
education levels as the growth rate of in education levels during 1960-1995 is negatively
correlated with the initial level of education in 1960. Therefore, one can expect that the
returns to education will be rising in the years to come because the demand for college
educated workers outstrips supply.

2.2.2    Resources invested in human capital are not increasing

Resources invested in human capital in Europe also remain rather stagnant despite the rising
returns. Overall investment levels as a fraction of GDP do not change much over time in
Continental and Mediterranean countries, see Figure 5. Notable are the decreases in some
countries (Finland and Norway). The financial resources per student in higher education
invested are again roughly constant in Continental European and Mediterranean countries.
In Anglo-Saxon and Nordic countries, resources invested in higher education have increased
in recent years (see OECD, 2005a).
    5
      De la Fuente and Domenech (2006) have constructed a panel data set for OECD countries of educational
attainment for various education levels and average years of education based on data from national statistical
offices which are supplemented by data from the OECD.



                                                      8
     Figure 6 plots the share of private contributions to the direct costs of education for
different countries. Virtually all European countries heavily rely on state funding for ed-
ucation and that is probably also the reason why public budgets haven’t kept pace with
increasing enrollment rates in some countries. Primary and secondary education are gener-
ally free everywhere. As regards higher education, tuition is subsidized and students receive
(means tested) grants and study loans with interest subsidies. Again, only the Anglo-Saxon
countries have a non-trivial share private investments whereas especially the Nordic and
Mediterranean countries almost exclusively rely on state funding for education.
     Although larger skill premia would naturally give stronger incentives to invest in more
human capital, it is by no means certain that this will also happen in the stiffly regulated
higher education sectors in Europe. Due to the ageing of the population and the EMU-criteria
for deficits and debts, most government budgets are under pressure. There is currently
not much hope for extra public funding whereas there are good reasons for more private
investments in higher education. Nevertheless, most governments obstruct private funding
by repeatedly raising accessibility issues and failing to understand the basic incentive issues
facing schools and students (see Jacobs and Van der Ploeg, 2006).
     Larger private funding of education is efficient if governments do not free up enough
resources for investment in human capital, especially in higher education. There is a strong
efficiency case for public support in primary education in well-developed welfare states.
Poverty traps create not only large tax burdens on work effort but also on skill formation;
if it does not pay work it does not pay to invest in skills either. If the social objective is
to maintain welfare states and income support programs for the poor, sufficient investments
in human capital lift vulnerable groups above the minimum income floors (Bovenberg and
Jacobs, 2003). This public support may come in the form of public funding for primary and
secondary education, but also in the form of minimum school leaving ages and outlawing
child labor.

2.2.3   Skill-biased demand for labor

The sharp increase in educational attainment in some countries in Europe has put down-
ward pressures on skill-premia. That is probably why returns to education have not been
rising so much in some European countries as opposed to the US where growth in the sup-
ply of skilled workers choked off already in the 90’s (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Autor,
Katz, and Kearney, 2008). Nevertheless, overall wage inequality did increase and returns
to education certainly did not decrease to a large extent. Gottschalk and Smeeding (1996)
and Peracchi (1996) show that skill-premia remained rather constant in most countries and
generally increased in recent years. Everywhere in Europe labor markets have absorbed the

                                              9
enormous influx of skilled workers without large reductions in skill-premia. In other words,
the demand for skilled workers has been increasing at the same or even higher speed than the
supply of skilled workers. Many explanations have been put forward for these labor demand
shifts but skill-biased technical changes appears to be the most important one. Increasing
international trade and capital-skill complementarities could be supplementary explanations
for this phenomenon, see also Katz and Autor (1999).
    The outward shift of relative demand for skilled workers is radically transforming labor
markets and economies. To get an impression of its quantitative importance one may ask the
counterfactual question how much wage differentials would have increased had the supply for
skilled workers remained constant. In the US wage differentials between skilled and unskilled
workers would have increased at a rate of 3% per year (Katz and Murphy, 1992) and about
the same is found for Canada (Murphy, Riddell and Romer, 1998). Jacobs (2004) documents
a skill-bias of about 2% per year in the Netherlands. A skill-bias of a 1% increase in college
premium per year is found in Sweden by Edin and Holmlund (1995).

2.2.4   Low skilled workers have weak incentives to train

Unskilled individuals receive little training on the job, either because they opt out of it when
it is offered to them, or because employers choose to offer training to workers with better
skills. This is illustrated in Figure 7, from OECD (2003), which shows the proportion of
people at each literacy level who receive job training. A low score signifies a low level of
literacy. As emphasized by Carneiro and Heckman (2003), there are strong complementarities
between early human capital investments and adult human capital investments. Low skilled
workers have difficulty in benefiting from adult training because they have a low stock of
human capital on which adult investments can build on and be productive. Remediation
investments in adulthood are very costly and ineffective for low skilled individuals (Knudsen,
Heckman, Cameron and Shonkoff, 2006; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov, 2006).
Preventive investments that take place earlier in the life-cycle of individuals generate much
larger returns.

2.2.5   Large spending active labor market programmes

Many European governments spend large amounts of resources on active and passive labor
market programmes, as demonstrated in Figure 8. Continental European countries lead in
total spending, followed by the Nordics. Mediterranean countries have some labor market
programmes, especially Spain. Anglo-Saxon countries have virtually no labor market pro-
grammes compared to the rest. Below we will argue that these programmes are largely


                                              10
ineffective in lifting individuals out of poverty and raising their standards of living.

2.2.6    Taxes, subsidies and the incentives to acquire skills

Flat labor income taxes do not harm skill formation as long as all costs are subsidized or
deductible at the flat income tax rate. Direct costs and the opportunity costs of education
– forgone labor earnings while in education – are then taxed at the same rate as the future
labor earnings (Heckman, 1976). Only if marginal costs are taxed at lower rates than the
marginal benefits, tax distortions on skill formation emerge. If marginal tax rates on labor
incomes are increasing with income, future earnings are taxed at higher rates than forgone
labor earnings and taxation discourages investment in human capital. This is the case in
most European countries, see also Figure 16 which shows that Musgrave and Musgrave’s
coefficient of residual income progression is generally below one.6
     Also, if education requires non-deductible expenses or effort costs, labor taxation reduces
investment in human capital. Education expenses for formal schooling or training are gener-
ally not deductible for the income tax. Some exceptions occur in Italy, the Netherlands and
Portugal (see also Gordon and Tchilinguirian, 1998). Large subsidies on education and train-
ing do however correct for tax disincentives on skill formation (Bovenberg and Jacobs, 2005).
Indeed, many governments seem to over-subsidize higher education from a fiscal perspective,
i.e., there is a net subsidy rather than a net tax on education and training (De la Fuente
and Jimeno-Serrano, 2005; Bovenberg and Jacobs, 2005). Costs of training on-the-job are
generally deductible by firms.
     Non-pecuniary costs and benefits escape the tax system and cannot be subsidized either.
Given the high returns on human capital investments, one is tempted to conclude that non-
pecuniary costs of education appear to be empirically more important than the non-pecuniary
benefits. Findings by Carneiro et al. (2001, 2003) and Cunha, Heckman and Navarro (2005)
surveyed in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov (2006) suggest that non-pecuniary
costs can be very important indeed. Therefore, it can still be the case that taxation distorts
skill formation even though direct costs are heavily subsidized. Additionally, large subsidies
on observable inputs in human capital formation (like years enrolled in education) will crowd
out non-subsidized complementary inputs in human capital formation like study effort (see
Bovenberg and Jacobs, 2005; Jacobs, 2007). High subsidies on education may then go hand
in hand with long study durations, high drop-out rates and low student performance.
     Finally, labor income taxation depresses labor supply and thereby the utilization rate
of human capital. Consequently, labor income taxation indirectly depresses human capital
   6
    This coefficient gives the ratio (1 – marginal tax rate)/(1 – average tax rate) and is smaller than one if
the marginal taxes are higher than average taxes.


                                                     11
investments, even if all costs are deductible and labor taxes are flat, see also Jacobs (2005,
2007).

2.2.7    Slowing growth in skills lowers productivity growth

Researchers have established a robust, causal relation between education and earnings at
the microeconomic level (see for example Card, 1999; Harmon, Oosterbeek and Walker,
2003; Heckman, Lochner and Todd, 2006) although there is a debate about the magnitude
of the relationship. A growing body of evidence suggests that the macroeconomic returns
are of the same magnitude as the conventional microeconomic estimates (Heckman and
Klenow, 1998; Sianesi and Van Reenen, 2002; Krueger and Lindahl, 2001; De la Fuente and
Doménech, 2006; Ciccone and Peri, 2006). The fact that education appears to be roughly
equally productive at the macroeconomic level as at the micro-level largely disqualifies the
‘signalling-hypothesis’ as put forward by Arrow (1973).7 Skills are crucial determinants of
labor productivity. These findings can also be taken as evidence that — at current levels
of public spending — external effects of education are absent. Figure 9 gives the average
annualized growth rates of labor productivity during the last 20 years. This graph shows
that the Continental European and Mediterranean Countries have witnessed the lowest rates
of productivity growth. Unsurprisingly, the countries with large levels of investment in
human capital (Nordics and Anglo-Saxon countries) appear to generate the highest levels
of productivity growth. A slowdown in the rate of skill acquisition therefore appears to
threaten the standards of living of future generations.


2.3     Skill utilization
2.3.1    Small labor force attachment reduces the utilization rate of human capital

A possible reason for low average returns to education is that labor force participation rates
are low. This causes acquired human capital to remain idle. Hence, a lower utilization rate of
human capital reduces the returns to investments in schooling and training.8 Figure 10 shows
that labor force participation rates are lowest in Mediterranean and Continental European
countries. Nordic and Anglo-Saxon countries have higher participation rates. However,
labor force attainment has been increasing in recent years in many countries as women
started to participate in especially the Nordic and Continental European countries. Growth
in participation rates was more modest in Anglo-Saxon countries where participation rates
   7
    This was first noted by Heckman and Klenow (1998).
   8
    Standard measures for the returns to education or the skill premium rarely allow for the utilization rate
of human capital, however.


                                                     12
were already high. Mediterranean countries seem to be stuck in a trap of low participation
rates.
    Labor force attachment strongly increases with the level of education as can be seen from
Figure 11. This patterns holds across all countries. Although often overlooked in the human
capital literature, an important benefit of higher skills is therefore the increased labor force
attachment of more educated workers, especially in Europe where employment rates are
low. The mirror image is that there is a strong dependence of unemployment on the level
of education (graph not shown). As already noted before, official unemployment statistics
are misleading because many countries enroll unemployed workers in ALM programmes,
see Figure 1 from Heckman, Ljunge and Ragan (2006). The latter authors show that real
unemployment rates can be twice as high as official statistics suggest. Some corporatist
countries may just be good in hiding unemployment.
    European countries have also hidden a lot of unemployment in sickness and disability
benefits. Figure 12 gives the non-employment rates of disabled workers as a fraction of
the population aged 20-64. This depressing picture shows that a fraction of around 8%
of the population aged 20-64 receives a sickness or disability benefit and does not work.
Large fractions of workforces are disabled or sick and not participating in the labor market
especially in the Netherlands, Germany, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden and the UK where
the rate of sickness/disability is around 10% or higher. Disability related expenditures are
especially high in the Netherlands and some Nordic countries (between 4-5% GDP). The
other Continental European countries and the Anglo-Saxon countries do not have a lot of
disability spending: between 1-2% of GDP (OECD, 2005c).

2.3.2   Falling working hours lower utilization rates of human capital

Not only is the employment rate of European workforces low in comparison to the Anglo-
Saxon world, but also hours worked. This fact is documented many times and one of the
suggested reasons is the high level of taxation. However, also unionization of labor markets
and collective labor agreements on reductions in working hours and holidays matter (see,
for example, Prescott, 2004; Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote, 2005). The average number of
hours worked is falling quite steadily over time in many countries in the last two decades
(OECD, 2006a). The only exception is Sweden where average hours worked actually in-
creased. Anglo-Saxon countries featured rather stable patterns of hours worked over time
with the exception of the UK. Part of this development is the mirror image of increasing
labor force participation rates by female workers who tend to work more in part-time jobs
(OECD, 2006a). This pattern cannot readily be explained by increasing tax rates everywhere
because tax rates have been falling in recent years in many countries, see also Figure 16.

                                              13
2.3.3   Generous benefit entitlements reduce employment

Replacement incomes when unemployed can be high as indicated in Figure 13. Replacement
incomes for the pool of the unemployed in Nordic and Continental European countries are
around 50-60% of earned income. Anglo-Saxon countries have much lower replacement rates
in the order of 20% of earned income or even less on average. The Mediterranean countries
are in the middle with replacement rates of about 30% with a notable exception of Italy.
Figure 14 shows how eligibility for unemployment benefits changes over time. Individuals
quickly loose their benefits in the Anglo-Saxon, Nordic and Mediterranean countries. Only
in the Continental European countries unemployment benefits often extend to 5 years or
more without large reductions in benefit levels.
    Theoretical work by Layard et al. (1991), Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1994), Pis-
sarides (1998), Sørensen (1999) and others, shows that larger replacement benefits reduce
employment in both competitive and non-competitive labor markets characterized by unions,
efficiency wages or matching frictions. In a neoclassical world, unemployment benefits lower
labor supply through income effects and act as subsidies on leisure. In labor markets with
unions, higher replacement rates raise unions’ wage demands and this lowers employment. In
labor markets with frictions or efficiency wages, higher replacement incomes increase reser-
vation wages for workers and thereby lower employment as workers receive higher wages.
So both in competitive and non-competitive labor markets, higher (unemployment) benefits
reduce employment (or increase unemployment).
    Generous benefit entitlements are probably one of main the reasons why unemployment
rates are high, but also contributing are extensive duration of benefits, strict labor market
regulations with respect to hiring and firing of workers, and large union coverage. See La-
yard et al. (1991) and Nickell (1997). The main problem however with these macroeconomic
studies is that the time-series variation within countries is rather limited and identification
of effects heavily relies on the cross-country dimension. Adding country fixed effects of-
ten destroys the cross-country correlations found, see also Van Ours and Belot (2001) and
Blanchard (2006).
    In contrast to the macroeconomic literature, a pile of microeconomic studies suggests that
employment sharply decreases with the generosity and duration of benefits because workers
search less actively for work both in the US and in European countries, see the overview in
Lalive et al. (2006) and the estimates they present. Abbring et al. (2005) and Lalive et al.
(2005) and the numerous papers they cite, find that sanctions on benefit levels and durations
may be highly effective in getting unemployed workers back to work.
    Some recent studies document strong cohort effects in the take-up rates of benefits (Lind-
beck and Nyberg, 2006; Ljunge, 2006). Younger generations are more likely to collect some

                                              14
benefit than older generations which can be due to the erosion of work ethic.9 These argu-
ments provide an alternative explanation for the high level on which European unemployment
rates have been stuck since the end of the 1980’s.

2.3.4    Labor market protection harms labor market performance

Figure 15 gives the OECD summary statistic on labor market regulations. This statistic sum-
marizes the severity of legal restrictions on hiring and firing, flexibility in labor contracts,
working time restrictions, minimum wages, and employees’ representation rights (work coun-
cils, company boards). Mediterranean countries have the least flexible labor markets, fol-
lowed by the Continental European countries. Nordic countries, and especially Denmark,
appear to have more flexible labor markets. It goes without saying that the Anglo-Saxon
countries have most flexible labor markets in the world.
    Measures of labor market protection appear to be associated with bad labor market
performance in macroeconomic studies (see Layard et al. 1991; Nickell, 1997). Again,
time-series variation in these cross-country panel analyses is often too limited and solid
conclusions cannot be drawn in general. Heckman and Pagés (2003, 2004) present evidence
from microeconomic studies for Latin American countries to assess the impact of labor market
regulations. They find that job security regulations indeed have large efficiency costs. In
addition, the distributional consequences appear to be perverse. Insiders gain from labor
market regulations at the expense of outsiders: young and unskilled workers. However, using
a panel of both Latin American and OECD countries and exploiting exogenous variation
induced by various policy reforms, the macroeconomic evidence on the impact of labor market
regulations remains fragile. Payroll taxes are the only really robust variable in explaining
lower employment and higher unemployment rates.

2.3.5    Large tax burdens weaken labor market performance

Figure 16 gives the average and marginal tax burdens on earned income including the value
added or sales taxes. Large average and marginal tax burdens suggest that labor supply is
distorted substantially (Prescott, 2004; Alesina et al. 2005). Marginal tax rates are generally
in the order of 60–70% in Continental European and Nordic Countries. Marginal tax rates
are substantially lower in the Mediterranean countries and the Anglo-Saxon world. Here,
the Continental European Countries have the steepest graduation in tax rates. The other
countries are relatively close in terms of tax rate progression.
   9
     These findings are consistent with a ‘social multiplier’ for leisure demand as hypothesized by Alesina et
al. (2005).



                                                     15
    A huge micro literature shows that high levels of taxation depresses labor supply in terms
of hours worked. See Pencavel (1986), Killingsworth and Heckman (1986), and Blundell and
MaCurdy (1999), for extensive overviews. Substitution effects in labor supply are dominant
(especially for women) and income effects appear to be modest. Much less empirical evidence
can be found on the effects of taxation on other choice margins than hours worked. As
stressed by Heckman (1993) and Saez (2002), the participation (‘extensive’) margin is more
elastic than the hours worked (‘intensive’) margin. Taxation potentially also affects human
capital formation, search efforts of the unemployed and wage setting institutions.
    The effects of higher taxes on labor earnings are not clear-cut in non-competitive, Eu-
ropean style labor markets. Typically, in non-competitive labor markets the wage level and
the unemployment rate increase if marginal tax rates are lower, average tax rates are higher,
and benefit levels/replacement incomes are higher – ceteris paribus.
    Higher marginal taxes generally increase employment for given average taxes and labor
supply. See Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1994), Sørensen (1999), Pissarides (1998), Boven-
berg (2006), and Van der Ploeg (2006). Unions are punished when seeking higher wages
in response to higher marginal tax rates as the government taxes away wage increases at
higher rates. This force moderates wage demands, labor demand expands and unemploy-
ment falls. In labor markets characterized by search frictions, marginal tax rates can boost
employment. Since workers and firms Nash-bargain over the surplus of firm-worker matches,
workers capture less of the surplus when marginal tax rates increase. Firms need to pay a
higher gross wage to provide a given net wage to the worker. And, conversely, workers need
to accept a lower net wage to maintain a given level of profits for the firm. Hence, the nego-
tiated wage falls, labor demand expands, labor market tightness increases, and equilibrium
unemployment falls. In market environments characterized by efficiency wages, firms find
it harder to recruit, retain or motivate workers by increasing wages when governments tax
away these wage increases at higher rates. Therefore, firms pay lower wages, labor demand
expands and equilibrium unemployment falls.
    Higher average income taxes – for given marginal tax rates – may also have opposite
effects in comparison with neoclassical models, depending on the response of the net re-
placement rate to higher taxes. See Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1994), Sørensen (1999),
Pissarides (1998), Bovenberg (2006) and Van der Ploeg (2006). A higher average income
tax increases net replacement rates (net benefit divided by the net wage rate) if benefits
are untaxed. In response to higher average taxes, unions will demand higher wages as the
position of their working members worsens in comparison with the non-working members,
so that unemployment rates go up. Firms paying efficiency wages see that it becomes more
difficult to recruit, retain or motivate workers because net replacement rates increase. As


                                             16
a result, labor costs rise and equilibrium unemployment increases. With search frictions,
higher average tax rates on wage income increase wage demands of workers, which pushes
up wage costs for firms, labor market tightness falls and unemployment increases. However,
when benefits are indexed to net wages, replacement rates remain fixed and unions, firms
or workers do not change wage setting behavior (a lot) and there are much smaller (or even
zero) effects of higher average tax rates on unemployment.
    Most of the theoretical papers cited above analyze non-competitive labor markets where
labor supply is treated as exogenous, thereby overstating the case for tax progression.
Sørensen (1999, p.449) demonstrates that the welfare gains of tax progression in union and
efficiency wage models are virtually negligible when the compensated wage elasticity of la-
bor supply approaches lower bounds found in the empirical literature (around .20/.25). See
Browning, Hansen and Heckman (1999) and Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) for evidence on
this question. Indeed, Sørensen’s findings suggest that deviations from a flat rate income
tax to cushion labor market distortions are quite costly in terms of reduced labor supply.
Sørensen (1997) develops a CGE-model for Denmark. He analyzes larger tax credits for
low wage earners, financed by raising marginal tax rates on all labor incomes. This policy,
which makes the tax system more progressive, has ambiguous welfare effects, depending crit-
ically on elasticities of the wage equation with respect to marginal and average tax rates on
wages. Bovenberg et al. (2000) develop a detailed CGE-model for the Netherlands, which
incorporates labor supply on the intensive and extensive margins, on-the-job training, search
frictions and wage-setting by unions. They demonstrate that the negative (positive) effects
of high marginal (average) tax burdens on labor supply and training are outweighed by the
small positive effects arising from wage moderation and reductions in labor market frictions.
    The possibility of setting wages above the market clearing level depends on the ability
of consumers or workers to shift taxes to firms. Most theories of wage determination in
non-competitive labor markets show that the wage mark-up over the market clearing wage
declines if the labor demand elasticity increases, i.e. when it is more difficult to shift taxes
towards firms, see for example Bovenberg (2006) and Van der Ploeg (2006). In small open
economies with perfect capital mobility and perfectly competitive goods markets, it is not
possible to shift the tax burden to firms; labor demand would be perfectly elastic at the
world wage rate. Thus, the distortions created by unions, search frictions, and efficiency
wages could be less relevant for many small open European countries.
    Finally, to fully understand the effects of taxes in distorted labor markets, one should
not only focus on changes in tax-rate progression for given levels of benefits and average tax
rates, as most of the aforementioned papers do. Empirically, larger marginal tax rates are
strongly associated with higher non-employment benefits and higher average tax burdens.


                                              17
See Figure 13 and Figure 16. A policy of increasing marginal taxes, while using tax revenues
to finance benefits or larger levels of public spending (so that average tax rates increase)
generally reduces labor supply and employment in both competitive and non-competitive
labor markets.
    To conclude, it is not clear that taxation is always less harmful in non-competitive than
in competitive labor markets. This depends on how responsive labor supply is, how much of
the incidence of taxes can be shifted to firms, and how tax revenues are spent.


2.4     Skill maintenance
2.4.1    Decreasing retirement ages causes quicker depreciation of skills

Apart from labor force participation and hours worked, the age of retirement also constitutes
an important element of the utilization of human capital over the life-cycle. At retirement,
human capital is written off completely. If workers retire later, they will have larger returns
on their investments in education and training on-the-job as the time-horizon over which the
investments mature expands.
    Figure 17 shows that that labor force attachment of the average worker is rapidly declining
with age. This development is also carefully documented by Gruber and Wise (1999). Labor
force participation rates of 55-64 year old workers are only in the order of 1/2 or even less.
Especially the Continental European and Mediterranean countries have low participation
rates of older workers. Nordic countries outperform the Anglo-Saxon countries as regards
the labor force participation rates of 55-59 year old workers, but the Anglo-Saxon countries
do better in the 60-64 year cohorts.
    Figure 18 shows the development of labor force participation rates of cohorts of workers
aged 55-59 year. Generally the labor force participation rates have been falling and show a
turn around in recent decades. However, if there has been an increase in overall labor force
participation rates of 55-59 year old cohorts, it is mainly driven by the general increases in
female force participation rates. Belgium (slightly), Denmark, Finland and the Netherlands
are the only four countries who have witnessed both an increase in male and female labor
force participation rates and in recent years which is probably due to policy changes in early
retirement schemes.10
  10
     All countries have witnessed declines of labor force participation rates of 60-64 year old cohorts (not
shown). Dramatic declines are found in Finland, France, Germany, Netherlands, and Spain. In Australia,
Canada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and the United States the decline is to an important extent offset by
increases in female force participation. In the other countries this offsetting effect has been largely absent as
female participation rates were falling too. However, recent increases in Canada, Netherlands and Sweden
(as from 1990) are the result of increasing male and female labor force participation rates. This is, again,
likely to be the result of changes in early retirement schemes.


                                                       18
     Figure 19 plots the effective age of retirement, conditional upon being in the labor force.
There has been a landslide in effective retirement ages. Over the last 40 years effective
retirement ages went down massively everywhere in the Western world, including the Anglo-
Saxon countries. Again, the Continental European countries have witnessed the largest
decreases in the retirement ages (see also Gruber and Wise, 1999). In recent years we see
that the decrease in effective retirement ages has come to a halt at a low plateau.
     Figure 20 shows that labor force participation rates of 55-59 and 60-64 year old cohorts
are much higher when individuals have more initial education. Better skilled workers retire
much later. This graph reinforces our notion that labor supply and skill formation over the
life-cycle are strongly complementary activities.

2.4.2    Generous pensions and early retirement schemes reduce labor force par-
         ticipation of older workers

Pension benefits can be generous as is clear from Figure 21. Pension replacement incomes
in Continental European are quite high and about 60-80% of pre-retirement earnings for
an average worker. Mediterranean countries have exceptionally generous pension schemes
which entail pension benefits of 80-100% of last earnings (up to 100% in Greece). The
Nordics, on the contrary, have much more modest pension benefits in the order of 40-60%
of pre-retirement earnings. The Anglo-Saxon countries have on average the lowest pension
benefits which are around 40-50% of final earnings. Another interesting feature is that
pension systems are PAYG state pensions almost everywhere. Exceptions are the Anglo-
Saxon countries, the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark that also heavily rely on substantial
private funding, either through DB/DC occupational pensions or individual saving schemes
see also OECD (2005d). Note finally that net pension incomes are always larger than gross
pension incomes. The reason is that all governments give tax-deductions or subsidies on
pension savings.
    Many workers retire long before statutory retirement ages via all kinds of early-retirement
schemes. It is not easy to make international comparisons because the institutional details
vary from country to country. However, we can summarize the impact of early retirement
schemes on the labor market by the implicit marginal tax rates imposed on an additional year
of work (see also Gruber and Wise, 1999). Figure 22 shows that early retirement schemes do
indeed cause very high marginal tax rates on pre-retirement incomes.11 Moreover retirement
ages and benefit generosity are very negatively related. Gruber and Wise (1999) present
  11
    We have to note that some countries have started to reform their early retirement schemes in recent
years, for example in the Netherlands. The graph may therefore give a too pessimistic view of the adverse
incentives to retire early.


                                                   19
strong evidence that this is a causal relation. It should therefore not come as a surprise that
the Continental European and Mediterranean countries have low labor force participation
rates of elderly workers because they have the most generous early retirement schemes.
In recent years some countries have reformed their pension schemes. The Netherlands,
Germany, France, and Italy are examples. Labor force participation of older workers appears
to be picking up in recent years in some countries due to reforms, general trends such as
rising female labor force participation, or because workers anticipate future reforms.


3      The technology of skill formation12
Figure 23 summarizes the major theme of Heckman (2000) and Carneiro and Heckman
(2003). It plots the rate of return to human capital at different stages of the life-cycle for
a person of given abilities. The horizontal axis represents age, which is a surrogate for the
agent’s position in the life-cycle. The vertical axis represents the rate of return to investment
assuming the same amount of investment is made at each age. Ceteris paribus the rate of
return to a dollar of investment made while a person is young is higher than the rate of
return to the same dollar made at a later age. Early investments are harvested over a longer
horizon than those made later in the life-cycle (Becker, 1964). In addition, because early
investments raise the productivity (lower the costs) of later investments, human capital is
synergistic. Learning begets learning; skills (both cognitive and noncognitive) acquired early
on facilitate later learning. Early deficits make later remediation difficult. Finally, young
children’s cognition and behavior are more easily malleable than cognition and behavior
in adults. For an externally specified opportunity costs of funds, an optimal investment
strategy is to invest relatively less in the old and relatively more in in the young. A central
empirical conclusion of their analysis is that at current investment levels, efficiency in public
spending would be enhanced if human capital investment were directed more toward the
disadvantaged young who do not receive enriched early environments, and less toward older,
less-skilled, and illiterate persons for whom human capital is a poor investment.
    Abilities are multiple in nature. They are both cognitive and noncognitive. Both cogni-
tive and noncognitive abilities matter in determining participation in crime, teenage preg-
nancy, drug use and other deviant activities. These abilities are themselves produced by
the family and by personal actions. Both genes and environments are involved in producing
these abilities. Environments affect genetic expression mechanisms (see, e.g., Turkheimer,
  12
    This section draws upon research by Heckman (2000); Carneiro and Heckman (2003); Cunha, Heckman,
Lochner and Masterov (2006); Carneiro, Cunha and Heckman (2005); and Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2008)
that develops the economic foundation for skill acquisition in modern economies.



                                                20
Haley, Waldron, D’Onofrio and Gottesman, 2003; Björklund, Lindahl and Plug, 2006). This
interaction has important theoretical and empirical implications for skill policies. It suggests
an important role for environment-enriching policies in fostering human skills. Differences
in cognitive ability across family types appear early and persist over time (Carneiro and
Heckman, 2003; Cunha and Heckman, 2007). Measured cognitive ability is susceptible to
environmental influences, including in utero experiences. Education barely affects test score
gaps by family income or socioeconomic status after the early years of schooling (Carneiro
and Heckman, 2003; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov, 2006; Raudenbush, 2006).13
    Noncognitive abilities such as motivation, self-discipline, and time preference — associated
with the development of the prefrontal cortex — are also affected by environmental influences.
Noncognitive abilities and cognitive abilities affect schooling attainment and performance,
and a wide array of behaviors. Using a novel empirical approach, Heckman, Stixrud, and
Urzua (2006) identify a low dimensional vector of latent cognitive and noncognitive skills
which explains a diverse array of social and labor market outcomes. For many dimensions of
social performance, cognitive and noncognitive skills are equally important. Heckman and
Rubinstein (2001) and Heckman, Hsee and Rubinstein (2001) and Heckman and LaFontaine
(2006) study the GED program14 and show that the cognitive ability of GED participants is
on average equal to that of high school graduates who do not enroll in college and even higher
than the ability of high school drop-outs. However, GED recipients earn less than high-school
drop-outs once the analyst controls for cognitive abilities. Consequently, noncognitive abil-
ity appears to be an important determinant of earnings which GED recipients lack. As is
true for cognitive skills, gaps in noncognitive skills (motivation, trustworthiness, behavioral
skills) emerge early and are substantially reduced once long-run family factors influencing
the child’s early years are controlled for (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003). I.Q. is fairly well
set by age ten. Noncognitive abilities are more malleable over the life-cycle than cognitive
abilities.
    Much of the effectiveness of early childhood interventions comes in boosting noncognitive
skills and fostering motivation (see, e.g., Heckman, Malofeeva, Pinto, and Savelyev, 2009).
Short-term increases in cognitive skills (test-scores) fade out over time. Successful programs
increase noncognitive skills and result in more social behavior and less crime. Programs
  13
      In the popular literature, achievement tests and IQ tests are often confused. Achievement test scores are
affected by IQ, schooling inputs, and noncognitive skills, and are malleable over a much greater range of ages
than is IQ (see Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen, 2004; Cunha and Heckman, 2008; and Cunha, Heckman and
Schennach, 2010). Abilities have an acquired character although they differ in their malleability at different
ages.
   14
      The General Educational Development (GED) program allows secondary-school individuals to obtain
certification through an equivalency exam administered to dropouts which is comparable to a high-school
degree.



                                                      21
are more successful if parents are part of the treatment, which bolsters the notion that
improvements in the home environment have long-lasting effects. For overviews of the liter-
ature and evidence on a diverse array of early intervention programs, see Heckman (2000),
Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and Masterov (2006), Carneiro and Heckman (2003) and Cunha,
Heckman, Lochner and Masterov (2006). Given the quantitative importance of noncognitive
traits, social policy is more effective in attempting to alter them especially for children from
disadvantaged environments who receive little encouragement and discipline at home.
    Interventions in adolescent years partially remediate but do not remedy insufficient early
childhood investments at current levels of investment. Just as early intervention programs
have a high payoff primarily because of the social skills and motivation they impart to the
child and the improved home environment they produce, so do interventions that operate
during the adolescent years, and for many of the same reasons. The impacts they achieve
are modest, but positive.
    One cannot expect substantial benefits from public job training programs which primarily
targeted to disadvantaged workers. Surveying mainly microeconomic studies, Heckman,
Lalonde and Smith (1999); Martin and Grubb (2001); and Calmfors, Forslund and Hemström
(2001) conclude that these programs are largely ineffective.15 The comparison of job training
programs suggests a few important lessons. First, you get what you pay for. The recently
terminated JTPA program in the U.S. cost very little but produced very few results. An
exception to the rule is classroom training, for which the returns are substantial (Heckman,
Hohmann, Khoo and Smith, 2000). Second, the effects of treatment vary substantially among
subgroups (Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith, 1999). Third, job training programs also have
effects on behavior beyond schooling and work that should be considered in evaluating their
full effects. Reductions in crime may be an important effect of programs targeted at male
youth. The evidence summarized in Heckman, LaLonde, and Smith (1999) indicates that
the rate of return to most U.S. and European training programs is far below 10 percent,
although the benefits to certain groups may be substantial. Some programs survive a cost-
benefit test, but many do not. And even the most successful programs have only small
impacts on poverty rates and few are lifted out of it. The study by Calmfors, Forslund and
Hemstöm (2001), presents an extensive overview of the Swedish experience with active labor
market policies and they conclude that ALMP have been inefficient. Public job training to
remedy or alleviate substantially skill deficits that arise at early ages are generally ineffective.
    Returns to human capital investments are highest for investments in children from dis-
  15
    Some macroeconomic cross-country studies by Layard, Nickell and Jackman (1991) and Nickell (1997)
suggest that active labor market programmes can be effective in reducing unemployment rates, but these
studies do not control for country-specific effects.



                                                 22
advantaged families where children receive inadequate parental resources (Heckman, 2006;
Heckman and Masterov, 2006). Universal programs generate dead weight because children
from advantaged families receive substantial parental investment. Politicians face a practical
problem of the transition. Older persons and disadvantaged younger persons are unemploy-
able at current wage minimums. Investing in them has a low economic return. Carefully
constructed wage subsidies are more effective in providing them with dignity and social in-
clusion, and to benefit from what they can offer society at large, see also the essays in Phelps
et al. (2003). If such subsidies are not cohort-specific and phased out over time, newer gen-
erations will have weaker incentives to develop skills and poverty will perpetuate for a longer
time across generations.


4      A theory of skill formation, skill use and skill main-
       tenance
How can we reconcile the empirical findings of the European experience with theory? In this
section we develop a partial equilibrium life-cycle model of schooling, on-the-job training,
labor supply, saving and retirement. By simultaneously analyzing schooling, training labor
supply and retirement decisions, the model allows us to spell out various complementarities
over the life-cycle. First, we show that human capital investments feature dynamic comple-
mentarities over the life-cycle even after initial education. Both initial schooling and later
on-the-job training are complementary activities. The returns to initial schooling are larger
when individuals engage more in on-the-job training later on during their working careers.
And, individuals will invest more in on-the-job training when they have more initial school-
ing. Second, complementarities exist between skill formation and labor market participation
in its broadest sense. That is, the more individuals work and the later they retire, the larger
will be the returns to investments in initial schooling and on-the-job training. The reason
is that the costs of leisure and retirement increase when individuals become better skilled.
Also the reverse holds. Later retirement and more hours of work boost skill formation by
increasing its financial rewards. Our model builds on Mincer (1974) and Ben-Porath (1967)
and adds an endogenous retirement decision. We focus on labor supply on the intensive
(hours) margin and retirement.16
    We maintain the assumption of full employment as labor markets are perfectly com-
petitive and frictionless. We acknowledge at the outset that this is probably not the best
description of the labor markets in Europe, but economic theory does not provide us yet
  16
    For simplicity of exposition we do not work with the more general model of skill formation developed
and estimated by Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010)

                                                  23
with useful models that allow for the joint determination of labor supply, human capital
formation and wages in non-competitive labor markets.17


4.1     Model
We assume that a representative individual is born at time t = 0 and has a life-span T which
is exogenously given. This individual undergoes S years of initial education at the beginning
of his life. Then the individual works. After the working career the individual retires at
date R. The life-time time constraint states that total time in school S, in the labor market
(R − S) and in retirement (T − R) should equal the life-span T of the individual:

                                       T = S + (R − S) + (T − R) .                                       (1)

    At each date, the individual derive instantaneous utility U (Ct ) from consumption Ct .
To simplify the analysis we assume that only when the individual is in the labor market
(S < t ≤ R) does he derive utility form leisure Lt , i.e., V (Lt ). Similarly, the individual does
not engage in training-on-the-job before entering the labor market and stops with on-the-job
training when he leaves the labor market. The time constraint while working states that the
fraction of time working Lt , plus the fraction of time invested in training It plus the fraction
time of time consumed as leisure Lt should be equal to the total time endowment – which is
normalized to one:
                                1 = Lt + It + Lt , S < t ≤ R.                                  (2)

Alternatively, one could interpret Lt as the labor force participation rate, It as aggregate
training efforts, and Lt as the non-employment rate in this representative agent setting.
    Individuals derive utility X(T −R) from the years they are retired T −R where R denotes
the retirement age. Retirement is a discrete decision to exit the labor market completely.
The individual does not derive direct (dis-)utility from being in school.
    Life-time utility of the individual is a time-separable function of instantaneous consump-
tion and leisure felicities and retirement utility
                  Z     T                          Z   R
                            U (Ct ) exp(−ρt)dt +           V (Lt ) exp(−ρt)dt + X(T − R),                (3)
                    0                              S


with U 0 (Ct ) > 0, U 00 (Ct ) < 0, V 0 (Lt ) > 0, V 00 (Lt ) < 0, X 0 (T − R) > 0 and X 00 (T − R) < 0
where ρ is the subjective rate of time preference. These preferences simplify our analysis. The
  17
     One should bear this qualifier in mind at our discussion of the model simulations. These simulations are
only meant to stress the importance of various complementarities over the life-cycle and these complemen-
tarities are in our view relevant in both competitive and non-competitive labor markets.


                                                           24
costs of forgone labor time are measured by forgone labor earnings. The value of retirement
leisure is governed by X(T − R).18
    The representative individual optimally decides the number of years S in education.
W (S) is the rental rate of human capital of type S. This rental rate is assumed to be constant
over time and differs between individuals with different skill levels. W (S) features positive
but diminishing marginal returns of additional initial schooling: W 0 (S) > 0, W 00 (S) < 0.
Alternatively, one may interpret W (S) as the production function of human capital. The
costs of education are the forgone earnings W (S) while not working and the direct costs P per
year of education (we ignore the utility or disutility of education). Without loss of generality,
we keep the direct costs of education fixed. We assume here that the government can
affect decision on the optimal years of schooling only through the tax system and education
subsidies. In the real world, governments affect the education choices of individuals through
a host of other mechanisms, for example, by outlawing child labor, by setting minimum
school leaving ages, and so on. These alternative instruments can be regarded as implicit
rather than explicit subsidies on education. As such, our model is still suited to capture the
main incentive issues and we do not think that this undermines our main story of the various
complementarities over the life-cycle. Nevertheless, some of these policies may require fewer
public resources than education subsidies and could be preferred for that reason.
    The individual starts his life with A0 in financial assets which are normalized to zero for
convenience (A0 = 0). He borrows in a perfect capital market at constant real interest rate r
to finance the costs of living and the costs of education in the periods when he is enrolled in
initial education. The flow budget constraint of the individual while still in school (t ≤ S)
is therefore given by

                         Ȧt = (1 − τA )rAt − Ct − (1 − s)P,         0 ≤ t ≤ S,                        (4)

where a dot denotes a time-derivative. Since A0 = 0, and Ct and P are both positive, the
individual accumulates debt in the first periods of his life. τA is the tax on interest income.
Interest payments of education loans are deductible for the interest tax. s is the subsidy rate
on direct educational costs.
    After graduation, the individual starts earning gross labor income W (S)Ht Lt . Ht is the
stock of human capital which is gathered through training on-the-job in a manner that is
made precise below. The flow budget constraints after graduation until retirement (S < t ≤
R) state that the increase in financial assets should equal total interest income (which is
negative when individuals repay debts), net labor income (1 − τL )W (S)Ht Lt (where τL is
  18
    The separability between leisure and retirement from consumption in the utility function avoids discon-
tinuities in the marginal utility of consumption.

                                                    25
the labor income tax rate), minus consumption Ct :

                   Ȧt = (1 − τA )rAt + (1 − τL )W (S)Ht Lt − Ct ,        S < t ≤ R.                   (5)

   After retirement, until death (R < t ≤ T ), the representative individual does not work
anymore and runs down his accumulated assets for consumption purposes:

                             Ȧt = (1 − τA )rAt + B − Ct ,      R < t ≤ T,                             (6)

where B is the net retirement benefit in each year spent in retirement. One should interpret
the pension benefit B as that part of pension benefits that is actuarially completely non-
neutral, since individuals only receive retirement benefits conditional upon full retirement.
Any actuarially fair pension savings are covered by the voluntary saving decision. The
individual has no bequest motive and ends his life with zero wealth: AT = 0.
    The representative individual can increase his human capital by allocating time It to
learning activities, while foregoing labor earnings or leisure time. It’s assumed that on-the-
job training does not require direct costs. The individual has one unit of on-the-job human
capital when he enters the labor market, i.e., HS ≡ 1. On-the-job human capital accumulates
according to a Ben-Porath (1967) type of production function

                             Ḣt = G(S)F (It , Ht ) − δHt ,     S < t ≤ R,                             (7)

where FI (It , Ht ) > 0, FH (It , Ht ) > 0, FII (It , Ht ) < 0, FHH (It , Ht ) < 0 and FIH (It , Ht ) > 0.
G(S) denotes the productivity of on-the-job-training, which increases with the initial level of
education at a diminishing rate: G0 (S) > 0 and G00 (S) < 0. This captures the main idea of
dynamic complementarity in skill-formation. Larger levels of initial education increase the
productivity of investments in on-the-job training. Furthermore, there is dynamic comple-
mentarity in human capital formation on-the-job because the marginal product of training
investments G(S)FI (It , Ht ) increases with the level of human capital Ht as indicated by the
positive cross-derivative FIH (It , Ht ) > 0. Larger levels of human capital increase the pro-
ductivity of later human capital investments. δ denotes the rate of depreciation of human
capital. Browning, Hansen, and Heckman (1999) survey empirical estimates of Ben-Porath
earnings functions. Specification ((7)) is consistent with estimates reported by Heckman,
Lochner, and Taber (1998).19
  19
    Initial education is acquired in both families and schools. Our current formulation lumps human capital
formation in families and schools together during the initial phase. However, human capital formation in
schools and families are by no means perfect substitutes, see for example Cunha, Heckman, Lochner and
Masterov (2006) for more on this. Investment in on-the-job human capital takes place mainly in firms. The


                                                    26
   Integrating the asset accumulation constraints and imposing the initial and terminal
conditions on financial wealth gives the life-time budget constraint of the individual
                         Z    T                      Z   S
                                            ∗
                                                (1 − s)P exp(−r∗ t)dt
                                  Ct exp(−r t)dt +
                       0                      0
                      Z R                                   Z T
                                                     ∗
                    =     (1 − τL )W (S)Ht Lt exp(−r t)dt +     B exp(−r∗ t)dt,                              (8)
                          S                                              R


where r∗ ≡ (1 − τA )r is the net discount rate.
   The individual maximizes life-time utility by choosing consumption, labor supply, leisure,
on-the-job training, education, and retirement subject to the household budget constraint,
the time constraints and the accumulation equation for on-the-job human capital. The
appendix contains the derivation.20
   Using standard results we obtain the Euler equation for consumption

                                        Ċt
                                            = θt (r∗ − ρ) ,   0 ≤ t ≤ T,                                     (9)
                                        Ct
              00           −1
where θt ≡ − UU(C     t )Ct
                   0 (C )
                        t
                                is the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution in consumption.
If the rate of time preference is lower than the real after-tax return on financial saving,
consumption features an upward sloping profile over the life-cycle. A larger intertemporal
elasticity of substitution results in a stronger upward sloping consumption profile and a
stronger sensitivity of savings with respect to after-tax returns.21
    The labor supply equation is governed by the first order condition:

                                  V 0 (Lt )
                                            = (1 − τL )W (S)Ht ,    S < t ≤ R.                             (10)
                                  U 0 (Ct )

The marginal willingness to demand leisure time decreases with the net wage rate and
increases with the level of taxation. The gross wage rate increases with education S and on-
degree of complementarity between human capital formation through schools/families and firms is captured
by the productivity of learning in the on-the-job human capital production function.
  20
     We assume that first-order conditions are necessary and sufficient. The latter condition is not necessarily
fulfilled due to the feedbacks between labor supply and human capital accumulation. In order to guarantee
an interior solution, elasticities of human capital decisions (schooling and training) and labor supply decisions
(work effort, retirement) should not be too high. Otherwise higher investments in human capital (schooling
and training) will boost labor supply (work effort and retirement), which, in turn, increases the return to
human capital investments. This increases human capital investment and labor supply expands in a second
round, which again increases human capital investments, etc. Only sufficiently strong decreasing returns
in schooling and training and a sufficiently concave leisure and retirement sub-utility functions ensure an
interior solution. We assume that these conditions are met. See Arrow and Kurz (1970), Blinder and Weiss
(1976), and Heckman (1975) for discussions of sufficiency conditions.
  21
     Browning, Hansen, and Heckman (1999) survey the estimates of θt obtained from micro and macro data.


                                                         27
the-job human capital Ht . Hence, better skilled workers supply more labor if the substitution
effect dominates the income effect in labor supply (which is the empirically plausible case; see
Browning, Hansen, and Heckman, 1999). Therefore, this equation implies that labor supply
and skill formation are complementary activities. Indeed, the data previously discussed show
that more highly educated workers have higher participation rates and lower unemployment
rates.
    The optimal number of years in initial education follows from the first-order conditions
for education, leisure demand, labor supply and training22
                     R
                                                           G0 (S) F (IS , 1)
             Z
                (1 − τL )W 0 (S)Ht Lt exp(−r∗ (t − S))dt +                   (1 − τL )W (S)
              S                                            G(S) FI (IS , 1)
                                                     
                                                  LS
             = (1 − s)P + (1 − τL )W (S) LS +           ,                                                 (11)
                                                   S
                 0
where t ≡ V V(L(Lt t)L) t > 0 is the elasticity of the leisure sub-utility function at time t.
    This is a modified Mincer equation stating that the net present value of marginal returns
to initial education (evaluated at the time of graduation S) should be equal to net marginal
costs on additional year of schooling. The latter comprise direct, subsidized expenditures
and net forgone labor earnings. Years spent in initial education increase when the returns
to human capital investments are larger. This is the case when the working life is longer
and individuals retire later (R larger). We note here that the returns at later ages are more
heavily discounted, so that expanding the retirement age has only small effects when the
discount rate is sufficiently large. The feedback between retirement and education may gain
in strength due to training on-the-job. On-the-job training becomes more profitable when
individuals retire later, (see below), and this in turn enhances initial investment in education.
Returns increase when individuals invest more in on-the-job training during their working
lives (Ht larger) and supply more labor (Lt larger). The standard Mincer equation ignores
the interaction with labor supply and training on-the-job. In addition, the time horizon is
finite and direct costs of education are not negligible as also noted by Heckman, Lochner
and Todd (2006).23 Furthermore, individuals with a higher level of education have a larger
                                                                                0 (S) F (I ,1)
return on investments in on-the-job human capital as indicated by GG(S)                    S
                                                                                      FI (IS ,1)
                                                                                                 (1 − τL )W (S)
  22
    Note that HS ≡ 1, since individuals do not train if they are not in the labor market yet.
  23
    The term LS + LSS originates from the fact that more time spent on initial education lowers the time-
span over which labor can be supplied or leisure can be consumed, see the utility function. LS is associated
with the marginal loss of forgone labor earnings, and LSS is associated with marginal forgone leisure time
when individuals invest more time in initial education. In the absence of endogenous leisure demand during
working-life, LS = 0, and LS + LSS equals (1 − IS ). The same is true if the sub-utility function over leisure
V (LS ) is linear, i.e., when S = 1. In that case, more time spent in initial education reduces the marginal
value of working and leisure time during working life equally.


                                                      28
which denotes the discounted value of larger human capital investments in training due to
more initial education.
    All these results underscore the second important complementarity. Educational invest-
ments increase when the utilization of human capital is larger and when skills are better
maintained through on-the-job training. Initial schooling is therefore complementary to
later retirement, hours worked and on-the-job training. Again, this is in conformity with the
data presented earlier.
    Labor taxation directly reduces investments in initial education as long as the subsidy
rate is smaller than the tax rate (τL > s). If the subsidy rate s equals the tax rate on labor
τL taxation is neutral with respect to human capital investments because then all costs and
benefits of human capital formation are symmetrically affected by the tax and subsidy rates.
Capital income taxation (as reflected in a lower r∗ ) boosts initial education. The reason is
that higher capital income taxation lowers the net discount rate at which marginal benefits
of education are discounted. Alternatively, one can say that higher taxes on capital income
induce substitution in household life-time asset portfolio’s from financial towards human
assets (see Heckman, 1976). Labor taxation nevertheless reduces labor supply and lower the
retirement age (shown below), hence labor taxation still discourages investments in initial
education by lowering the utilization rate of human capital.
    Optimal retirement is given by

                      X 0 (T − R)
                                                                       
                                                                 1 − LR
                                  = (1 − τL )W (S)HR (1 − %)LR +          ,                                 (12)
                           λR                                      R

where λt ≡ U 0 (C0 ) exp(−r∗ t) is the marginal value of income at time t, and % ≡ (1−τL )WB(S)HR LR
is the implicit marginal tax rate on additional years of work due to the presence of (early)
retirement incomes.24 The marginal willingness to pay for an additional year in retirement
should be equal to the marginal costs of an extra year in retirement. The marginal benefit
is the marginal rate of substitution between retirement utility and consumption at the date
of retirement. The marginal costs are given by the value of net the forgone labor earnings
in the last year on the labor market.25
  24
     Note that IR = 0 at the end of the working life.
  25
     Again, there is a term (1 − %)LR + 1−LR
                                              R
                                                representing the impact of retirement on the time-span over
which individuals enjoy labor earnings and ordinary leisure. (1 − %)LR corresponds with the marginal loss of
forgone labor earnings, which are reduced one-for-one with the implicit tax on retirement due to actuarially
unfair pensions. 1−LR
                       R
                         measures the marginal value of forgone leisure time when individuals retire earlier.
In the absence of an endogenous leisure demand decision and actuarially fair pensions (LR = 1 and % = 0)
this term would vanish. Similarly, the last term cancels out if the leisure sub-utility function V (LR ) is linear
(R = 1), and pensions are actuarially fair (% = 0). Later retirement then augments the marginal value of
working and leisure time equally.



                                                       29
    The individual has stronger incentives to retire later if the individual has more initial
education S, has accumulated a higher stock of on-the-job human capital HR , and supplies
more labor effort LR in the retirement year R. The labor tax directly distorts retirement
decisions, because retirement utility is not taxed, whereas continued work is. This direct
impact of labor taxation on retirement is not often discussed in the literature on retirement
(e.g. Gruber and Wise, 1999). Indeed, this literature mainly focuses on the implicit marginal
tax rate on additional years of work, %, due to the presence of actuarially unfair (early)
retirement incomes. The implicit tax % on continued work exacerbates the impact of the labor
tax τL on the decision to exit the labor market. λR ≡ U 0 (C0 ) exp(−r∗ R) captures wealth
effects in the retirement decision. Richer individuals, with a lower marginal utility of income,
retire earlier – ceteris paribus. The third complementarity is therefore that retirement is
delayed when individuals utilize and maintain their skills better through working life. Hence,
more skilled workers retire later when the income effect of higher skills are outweighed by
the substitution effects of higher skills. Again, this is in conformity with the data.
    Investment in on-the-job training is governed by the following equation

                               µt
                                  G(S)FI (It , Ht ) = (1 − τL )W (S)Ht ,                             (13)
                               λt

where µλtt is the shadow value – expressed in monetary units – of one unit of human capital at
time t. This equation states that the marginal costs of on-the-job human capital investment
(right-hand side) should be equal to the discounted value of marginal benefits in terms of
higher wages (left-hand side). The benefits and costs of OJT investments increase when
schooling levels are higher and when the individual has a higher stock of human capital.
The benefits also increase when the shadow value µλtt of human capital is large. Now we see
that higher levels of initial education both increase the opportunity costs of training on-the-
job and the marginal benefits of training on the job. The same holds for a higher stock of
on-the-job human capital.
    We assume that F (It , Ht ) ≡ [Φ(It , Ht )]φ , where 0 < φ < 1 and σ ≡ ΦΦIIH(I(I
                                                                                  t ,Ht )ΦH (It ,Ht )
                                                                                     t ,Ht )Φ(It ,Ht )
                                                                                                       . φ
is a returns to scale parameter and σ is the elasticity of substitution between I and H in
the homothetic constant returns to scale sub-production function Φ(It , Ht ). We then find an
arbitrage equation between on-the-job human capital investments and financial saving:

                                      FI (It , Ht )Lt
                G(S)FH (It , Ht ) + G(S)              +                                              (14)
                                           Ht
                    ωH               Ḣ      ω                        I˙
                                         t         H                        t
                  1−    + (1 − φ) ωH       +          + (1 − φ)(1 − ωH )      = r∗ + δ,
                      σ                Ht         σ                       It



                                                   30
where ωH ≡ ΦHΦ(I  (It ,Ht )Ht 26
                     t ,Ht )
                             . The left-hand-side gives the total returns of one extra unit of
human capital. The right-hand-side gives the required rate of return on investments in OJT;
the net returns on financial savings plus the rate of depreciation.
    The fourth complementarity in skill formation follows from the last equation. First,
individuals with more initial education S will engage in more on-the-job training because
the productivity of OJT investments is enhanced by higher initial education. This is again
in conformity with the data; more educated workers engage more in training. Second, if
labor supply increases and human capital is more heavily utilized, the marginal returns to
investments in on-the-job training increase. Therefore, individuals who work more hours or
participate more in the labor market have higher returns on training. Third, if individuals
maintain their skills though their working career, later investments in human capital become
more profitable. σ measures the dynamic complementarity of on-the-job human capital
investments. If σ = 0, it is not possible to remedy neglect of on-the-job training in the early
years of the working career. Early and late investments are perfect complements. If σ > 0
it is to some extent possible to remedy poor skill maintenance early in working careers. If
σ = ∞ initial and later investments are perfect substitutes. ωH then measures the plasticity
of investments in human capital. If ωH > 1/2 plasticity is smaller at later ages than at early
ages. If ωH is close to 1 it may be very costly to remediate deficient early career investment
in on-the-job training. When ωH = 1, it is impossible.27
    The tax rate on labor incomes is absent in the training arbitrage equation. Linear income
taxes affect marginal costs and benefits of training equally and therefore do not directly
reduce training investment.28 Note, however, that labor supply and retirement are distorted
by higher taxes. So taxes do indirectly affect the returns to training by lowering the marginal
benefits as the utilization rate of the stock of on-the-job human capital falls and the payback-
time of investments decreases. Capital income taxes boost training by lowering the required
rate of return on training investments. Intuitively, a higher capital income tax increases the
net present value of additional labor earnings resulting from larger training efforts.


4.2    Policy impacts
In general, explicit analytical solutions to the model can be found only if one imposes (strong)
functional form restrictions on preferences or technologies. To illustrate some of the impor-
tant interactions described in the previous section, we present some numerical simulations
of the model where it is either assumed that OJT-investments are fixed (Ht ≡ 1, It ≡ 0)
 26
    Ben-Porath (1967) is a special case of the current model.
 27
    This analysis mirrors those of Cunha and Heckman (2007) and Heckman (2007).
 28
    Note that direct costs of training are absent.


                                                31
and labor supply, initial investment and retirement are endogenous, or where training and
retirement are endogenous, but labor supply and initial investment in human capital are
fixed (i.e, Lt ≡ 1, and S = constant).
    In the simulations, the uncompensated labor supply elasticity is set at 0.18 (if endoge-
nous), the uncompensated retirement elasticity is set at 0.2, and the elasticities of the human
capital production function are based on findings from the literature. The baseline policy
variables are τL = 0.5, s = 0.75, and % = 0.3. These values match (unweighted) averages for
the sample of 16 continental European and Anglo-Saxon countries we analyzed in Section
2. Total marginal tax wedges on labor income (including employer contributions and local
taxes) are 51% for a single household without dependents which earns the average production
wage (OECD, 2007a). 79% is the average of subsidies on higher education, which probably
corresponds better to a marginal subsidy than the average subsidy on all levels of education
(OECD, 2007b). Gruber and Wise (1999), OECD (2004c), and Duval (2004) show that the
implicit tax on work after age 55 amounts to around 30% for an older worker aged between
55–65, although there are substantial cross-country differences.29 In order to abstract from
various complications in determining effective marginal tax rates on capital income, we set
capital income taxes to zero in the simulations (τA = 0).30 None of our conclusions depend
on this particular assumption. Jacobs (2009a) and Jacobs (2009b) provide more details on
the calibration of the models and provide extensive sensitivity analyses.
    Figure 24 plots the simulated life-cycle labor supply patterns for various policy exper-
iments for the model where investments in OJT are fixed throughout the life-cycle. Each
panel shows that individuals are enrolled in initial education for the first years of their life-
cycle, then labor is supplied during working life, and the final years of life are spent in
retirement. The time path of labor supply during working lives is downward sloping over
the life-cycle due to income effects as the consumption profile rises with age (not shown).
In the baseline simulation, labor supply at the end of the life cycle is around 60%. If labor
supply is interpreted as the employment rate, the downward sloping path matches falling
labor force participation rates over the life cycle quite well (OECD, 2006a). All figures show
that various decisions over the life-cycle are affected by policy.
  29
      Gruber and Wise (1999) report the so-called ‘tax force’ statistic, which corresponds to the sum of
marginal tax wedges on retirement while working during ages 55–69. Dividing the ‘tax force’ by 15 gives
a yearly average marginal tax wedge on retirement during working ages 55–69. OECD (2004c) computes
marginal tax wedges on retirement which are around 20% (40%) on average for 55-59 (60-64) year old
workers. Duval (2004, p.33) calculates that average implicit tax rates in OECD countries are equal to 30%.
   30
      Good measures of marginal effective tax rates on savings are difficult to obtain as institutional details
are crucial. Taxes on savings may easily be shifted to labor (consumption) which we cannot account for
since we use a partial equilibrium setup. And, corporate income taxes play a role as well in determining the
effective tax burden on savings. See, for example, Carey and Rabesona (2004).



                                                      32
     As expected, panel A of Figure 24 shows that higher labor taxes result in less educa-
tion, lower labor supply and earlier retirement. The model yields an uncompensated wage
elasticity of labor supply of approximately 0.18, which is not extreme. Although taxes di-
rectly distort labor supply, human capital investment and retirement, life-cycle interactions
between labor supply and human capital decisions reinforce the impact of taxes. As a result,
very substantial declines in labor supply, retirement ages and years of education are found
as labor taxes increase. Indeed, the uncompensated elasticity of the tax base is 0.46, which
more than twice as large as the simple labor supply elasticity (Jacobs, 2009a). Panel B of
Figure 24 shows the impact of education policy. This graph most clearly illustrates the im-
portance of the dynamic interactions over the life-cycle. The subsidy only directly increases
human capital investments, not labor supply and retirement. However, higher education
subsidies indirectly boost labor supply and the retirement age as individuals become better
educated. The costs of leisure and retirement increase with the level of human capital and
quite strong effects of higher education subsidies on labor supply and retirement decisions
are found in the simulations. Similarly, a larger retirement wedge also shows that human
capital investments and retirement decisions are interacting, see panel C of Figure 24. A
lower retirement wedge directly results in later retirement and indirectly also in larger in-
vestment in human capital. The effects are not very large because returns to education at
later points in the life-cycle are heavily discounted. Labor supply responds marginally to a
lower retirement wedge. Substitution effects in wages – due to a higher education level – are
relatively small and income effects – due to a longer working life – are relatively large. Both
effects roughly cancel out.
     Life-cycle interactions only gain in importance when on-the-job training is allowed to
be endogenous. Jacobs (2009b) analyzes a model with exogenous labor supply and initial
investment in human capital (i.e, Lt ≡ 1, and S = constant), but with endogenous retirement
and OJT. Figure 25 plots the effects of labor taxes and retirement policies on investments
in OJT, retirement ages, and lifetime earnings profiles. Labor earnings drop to zero at
the retirement age. Investment in OJT is high at the beginning of the working career,
and declines until the retirement age is reached. The reason is that the payback-time of
investments continuously decreases. The life-cycle profile of labor earnings steadily increases
until it peaks and then decreases slightly afterwards. This reflects both the investment in
OJT before the peak and the depreciation of human capital after the peak. There would
be no decline in labor earnings at the end of the life-cycle in the absence of depreciation of
human capital. Labor productivity (not shown) peaks before earnings, since individuals are
still investing some of their time endowment in OJT at the peak in labor productivity, cf.
Ben-Porath (1967) and Heckman (1976). The individual also has a valuable time endowment


                                              33
after retirement, although it is steadily depreciating over time. Investment in human capital
drops to zero at retirement, since the marginal value of investment in human capital has
become zero then.
    Life-cycle investments in OJT are affected by the labor tax. However, the labor tax
impacts human capital investments only indirectly, since all costs of OJT are deductible and
labor supply is exogenous. A higher (explicit) tax on retirement reduces OJT-investments
to a considerable extent, since the payback period of investment in human capital falls.
Since retirement is distorted by the presence of the positive implicit tax on retirement, the
effect is substantial. Consequently, life-cycle earnings profiles shift towards the origin, and
earnings peak earlier. Since less time will be invested in OJT, earnings when young increase
slightly. However, lower growth of human capital stocks implies that earnings at later ages
will be (much) lower. This, in turn, promotes earlier retirement as the opportunity costs
of retirement decrease if wages are lower. A higher implicit tax on retirement gives similar
results as a higher labor tax, since it also gives stronger incentives to retire early. As a
result, investment in human capital declines at all ages. Since less human capital will be
accumulated, workers end up with lower wages at the end of their careers and they retire
earlier. Thus, actuarially very unfair retirement schemes seriously impair investments in
OJT over the life-cycle. This finding confirms the notion that individuals do not invest in
skills because they retire early, and they retire early because they do not invest in skills.
    The model simulations clearly demonstrate that the policy environment is very important
to understand life-cycle interactions between education, labor supply, OJT, and retirement.
Human capital formation, labor supply, investment in OJT, and later retirement are com-
plementary. In panel D of Figure 24 we have simulated the model with exogenous OJT with
a set of policy parameters that correspond with the unweighted averages of the policies of
Anglo-Saxon, Continental European, Mediterranean and Nordic countries, see also Section 2.
We can infer from these simulations that America’s labor supply is larger than in Europe due
to the high marginal taxes on work effort in Europe. Moreover, the main driver behind the
earlier retirement of Europeans is the larger total tax wedge on retirement. Early retirement
in turn depresses skill maintenance in OJT and lowers wage growth over the life-cycle. The
simulations illustrate that human capital policy in Europe reduces implicit taxes on skill
formation created by various welfare state arrangements. Indeed, many European coun-
tries subsidize initial education much more than the US, especially in the Nordic countries.
Without subsidies on skill formation, explicit and implicit taxes on human capital formation
would generate more dependence on welfare states as skill formation, skill utilization, and
skill maintenance would be retarded. In other words, there is not only a trade-off between
equity and efficiency in the quantity of labor supply, but also a trade-off between equity and


                                              34
the quality of labor supply.


5     Conclusions
European welfare states that attempt to protect incomes and labor market prospects for
persons with low skills face important policy challenges. Labor demand has shifted towards
the skilled workers as can be witnessed from increasing earnings inequality and the rising
returns to education. The growth in the supply of human capital is likely to choke off in years
to come. Despite increasing enrollment rates at higher levels of education, resources invested
in Europe remain rather stagnant at all levels (except for the Nordic countries) and often
more targeted on higher education than pre-school and primary education. A substantial
fraction of immigrant youths have literacy problems, drop out from secondary education, do
not assimilate and end up disproportionally in crime or welfare state arrangements. Poverty
traps not only result in weak incentives to work, but also in weak incentives to invest in
human capital. As relative demand for unskilled labor decreases, low skill workers become
increasingly dependent on welfare state arrangements such as unemployment benefits, pub-
lic training and labor market policies. In the end, social cohesion could be undermined
with a growing divide on labor markets between the skilled and the unskilled and a larger
dependency of low skill workers on welfare state arrangements.
     European welfare states do not only affect skill creation, but also Europe’s skill utilization
is low for a variety of reasons. Hours worked are low and decreasing. Labor force participation
rates are relatively low – especially in Continental Europe and Mediterranean countries –
but increasing which is in part due to larger female participation rates. Take up rates of
benefits for unemployment, sickness, and disability are very substantial. Many unemployed
workers appear to be hidden in generally ineffective active labor market and training policies.
Generous social benefits and high levels of taxation lower labor force participation and hours
worked and thereby lower returns on human capital investments. Generous welfare states
create substantial implicit taxes on the returns to human capital investments through the
interaction with the labor market.
     Not only is the utilization rate of European human capital low, also the maintenance
of human capital is worrisome. Effective retirement ages have fallen dramatically and have
landed on a low plateau in recent years. Declining labor force participation rates of older
workers are showing signs of a trend reversal in some countries (after controlling for the
increase in female labor force participation rates). Individuals spend about one third of their
life-time in retirement. Incentives to retire long before statutory retirement ages are strong
due to generous pension and early retirement schemes. Short payback times of investments

                                                35
in human capital and steep depreciation rates of skills undermine the incentives to create
and maintain skills through education and on-the-job training.
    Human capital policies can be both efficient and equitable and can thus be helpful to
maintain welfare states. Human capital investment is self-productive and investments at
different ages are complementary. Self-productivity and complementarity are the reasons
why skill begets skill and learning begets learning. Complementarity implies that early
investments need to be followed by later investments if the early investments are to pay off.
The returns to human capital of children are very high and rising, hence larger investments
are efficient. Moreover, there is no trade-off between equity and efficiency at early ages of
human development, but a substantial trade-off at later ages. Once skills are crystallized,
complementarity implies that the returns are highest for investment in the most able. At
the youngest ages, it is possible to form ability and create the stock of skills that enrich late
adolescent and early adult human capital investment. Thus, early interventions targeted
toward the disadvantaged can be very efficient. Later investments are not.
    Policies that focus heavily on early childhood interventions for children from disadvan-
taged families are effective. At later ages policies are generally too costly and ineffective.
Given public spending constraints, it is efficient to shift resources away from higher education
to pre-school and primary education, while private funding for higher education can expand,
possibly through income contingent loans to warrant access. The benefits of labor market
and training programmes for older workers are doubtful and the costs are high. Successful
policies focus on both noncognitive and cognitive skills. The benefits of lower crime rates
and socially more acceptable behavior are substantial. Family policy can be effective. Early
cognitive and noncognitive deficits can be partially remedied.
    Dynamic complementarities are not only important for initial investments in life, but also
for the utilization and the maintenance of skills during working life. Returns to investments
early in life will not materialize if early investments are not followed up by later investments.
A precondition for sufficient returns to investments during working life is a sufficient level
of investment early in life. The returns of European human capital investments are affected
by tax-benefit and pension systems and the functioning of labor markets. European labor
markets are distorted due to severe labor market regulations, high taxes, generous benefit
schemes and insider-outsider problems in wage setting institutions. Stricter eligibility for
various types of benefits and less income redistribution from the outsiders towards the insiders
through all kinds of benefit schemes boosts labor supply and employment. This is both
efficient and equitable, since the outsiders on labor markets are hurt by the privileged insiders.
Reducing distortions in labor markets increases the utilization rates of human capital and
enlarges the benefits of initial education and skill maintenance over the life-cycle. Retirement


                                               36
is heavily subsidized via early retirement schemes and pension subsidies. These policies create
perverse incentives to utilize and maintain human capital over the life-cycle. Therefore,
actuarially fairer early-retirement schemes and pension plans can have beneficial incentive
effects on the utilization and maintenance of skills over the life-cycle.


Appendix
The Hamiltonian for maximizing life-time utility is given by
                    Z   T                      Z   R
            H ≡       U (Ct ) exp(−ρt)dt +     V (Lt ) exp(−ρt)dt + X(T − R)              (15)
                   0                         S
                    Z R                                    Z T              
                                                    ∗                   ∗
                + λ      (1 − τL )W (S)Ht Lt exp(−r t)dt +      B exp(−r t)dt
                      S                                      R
                    Z T                   Z S                      
                                    ∗                           ∗
                − λ      Ct exp(−r t)dt +      (1 − s)P exp(−r t)dt
                            0                      0
                + µt [G(S)F (It , Ht ) − δHt ] + νt [1 − Lt − It − Lt ] ,

where λ is the marginal utility of life-time income, µt is the co-state variable at time t
associated with the on-the-job human capital accumulation equation, and νt is the shadow
value of the time-constraint at time t.
   First-order conditions for a maximum are given by

                  ∂H
                      = U 0 (Ct ) exp(−ρt) − λ exp(−r∗ t) = 0,       0 ≤ t ≤ T,           (16)
                  ∂Ct

                        ∂H
                            = V 0 (Lt ) exp(−ρt) − νt = 0,     S < t < R,                 (17)
                        ∂Lt
                 ∂H
                     = λ(1 − τL )W (S)Ht exp(−r∗ t) − νt = 0,         S < t < R,          (18)
                 ∂Lt

          ∂H
             = −V (LS ) exp (−ρS) − λ(1 − s)P exp(−r∗ S)                                  (19)
          ∂S
             − λ(1 − τL )W (S)HS LS exp(−r∗ S)
                 Z R
             + λ     (1 − τL )W 0 (S)Ht Lt exp(−r∗ t)dt + µS G0 (S)F (IS , HS ) = 0,
                        S



                   ∂H
                      = V (LR ) exp (−ρR) − X 0 (T − R)                                   (20)
                   ∂R
                      + λ ((1 − τL )W (S)HR LR − B) exp(−r∗ R) = 0,

                                                37
                         ∂H
                             = µt G(S)FI (It , Ht ) − νt = 0,      S < t < R,                       (21)
                         ∂It

                     ∂H
                         = λ(1 − τL )W (S)Lt exp(−r∗ t)                                             (22)
                     ∂Ht
                         + µt [G(S)FH (It , Ht ) − δ] = −µ̇t .         S < t < R,

In addition, we have to impose a transversality condition on the co-state variable that µR = 0.
    The equations in the main text are derived as follows. Note that λ = U 0 (C0 ) from
the first-order condition for C0 . Totally differentiating the first-order condition for Ct with
respect to time gives the Euler equation for consumption in equation (9). Combining the
first-order conditions for Ct , Lt , and Lt yields equation (10). Equation (13) can be found by
substituting the first-order condition for Lt into the first-order condition for It . To derive
equation (11), we obtain from the first-order conditions for Lt and Lt :

                             V (Lt )           1
                                     exp(−ρt) = (1 − τL )W (S)Ht Lt ,                               (23)
                               λt              t
                                               0
where λt ≡ U 0 (C0 ) exp(−r∗ t), and t ≡ V V(L(Lt t)L) t . Substituting (13) and (23) in the first-order
condition for S and using HS ≡ 1 yields equation (11). Similarly, substitute (23) in the
retirement equation to find (12). Finally, totally differentiate equation (13) to find

                                 FII It I˙t
                                                        
                             µ̇t                FIH Ht     Ḣt
                            − =             +          −1      + r∗ .                               (24)
                             µt   FI It           FI       Ht

Substitute this result and equation (13) in the first-order condition for Ht :

                          G(S)FI (It , Ht )Lt FII It I˙t
                                                                   
                                                              FIH Ht Ḣt
      G(S)FH (It , Ht ) +                    −           + 1−            = r∗ + δ.                  (25)
                                Ht             FI It            FI    Ht

Homogeneous functions of degree φ have the property that its partial derivatives are homo-
geneous of degree φ − 1. Consequently, we can substitute FII It = (φ − 1) FI − FIH Ht into
the last equation:

                                     G(S)FI (It , Ht )Lt
                 G(S)FH (It , Ht ) +                                                                (26)
                                           Ht
                                          ˙                      
                              FIH F FH Ht It             FIH F FH Ht Ḣt
                 + 1−φ+                          + 1−                    = r∗ + δ.
                              FI FH F        It          FI FH F      Ht

We assume that F (It , Ht ) ≡ [Φ(It , Ht )]φ , which has the following derivatives: FI = φΦφ−1 ΦI ,
FH = φΦφ−1 ΦH , FIH = φΦφ−1 ΦIH (1 + (φ − 1) σ). Therefore, we find FHFH = φωH and

                                                   38
FIH F       1+(φ−1)σ
FI FH
        =      φσ
                     .   Substitution of these results yields equation (14).


References
 Abbring, Jaap H., Gerard J. van den Berg, and Jan C. van Ours (2005), “The Effect of
    Unemployment Insurance Sanctions on the Transition Rate from Unemployment to
    Employment”, Economic Journal, 115, 602–630.

 Alesina, Alberto F., Edward L. Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote (2005), “Work in the US and
     Europe: Why so Different?”, NBER Macroeconomic Annuals, 2, 1-64.

 Altonji, Joseph, and Thomas Dunn (1996), “The Effects of Family Characteristics on the
     Return to Education”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, (4), 692-704.

 Arrow, Kenneth J. (1973), “Higher Education as a Filter”, Journal of Public Economics,
     2, 193-216.

 Arrow, Kenneth J., and Kurz, Mordecai (1970), Public Investment, the Rate of Return, and
     Optimal Fiscal Policy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

 Atkinson, Anthony B. (2008), The Changing Distribution of Earnings in OECD Countries,
     Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 Atkinson, Anthony B., and Wiemer Salverda (2005), “Top Incomes in the Netherlands and
     the United Kingdom over the Twentieth Century”, Journal of the European Economic
     Association, 3, (4), 883-913.

 Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Meslissa S. Kearny (2008), “Trends in U.S. Wage
     Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90,
     (2), 300–323.

 Becker, Gary S. (1964), Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special
     Reference to Education. Third edition 1993, Chicago: Chicago University Press.

 Ben-Porath, Yoram (1967), “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of
     Earnings”, Journal of Political Economy, 75, (4), 352-365.

 Bertola, Giuseppe (2003), “Earnings Disparities in OECD Countries: Structural Trends and
     Institutional Influences”, paper prepared for the joint OECD/NDRC Understanding
     China’s Income Disparities seminar, Paris, 20-21 October, 2003.


                                                    39
Björklund, Anders, Mikael Lindahl, and Erik J.S. Plug (2006), “The Origins of Intergen-
     erational Associations: Lessons from Swedish Adoption Data”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 121, (3), 999-1028.

Blanchard, Olivier J. (2006), “European Unemployment: The Evolution of Facts and
    Ideas”, Economic Policy, 21, (45), 5-59.

Blinder, Alan S. and Yoram Weiss (1976), “Human Capital and Labor Supply: A Synthe-
    sis”, Journal of Political Economy, 84, (3), 449–72.

Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy (1999), “Labor Supply: A Review of Alterna-
    tive Approaches”, in: Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor
    Economics – Vol 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 1559-1695.

Borghans, Lex, Angela L. Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Bas ter Weel (2008), “The
    Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits”, Journal of Human Resources, 43,
    (4), 972–1059.

Bovenberg, A. Lans (2006), “Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance”, in: Jonas Agell
    and Peter B. Sørensen (eds.), Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance, Cambridge-
    MA: CESifo and MIT-Press, 3-74.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, Johan J. Graafland, and Ruud A. de Mooij (2000), “Tax Reform and
    the Dutch Labor Market”, Journal of Public Economics, 78, 193-214.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Bas Jacobs (2003), “On the Optimal Distribution of Income and
    Education”, unpublished manuscript: University of Amsterdam/Tilburg.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Bas Jacobs (2005), “Redistribution and Education Subsidies are
    Siamese Twins”, Journal of Public Economics, 89, 2005-2035.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Frederick van der Ploeg (1994), “Effects of the Tax and Benefit
    System on Wage Formation and Unemployment”, unpublished manuscript: University
    of Amsterdam/Tilburg.

Brandolini, Andrea, and Timothy M. Smeeding (2008), “Inequality: International Evi-
    dence”, in: Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume (eds), The New Palgrave Dic-
    tionary of Economics – Second Edition, Palgrave Macmillan.

Browning, Martin, Lars Peter Hansen, and James J. Heckman (1999), “Micro Data and
    General Equilibrium Models”, in: John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.), Hand-
    book of Macroeconomics– Vol 1A, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 543-633.

                                          40
Calmfors, Lars, Anders Forslund, and Maria Hemström (2001), “Does Active Labour Mar-
    ket Policy Work? Lessons from the Swedish Experiences”, Swedish Economic Policy
    Review, 85, 61-124.

Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman (2001), “The Dynamics of Educational At-
   tainment for Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites”, Journal of Political Economy, 109, (3),
   455-499.

Card, David (1999), “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings”, in: Orley Ashenfelter
    and David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics – Vol 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier-
    North Holland, 1801-1863.

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux (2001), “Dropout and Enrollment Trends in the Post-
    War Period: What Went Wrong in the 1970’s?”, in Jonathan Gruber (ed.) An Eco-
    nomic Analysis of Risky Behavior Among Youth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
    for NBER, 439-482.

Carey, David, and Josette Rabesona (2004), “Tax Ratios on Labour and Capital Income
    and on Consumption”, in: Peter Birch Sørensen (ed.), Measuring the Tax Burden on
    Capital and Labor, CESifo Seminar Series, Cambridge-MA: MIT Press, 213-262.

Carneiro, Pedro, Flavio Cunha, and James J. Heckman (2005), “Human Capital Policy for
    Europe”, unpublished manuscript: University College London/University of Chicago.

Carneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman, (2003), “Human Capital Policy,” in James J.
    Heckman and Alan B. Krueger (eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human
    Capital Policy? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 77-240.

Carneiro, Pedro, James J. Heckman, and Edward Vytlacil (2006), “Estimating the Rate of
    Return to Education When It Varies among Individuals”, revised version, unpublished
    manuscript: University of Chicago.

Carneiro, Pedro, Karsten Hansen, and James J. Heckman (2001), “Removing the Veil of Ig-
    norance in Assessing the Distributional Impacts of Social Policies”, Swedish Economic
    Policy Review, 8, 273-301.

Carneiro, Pedro, Karsten Hansen, and James J. Heckman (2003), “Estimating Distributions
    of Treatment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling”, International
    Economic Review, 44, (2), 361-422.



                                          41
Carneiro, Pedro, and Sokbae Lee (2006), “Changes in College Enrollment and Wage Inequal-
    ity: Distinguishing Price and Composition Effects”, unpublished manuscript: Univer-
    sity College London.

Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri (2006), “Identifying Human Capital Externalities:
    Theory with an Application to US Cities”, Review of Economic Studies, 73, 381–412.

Cunha, Flavio and James J. Heckman (2007), “Identifying and Estimating the Distributions
   of Ex Post and Ex Ante Returns to Schooling”, Labour Economics, 14, (6), 870-893.

Cuhna, Flavio, and James J Heckman (2007), “The technology of Skill Formation. ”,
   American Economic Review, 97, (2), 31–47.

Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman (2008), “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating
   the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation”, Journal of Human
   Resources, 43, (4), 738-782.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance J. Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov (2006),
   “Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation”, in: Eric Hanushek and
   Finis Welch (eds), Handbook of Economics of Education, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North
   Holland, 697-812.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Salvador Navarro (2005), “Separating Uncertainty
   from Heterogeneity in Life Cycle Earnings”, Oxford Economic Papers, 57, (2), 191-261.

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach (2010), “Estimating the
   Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation”, Econometrica, forthcom-
   ing.

Davis, Steven J. (1992), “Cross-Country Patterns of Changes in Relative Wages”, in: Blan-
    chard, Oliver J. and Stanley Fischer (eds), NBER Macroeconomic Annuals 1992, 239-
    400.

De la Fuente, Angel, and Rafael Doménech (2006), “Human Capital in Growth Regressions:
     How Much Difference Does Data Quality Make?”, Journal of the European Economic
     Association, 4, (1), 1-36.

De la Fuente, Angel, and Juan Francisco Jimeno-Serrano (2005), “The Private and Fiscal
    Returns to Schooling and the Effect of Public Policies on Private Incentives to Invest
    in Education: A General Framework and Some Results for the EU”, CESifo Working
    Paper 1392, Munich: CESifo.

                                           42
Duval, Romain (2004), “Retirement Behavior in OECD Countries: Impact of Old-Age
   Pension Schemes and Other Social Transfer Programmes”, OECD Economic Studies,
   37, 2003/2, 7-50.

Dynarski, Susan (2003), “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on College
   Attendance and Completion”, American Economic Review, 93, (1), 279-288.

Edin, Per-Anders, and Bertil Holmlund (1995), “The Swedish Wage Structure: The Rise
    and Fall of Wage Policy?”, in: Richard B. Freeman and Lawrence F. Katz, Differences
    and Changes in Wage Structures, Chicago: Chicago University Press, 307-343.

European Commission (2005), “Study on Access to Education and Training, Basic Skills
    and Early School Leavers (Ref. DG EAC 38/04); Lot 3: Early School Leavers Final
    Report”, Brussels: European Commission DG EAC.

Frederiksson, Peter (1997), “Economic Incentives and the Demand for Higer Education”,
    Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 99, (1), 129-142.

Gordon, Kathryn, and Henry Tchilinguirian (1998), “Marginal Effective Tax Rates on
    Physical, Human and R&D Capital”, OECD Working Paper No. ECO/WKP(98)12,
    Paris: OECD.

Gottschalk, Peter, and Timothy M. Smeeding (1996), “Cross-National Comparisons of
    Earnings and Income Inequality”, Journal of Economic Literature, 35, (2), 633-687.

Gruber, Jonathan, and David Wise (1999), Social Security and Retirement around the
   World, Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Hanushek, Eric, and Dennis D. Kimko (2000), “Schooling, Labor Force Quality, and the
   The Growth of Nations”, American Economic Review, 90, (5), 1184-1208.

Hansen, Karsten, James J. Heckman, and K.J. Kathleen Mullen (2004), “The Effect of
   Schooling and Ability on Achievement Test Scores”, Journal of Econometrics, 121,
   (1-2), 39-98.

Harmon Colm, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Ian Walker (2003), “The Returns to Education:
   Microeconomics”, Journal of Economic Surveys, 17, 115-155.

Heckman, James J. (1975), “Estimates of a Human Capital Production Function Embedded
    in a Life-Cycle Model of a Labor Supply”, in N. E. Terleckyj (ed), Household Production
    and Consumption, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                           43
Heckman, James J. (1976), “A Life Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning and Consumption”,
    Journal of Political Economy, 4, S11-S44.

Heckman, James J. (1993), “What Has Been Learned about Labor Supply in the Past
    Twenty Years?”, American Economic Review, 83, 116–121.

Heckman, James J. (2000), “Policies to Foster Human Capital”, Research in Economics 54,
    (1), 3-56.

Heckman, James J. (2006), “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvan-
    taged Children”, Science, 312, (5782), 1900–1902.

Heckman, James J. (2007), “The Economics, Technology, and Neuroscience of Human
    Capability Formation”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, (3),
    13250–13255.

Heckman, James J., Neil Hohmann, Michael Khoo, and Jeffrey Smith (2000), “Substitution
    and Dropout Bias in Social Experiments: A Study of an Influential Social Experiment”,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, (2), 651-694.

Heckman, James J., and Bas Jacobs (2006), “Reinventing Human Capital Policy”, paper
    prepared for the Netspar-SER-CPB conference, Reinventing the Welfare State, April
    27-28, 2006, The Hague, The Netherlands.

Heckman, James J., Jingjing Hsee, and Yona Rubinstein (2001), “The GED is a ‘Mixed
    Signal’: The Effect of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills on Human Capital and Labor
    Market Outcomes”, unpublished manuscript: University of Chicago.

Heckman, James J., and Peter J. Klenow (1998), “Human Capital Policy”, in: Michael
    Boskin (ed), Policies to Promote Human Capital Formation, Hoover Institution.

Heckman, James J., and Paul LaFontaine (2006), “Bias Corrected Estimates of GED Re-
    turns”, Journal of Labor Economics, in press.

Heckman, James J., Robert J. Lalonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith (1999), “The Economics and
    Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs”, in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card
    (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics – Vol 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland,
    1865-2097.

Heckman, James J., Martin Ljunge, and Kelly S. Ragan (2006), “What are the Key Em-
    ployment Challenges and Policy Priorities for OECD Countries”, University of Chicago


                                          44
    Department of Economics unpublished manuscript, presented at the “Boosting Jobs
    and Incomes” conference, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, June, 2006.

Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Christopher Taber (1998), “Explaining Rising
    Wage Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor
    Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 1-58.

Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, Petra E. Todd (2006), “Earnings Functions, Rates of
    Return and Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond”, in Eric Hanushek,
    and Finis Welch (eds), Handbook of Economics of Education, Amsterdam: Elsevier-
    North Holland, 307-458.

Heckman, James J., Lena Malofeeva, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter A. Savelyev (2009), “The
    Powerful Role of Noncognitive Skills in Explaining the Effect of the Perry Preschool
    Program”, unpublished manuscript: University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, James J., and Dimitriy V. Masterov (2006), “The Productivity Argument for
    Investing in Young Children”, discussion paper: Early Childhood Research Collabora-
    tive, University of Minnesota.

Heckman, James J., and Carmen Pagés (2003), “Law and Unemployment: Lessons from
    Latin America and the Carribbean”, NBER Working Paper 10129, Cambridge MA:
    NBER.

Heckman, James J., and Carmen Pagés (2004), Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin
    American and the Caribbean, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Heckman, James J., and Yona Rubinstein (2001), “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills:
    Lessons from the GED Testing Program”, American Economic Review, 91, (2), 145-
    149.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua (2006), “The Effects of Cognitive and
    Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior”, Journal of
    Labor Economics, 24, (3), 411-482.

Hilmer, Michael J. (1998), “Post-Secondary Fees and the Decision to Attend a University
    or a Community College”, Journal of Public Economics, 67, 329–348.

Jacobs, Bas (2004), “The Lost Race between Schooling and Technology”, De Economist,
    152, 1, 47-78.


                                          45
Jacobs, Bas (2005), “Optimal Income Taxation with Endogenous Human Capital”, Journal
    of Public Economic Theory, 7, (2), 295-315.

Jacobs, Bas (2007), “Optimal Tax and Education Policies and Investments in Human Capi-
    tal”, in: Hartog, Joop, and Henriëtte Maassen van den Brink, Human Capital: Moving
    the Frontier, Cambrige: Cambridge University Press, 212-232.

Jacobs, Bas (2009a), “Is Prescott Right? Welfare State Policies and the Incentives to Work,
    Learn and Retire”, International Tax and Public Finance, 16, 253-280.

Jacobs, Bas (2009b), “Human Capital, Retirement and Pension Saving”, in: A. Lans Boven-
    berg and Arthur van Soest (eds) (2010), Ageing, Health and Pensions in Europe –
    Forward Looks 2006 ESF, Strasbourg: European Science Foundation, forthcoming.

Jacobs, Bas, and Frederick van der Ploeg (2006), “Guide to Reform of Higher Education:
    A European Perspective”, Economic Policy, 21, (47), 536-592.

Kane, Thomas J. (1994), “College Entry by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College Costs,
   Family Background and the Returns to Education”, Journal of Political Economy, 102,
   (5), 878-911.

Kane, Thomas J. (1995), “Rising Public Tuition and College Entry: How well do Public
   Subsidies Promote Access to College”, NBER Workingpaper, 5164, Cambridge MA:
   NBER.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy (1992), “Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987:
    Supply and Demand Factors”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35-78.

Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor (1999), “Changes in the Wage Structure and
    Wage Inequality”, in: Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor
    Economics Vol. 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 1463-1555.

Killingsworth, Mark R., and James J. Heckman (1986), “Female labor Supply: A Survey”,
     in: Ashenfelter, Orley and Richard Layard (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics - Vol.
     I, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 103-204.

Knudsen, Eric, James J. Heckman, Judy Cameron, and Jack Shonkoff (2006), “Economic,
   Neurobiological and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America’s Future Workforce”,
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103, (27), 10155-10162.

Krueger, Alan B., and Mikael Lindahl (2001), “Education for Growth: Why and for
    Whom?”, Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 1101-1136.

                                           46
Lalive, Rafael, Jan C. van Ours, and Josef Zweimuller (2005), “The Effects of Benefit
     Sanctions on the Duration of Unemployment”, Journal of the European Economic
     Association, 3, 1386-1417.

Lalive, Rafael, Jan C. van Ours, and Josef Zweimuller (2006), “How Changes in Financial
     Incentives Affect the Duration of Unemployment”, Review of Economic Studies, 73,
     (4), 1009-1038.

Layard, Richard, Stephen Nickell and, Richard Jackman (1991), Unemployment, Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.

Lindbeck, Assar, and Sven Nyberg (2006), “Raising Children to Work Hard: Altruism,
    Work Norms and Social Insurance”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, (4), 1473-
    1503.

Ljunge, Martin (2006), “Half the Job Is Showing Up: Returns to Work, Taxes, and Sick
    Leave Choices”, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Chicago, June 2006.

Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (1998), “The European Unemployment Dilemma”,
    Journal of Political Economy, 106, (3), 514–550.

Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (2002), “The European Employment Experience”,
    CEPR Discussion Paper 3543, London: CEPR.

Martin, John, and David Grubb (2001), “What Works and for Whom: A Review of OECD
    Countries’ Experience with Active Labour Market Policies”, Swedish Economic Policy
    Review, 8, (2), 9-56.

Mincer, Jacob (1974), Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, Cambridge MA: NBER, dis-
    tributed by Columbia University Press, New York.

Murphy, Kevin M., W. Craig Riddell, and Paul M. Romer (1998), “Wages, Skills, and
   Technology in the United States and Canada”, in: Elhanan Helpman (ed.) (1998),
   General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth, Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 283-
   309.

Nahuis, Richard, and Henri L.F. de Groot (2003), “Rising Skill Premia: You Ain’t Seen
   Nothing Yet?”, CPB Discussion Paper No 20: The Hague: CPB Netherlands Bureau
   for Economic Policy Analysis.

Nickell, Stephen (1997), “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North
    America”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, (3), 55-74.

                                         47
Nickell, Stephen (2003), “Poverty and Worklessness in Britain”, Economic Journal, 114,
    C1-C25.

OECD (2003), Education at a Glance, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2004a), Learning for Tomorrow’s World First Results from PISA 2003, Paris:
   OECD.

OECD (2004b), Benefits and Wages, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2004c), The Labor Force Participation of Older Workers: The Effects of Pension
   and Early Retirement Schemes, Working Paper, OECD Economics Department, May
   2004.

OECD (2005a) Education at a Glance, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2005b), OECD Factbook, Paris OECD.

OECD (2005c), OECD Social Indicators, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2005d), Pensions at a Glance, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2005e), OECD Tax Database, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2006a), OECD Labor Force Statistics Database, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2006b), OECD Social Indicators, Paris: OECD.

OECD (2006c), OECD Education Database, Paris: OECD.

Ours, Jan C. van, and Michèle Belot (2001), “Unemployment and Labor Market Institu-
    tions: An Empirical Analysis”, Journal of Japanese and International Economies, 15,
    (4), 403-418.

Pencavel, John (1986), “Labor Supply of Men: A Survey”, in: Ashenfelter, Orley, and
    Richard Layard (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics - Vol I, Amsterdam: Elsevier-
    North Holland, 3-102.

Peracchi, Franco (2006), “Educational Wage Premia and the Distribution of Earnings: An
    International Perspective”, in: Eric Hanushek and Finis Welch (eds), Handbook of
    Economics of Education, Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 189-254.

Piketty, Thomas (2003), “Income Inequality in France, 1901-1998”, Journal of Political
    Economy, 111, 1004–1042.

                                         48
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United States
    1913-1998”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, (1), 1-39.

Pissarides, Cristopher A. (1998), “The Impact of Employment Tax Cuts on Unemploy-
     ment and Wages: The Role of Unemployment Benefits and Tax Structure”, European
     Economic Review, 42, 155–183.

Phelps, Edmund S. (ed) (2003), Designing Social Inclusion: Tools to Raise Low-End Pay
    and Employment in Private Enterprise, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ploeg, Frederick van der (2006), “Do Social Policies Harm Employment? Second-Best
    Effects of Taxes and Benefits on Labor Markets”, in: Jonas Agell and Peter B. Sørensen
    (eds.), Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance, Cambridge-MA: CESifo and MIT-
    Press, 97-144.

Prescott, Edward C. (2004), “Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28, (1), 2-13.

Raudenbush, Stephen W. (2006), “Schooling, Statistics and Poverty: Measuring School
   Improvement and Improving Schools”, Inaugural Lecture, Division of Social Sciences,
   University of Chicago.

Saez, Emmanuel (2002), “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive
    Labor Supply Responses”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1039-1073

Sianesi, Barbara, and John van Reenen (2002), “The Returns to Education: Macroeco-
    nomics”, Journal of Economic Surveys, 17, 2, 1-114.

Sørensen, Peter B. (1997), “Public Finance Solutions to the European Unemployment Prob-
    lem”, Economic Policy, 12, (25), 221-264.

Sørensen, Peter B. (1999), “Optimal Tax Progressivity in Imperfect Labour Markets”,
    Labour Economics, 6, (3), 435-452.

Taber, Christopher (2001). “The Rising College Premium in the Eighties: Return to College
    or Return to Unobserved Ability?”, Review of Economic Studies, 68, (3), 665-691.

Turkheimer, Eric, Andreana Haley, Mary Waldron, Brian D’Onofrio, and Irving I. Gottes-
    man (2003), “Socioeconomic Status Modifies Heritability of IQ in Young Children”,
    Psychological Science, 14, 6, 623-628.



                                           49
                                                                                               Figure 1: Hidden unemployment in ALMP



                             Differences between Open and Full Unemployment, 1998-2004
                                                     averages

                 9.0

                 8.0

                 7.0

                 6.0

                 5.0

                 4.0




50
      % points
                 3.0

                 2.0

                 1.0

                 0.0

                              ay          c   h               e       K                  lia                   y                nd              d            nd                  k          en                 ds                 m
                             w                           ec       U                                       an               la                an         la                  ar                                n               u
                       o   r           ze             re                       s   tra                m                  er               nl                            m                 ed           rl   a              gi
                   N               C              G                                                er                                Fi             Ire               en                                                el
                                                                          Au                   G                   itz                                            D                  Sw              he             B
                                                                                                           Sw                                                                                   et
                                                                                                                                                                                            N



     Key: The graph shows the difference between the true (‘full’) unemployment rate and the reported (‘open’) unemployment rate
     due to disguising unemployed persons as trainees.
     Source: Heckman, Ljunge and Ragan (2006).
                                                          Figure 2: Inequality and higher educational attainment

                                         Earnings inequality and higher educational attainment
                                    OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics; OECD (2006c) Education Database




                     50        40
                                                  FI                                                        CA            USUS
                                                   FI                                                                     USUS
                                               FIFI FI                                                                      US
                                                 FI
                                                  FI FI                                                      CA            US
                                                                                                            CA
                                                                        AU                                               US




51
                                                                                                                   US
                                                                                                                    US




                      30
                                                                       FR
                                                                      AU
                                                                   AU FR            GB
                                         NO    BE
                                               BE                                    GB                      ES
                                                                NL       FR
                                                                     AU FR
                                                                    NL               GB
                                                          NL    NL AU   FR          GBGB
                                                          NL      AU        FR     GBGB
                                                           NL AUAU     DE    FR
                                                               DEDE
                                                                 DE           FR   GB




            20
                                                              DE DE
                                                                                   GB




     Tertiary attainment 25-34 cohorts
                     10
                                                    IT
                                                IT IT                                 PT
                                                ITIT

                                         2          2.5             3           3.5                  4               4.5
                                                                  P90/P10 earnings ratio
                                          Figure 3: Attainment rates higher education across countries over time




                               Higher educational attainment rates (% of population)
                                                  Source: De la Fuente and Domenech (2006)
            50                                                                          50
            45                                                                          45
            40                                                                          40
            35                                                                          35
            30                                                                          30
            25                                                                          25
            20                                                                          20
            15                                                                          15
            10                                                                          10
             5                                                                           5
             0                                                                           0
                 1960   1965      1970   1975       1980   1985      1990        1995        1960   1965      1970     1975        1980       1985      1990       1995

                        Netherlands       Belgium          France             Germany                       Portugal     Spain        Italy          Greece




52
            50                                                                          50
            45                                                                          45
            40                                                                          40
            35                                                                          35
            30                                                                          30
            25                                                                          25
            20                                                                          20
            15                                                                          15
            10                                                                          10
             5                                                                           5
             0                                                                           0
                 1960   1965      1970   1975       1980   1985      1990        1995        1960    1965     1970     1975        1980       1985      1990      1995

                               Denmark   Norway        Sweden       Finland                         United Kingdom     Australia          Canada        United States




                                                                                                                                                                          Source:   De la
     Fuente and Domenech (2006).
                                                              Figure 4: Growth in years of education and initial levels of education




                                                                         Growth rate human capital stocks 1960-1990/95
                                                                           Source: De la Fuente and Domenech (2006)

                                    1.20%
                                                                                                                       growth(1960-1995) = -0.001*stock(1960) + 0.015
                                                                                                                                        R2 = 0.817
                                                               IT
                                    1.00%                           GR
                                                PT
                                                         ES                                        FI

                                    0.80%
                                                                                                             NL
                                                                                                            SW
                                                                                              IE    BE




53
                                                                                                             FR                       DE
                                                                                                                                     AU
                                    0.60%                                                                         JP
                                                                                                                           AT
                                                                                                                  GB                         CA
                                                                                                                                                  US
                                    0.40%                                                                                         NO          CH




     Average growth rate per year
                                                                                                                                              NZ



                                    0.20%                                                                                                              DK




                                    0.00%
                                            4        5                    6            7                8              9             10                11               12
                                                                                    Average years of initial education 1960
     Figure 5: Change in total resources invested in primary, secondary and tertiary education across countries over time




                            Total expenditure on education (%GDP)
               Source: OECD (2005b) Factbook, OECD (2006c) Education Data Base
       9.00%                                                            9.00%

       8.50%                                                            8.50%

       8.00%                                                            8.00%

       7.50%                                                            7.50%

       7.00%                                                            7.00%

       6.50%                                                            6.50%

       6.00%                                                            6.00%

       5.50%                                                            5.50%




54
       5.00%                                                            5.00%

       4.50%                                                            4.50%

       4.00%                                                            4.00%
               1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002           1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

                                                                                   denmark            norway              sweden
                   netherlands        france             germany
                                                                                   finland            australia           canada
                   portugal           spain              italy
                                                                                   united states
                                                                       Figure 6: Share of private funding in education across countries




                                   Share of public expenditures in total direct expenditures on education (2002)
                                       Source: OECD (2005a) Education at a Glance (Canada: values 1995)

               100.0




                90.0



                80.0




                70.0




55
     Percent
                60.0




                50.0



                40.0
                               s           m         ce            y               al          in       ly        e            k          ay          en         d                m              lia            a               es
                          nd             iu                      an            g           a        Ita         ec           ar       w                        an              do           ra               ad              at
                       rla            lg          an         m             rtu          Sp                    re            m       or              ed       nl                          st             an                St
                                   Be          Fr          er           Po                                   G         en          N           Sw          Fi             i ng                         C              d
                    the                                   G                                                           D                                                  K            Au                           te
                  e                                                                                                                                                  d                                           ni
                 N                                                                                                                                                te                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                ni
                                                                                                                                                               U

                                        Pre-primary education                                        Primary, secondary and                                                               Tertiary education
                                                                                                     post-secondary non-tertiary education
                                                                                                      Figure 7: Training by education level across countries
                                                                                                           LITERACY AND ADULT EDUCATION PARTICIPATION

                             Per cent of population aged 16-65 participating in adult education and training during the year
                                 preceding the interview at each literacy level and in total, document scale, 1994-1998


            Per cent
            100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           100



             80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           80



             60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Total
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Total
             40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40    participation rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Level
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Level 1 1




56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Level
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Level 2 2
             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Level
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Level 3 3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0   Level 4/5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Level   4/5
               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                     Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Poland




                   Finland
                                                                                                                                  Canada




                                                Norway

                                       Sweden
                                                                                                                                                         Slovenia




                                                                                                                      Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Portugal



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hungary




                             Denmark
                                                                                        Switzerland
                                                                                                                                           Netherlands




                                                         New Zealand
                                                                                                      United States
                                                                                                                                                                    Czech Republic




                                                                       United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                               Belgium (Flanders)




            Countries are ranked by the total participation rate.
            Source: International Adult Literacy Survey, 1994-1998.
                                                                                                               Note: Document
     literacy measures the knowledge and skills required to locate and use information contained in various formats, including
     job applications, payroll forms, transportation schedules, maps, tables and graphics. Training is measured as enrollment in
     some form of organized adult education or training during the year preceding the interview.
     Source: OECD (2003).
                                                             Figure 8: Spending on labor market programs across countries




                         Total expenditure on training and passive/active labor market
                                             programmes (%GDP)
                                 Source: OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics

                5

             4.5

                4

             3.5

                3                                                                                                                                                                                                2001




57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002
             2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2003




     %GDP
                2                                                                                                                                                                                                2004

             1.5

                1

             0.5

                0
                           s                ce          y           al          n      ly                 e          k                ay             en            d         m       lia         a          es
                        nd          um               an          ug           ai    Ita              ec         ar                w                             an         do                 ad         at
                 rl a            lgi    ran        m         r t         Sp                     re            nm             or                 ed         i nl          g       stra      a n        St
                               Be      F        er        Po                                G              e             N                 Sw             F             n                C          d
               he                             G                                                           D                                                          Ki        Au
             et                                                                                                                                                  e d                           nite
            N                                                                                                                                                   t                            U
                                                                                                                                                             ni
                                                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                  Figure 9: Labor productivity growth




                            Annualized percentage increase in labor productivity (1993-2006)
                                           Source: OECD (2005b) Factbook

             3


          2.5


             2




58
     %
          1.5


             1


          0.5


             0
                        s                ce           y           al          n      ly                 e            k                ay             en            d          m       lia         a           es
                     nd          um                an          ug           ai    Ita              ec           ar                w                             an          do                 ad          at
              rl a            lgi    ran         m         r t         Sp                     re              nm             or                 ed         i nl           g       stra      a n         St
                            Be      F         er        Po                                G                  e           N                 Sw             F              n                C           d
            he                              G                                                               D                                                         Ki        Au
          et                                                                                                                                                      e d                            nite
         N                                                                                                                                                       t                              U
                                                                                                                                                              ni
                                                                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                            Figure 10: Labor force participation rates across countries over time




                                                                                               Labor force participation rates (1956-2003)
                                                                                              Source: OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics
                           70                                                                                                                                                                                 70

                           65                                                                                                                                                                                 65

                           60                                                                                                                                                                                 60

                           55                                                                                                                                                                                 55

                           50                                                                                                                                                                                 50




       (% of population)
                           45                                                                                                                                                                                 45

                               5   6      5   9      6   2      6   5      6   8      7   1      7   4      7   7      8   0      8   3      8   6       8   9      9   2      9   5       9   8      0   1        56         59         62         65        68        71        74        77        80         83        86        89        92        95        98        01
                            19         19         19         19         19         19         19         19         19         19         19          19         19         19          19         20         19         19         19         19        19        19        19        19        19         19        19        19        19        19        19        20




59
                                                             Netherlands                                  Belgium                                    France                            Germany                                                       Portugal                                    Spain                           Italy                             Greece


                           70                                                                                                                                                                                 70

                           65                                                                                                                                                                                 65

                           60                                                                                                                                                                                 60

                           55                                                                                                                                                                                 55

                           50                                                                                                                                                                                 50




     (% of population)
                           45                                                                                                                                                                                 45

                              5   6       5   9      6   2      6   5      6   8      7   1      7   4      7   7      8   0      8   3      8   6       8   9      9   2      9   5       9   8      0   1         56         59         62        65        68        71        74        77         80        83        86        89        92        95        98        01
                           19          19         19         19         19         19         19         19         19         19         19          19         19         19          19         20          19         19         19        19        19        19        19        19         19        19        19        19        19        19        19        20



                                                               Denmark                                   Norway                             Sweden                                     Finland                           United Kingdom                                            Australia                           Canada                                 United States
                                                                       Figure 11: Participation rates by level of education across countries




                                                             Employment rates by level of education (2003)
                                                             Source: OECD (2005a) Education at a Glance

                           100

                            90

                            80

                            70

                            60

                            50




60
                            40

                            30




     Employment rate (%)
                            20

                            10

                              0

                                         s1           m         ce            y              al          in       ly        e            k          ay          en         d                m              lia            a                  es
                                                    iu                      an           g           a        Ita         ec           ar       w                        an              do           ra               ad                 at
                                    nd           lg          an         m            rtu          Sp                    re            m       or              ed       nl                          st             an                   St
                                 rla          Be          Fr          er          Po                                   G         en          N           Sw          Fi               ng                         C                 d
                               he                                    G                                                          D                                                  Ki           Au
                            e t                                                                                                                                                d                                           n   ite
                           N                                                                                                                                                te                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                          ni
                                                                                                                                                                         U

                             Primary education or lower                                           Lower secondary education                                      Higher secondary vocational (short)
                             Higher secondary vocational (long)                                   Higher secondary general                                       Higher education (short)
                             Higher education (long)
                                                  Figure 12: Non-employed disabled and sick workers across countries




                             Non-employed sick and disabled workers (% of labor force)
                                     Source: OECD (2005c) Social Indicators

     12.0




     10.0




      8.0




61
      6.0




      4.0




      2.0




      0.0
                      s           m         ce            y              al          in       ly            k          ay          en                  m              lia            a                      es
                 nd             iu                      an           g           a        Ita             ar       w                                do           ra               ad                     at
               la            lg          an         m            rtu          Sp                         m       or              ed                           st             an                       St
            er            Be          Fr          er          Po                                    en          N           Sw                   ng                         C                     d
          h                                      G                                                 D                                          Ki           Au
        et                                                                                                                                d                                               n   ite
       N                                                                                                                               te                                                U
                                                                                                                                     ni
                                                                                                                                    U
     Figure 13: Replacement rates unemployed workers on average during 60 month period in unemployment across countries over
     time



              Replacement incomes unemployed workers (% of earned income) (1961-2000)
                              Source: OECD (2004b) Benefits and Wages
                   70                                                                                                                                                                    70

                   60                                                                                                                                                                    60

                   50                                                                                                                                                                    50

                   40                                                                                                                                                                    40




             (%)
                   30                                                                                                                                                                    30

                   20                                                                                                                                                                    20

                   10                                                                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                    0




62
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1961
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1963
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1965
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1967
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1969
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1973
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1975
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1985
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2001




                        1961
                               1963
                                      1965
                                             1967
                                                    1969
                                                           1971
                                                                  1973
                                                                         1975
                                                                                1977
                                                                                        1979
                                                                                               1981
                                                                                                      1983
                                                                                                             1985
                                                                                                                    1987
                                                                                                                            1989
                                                                                                                                    1991
                                                                                                                                            1993
                                                                                                                                                    1995
                                                                                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                                                                                    1999
                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Year


                                                    Netherlands                        Belgium                  France                      Germany                                                                                        Portugal                    Spain                   Italy                   Greece



                   70                                                                                                                                                               70
                   60                                                                                                                                                               60
                   50                                                                                                                                                               50
                   40                                                                                                                                                               40




             (%)
                   30                                                                                                                                                               30
                   20                                                                                                                                                               20
                   10                                                                                                                                                               10
                   0                                                                                                                                                                0




                        1961
                               1963
                                      1965
                                             1967
                                                    1969
                                                           1971
                                                                  1973
                                                                         1975
                                                                                1977
                                                                                        1979
                                                                                               1981
                                                                                                      1983
                                                                                                             1985
                                                                                                                     1987
                                                                                                                             1989
                                                                                                                                     1991
                                                                                                                                             1993
                                                                                                                                                     1995
                                                                                                                                                             1997
                                                                                                                                                                     1999
                                                                                                                                                                             2001
                                                                                                                                                                                          1961
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1963
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1965
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1967
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1969
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1973
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1975
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1985
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2001




                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                                                       Year



                                                    Denmark                        Norway                           Sweden                             Finland                                                  United Kingdom                                  Australia                            Canada                            United States
Figure 14: Development of eligibility to replacement incomes over 60-month period across
countries
                                                    Net Replacement Rates over a five year period
                           2002, no entitlement to social assistance, one-earner married couple with 2 children, in percent (1)


                           AUS               AUT                BEL                   CAN              CZE                 DNK                FIN
      100                                                                                                                                                    100


       80                                                                                                                                                    80


       60                                                                                                                                                    60


       40                                                                                                                                                    40


       20                                                                                                                                                    20


        0                                                                                                                                                    0
            0          5          10          15         20            25        30          35         40          45           50         55          60
                                                                                                                                             Time (months)



                            FRA                DEU                 GRC                 HUN               ISL               IRL                ITA
      100                                                                                                                                                    100


       80                                                                                                                                                    80


       60                                                                                                                                                    60


       40                                                                                                                                                    40


       20                                                                                                                                                    20


        0                                                                                                                                                    0
            0          5          10          15          20           25        30          35          40          45          50         55          60
                                                                                                                                             Time (months)



                            JPN               KOR                LUX                  NLD             NZL                 NOR               POL
      100                                                                                                                                                    100


       80                                                                                                                                                    80


       60                                                                                                                                                    60


       40                                                                                                                                                    40


       20                                                                                                                                                    20


        0                                                                                                                                                    0
            0          5          10          15          20           25        30          35          40         45           50         55          60
                                                                                                                                             Time (months)




                           PRT                SVK                ESP                  SWE                CHE                GBR                   USA
      100                                                                                                                                                    100


       80                                                                                                                                                    80


       60                                                                                                                                                    60


       40                                                                                                                                                    40


       20                                                                                                                                                    20


        0                                                                                                                                                    0
            0          5          10          15          20           25        30          35          40         45           50         55          60
                                                                                                                                             Time (months)

  1. Month one refers to the first month of benefit receipt, i.e. following any waiting period. Previous in-work earnings are equal to APW. Children are aged 4 and
  6 and neither childcare benefits nor childcare costs are considered.
  Source: OECD, 2004, Benefits and Wages: OECD Indicators.                  www.oecd.org/els/social/workincentives




Source: OECD (2004b).



                                                                                                              63
                                                        Figure 15: Severity of labor market regulations across countries over time




                                                       OECD Indicator - I Labor Market Regulations
                                                       Source: OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics

              4.5


                4


              3.5


                3


              2.5


                2


              1.5




64
                1


              0.5


                0
                            s           m         ce            y              al          in       ly        e          k           ay          en         d                m              lia            a                      es
                       nd             iu                      an           g           a        Ita         ec         ar        w                        an              do           ra               ad                     at
                    rla            lg          an         m            rtu          Sp                    re          m        or              ed       nl                          st             an                       St
                                Be          Fr          er          Po                                   G         en         N           Sw          Fi               ng                         C                     d
                 the                                   G                                                          D                                                 Ki           Au
               e                                                                                                                                                d                                               n   ite
              N                                                                                                                                              te                                                U
                                                                                                                                                           ni
                                                                                                                                                          U

                                                                                                          1990    1998       2003




     Note: The indicator measures the stringency of national legislation on employment protection (EPL) which are a cardinal
     summary of a set of indicators converted to cardinal scores and normalized to range from 0 to 6, with higher scores representing
     stricter regulation. Included are indicators for individual dismissals for regular employment, temporary employment, collective
     dismissals, regular procedural inconveniences, notice and severance pay for dismissals by tenure categories, difficulty of dismissal
     for regular contracts, legislation on fixed-term contracts, temporary work agency contracts, the definition of collective dismissal,
     additional notification requirements, additional delays involved, and other special costs to employers.
                                        Figure 16: Taxation across OECD countries over time



         Marginal tax and average tax wedges and income progression
                     Source: OECD (2005e) Tax Data Base

                                   Total marginal tax wedge on labor income including
                                            consumption taxes (% of income)
       80.0%

       60.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
       40.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                   2003
       20.0%

        0.0%
                                                   y




                                                                                                    k


                                                                                                            ay


                                                                                                                      en
                                        e
                             m




                                                               l


                                                                        n


                                                                               ly


                                                                                         ce




                                                                                                                              nd




                                                                                                                                                               da



                                                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                                                                             m


                                                                                                                                                      lia
                   s




                                                            ga




                                                                                                 ar
                                                an




                                                                                                                                                                              e
                 nd




                                      c




                                                                        ai


                                                                              Ita
                           iu




                                                                                                                                          do


                                                                                                                                                    ra
                                                                                                            rw
                                   an




                                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                                                           at
                                                                                                                      ed




                                                                                                                                                               na
                                                                                                                               a
                                                          rtu


                                                                      Sp




                                                                                                nm
                                               m
                         lg




                                                                                     re
              la




                                                                                                                            nl




                                                                                                                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                    st
                                                                                                                                       ng
                                                                                                          No
                                   Fr




                                                                                                                    Sw




                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                       Be
            er




                                            er




                                                                                                                            Fi
                                                        Po




                                                                                     G




                                                                                                                                                  Au
                                                                                              De




                                                                                                                                      Ki




                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                            G
            th




                                                                                                                                                                    ite
          Ne




                                                                                                                                   d




                                                                                                                                                                  Un
                                                                                                                               ite
                                                                                                                             Un




                                   Total average tax wedge on labor income including
                                            consumption taxes (% of income)
        80.0%

        60.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
        40.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                   2003
        20.0%

        0.0%
                                                      y




                                                                                                      k


                                                                                                             ay


                                                                                                                       en
                                        e
                              m




                                                                l




                                                                                                                                 nd




                                                                                                                                                               da



                                                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                         n


                                                                                ly


                                                                                         ce




                                                                                                                                              m


                                                                                                                                                      lia
                    s




                                                             ga




                                                                                                   ar
                                                   an




                                                                                                                                                                             e
                  nd




                                       c




                                                                        ai


                                                                              Ita
                            iu




                                                                                                                                           do


                                                                                                                                                    ra
                                                                                                            rw
                                    an




                                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                                                          at
                                                                                                                      ed




                                                                                                                                                               na
                                                                                                                               a
                                                            rtu


                                                                      Sp




                                                                                                nm
                                                m
                            lg




                                                                                     re
                 la




                                                                                                                            nl




                                                                                                                                                                       St
                                                                                                                                                    st
                                                                                                                                        ng
                                                                                                          No
                                   Fr




                                                                                                                    Sw




                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                          Be
               er




                                             er




                                                                                                                            Fi
                                                          Po




                                                                                     G




                                                                                                                                                  Au
                                                                                              De




                                                                                                                                      Ki




                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                            G
             th




                                                                                                                                                                    ite
           Ne




                                                                                                                                   d




                                                                                                                                                                  Un
                                                                                                                               ite
                                                                                                                             Un




                                   Musgrave and Musgrave's coeffcient of residual income
                                                      progression
           1.1
             1
           0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
           0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                   2003
           0.7
           0.6
           0.5
                                                                                ly




                                                                                                                                                       lia
                              um




                                                     y




                                                                                                               ay


                                                                                                                       en


                                                                                                                                 nd



                                                                                                                                              m




                                                                                                                                                                              es
                                        ce




                                                                          n




                                                                                         ce
                                                                  l
                      s




                                                                                                    k




                                                                                                                                                                da
                                                               ga
                                                   an
                    nd




                                                                                                  ar
                                                                        ai


                                                                               Ita




                                                                                                                                           do


                                                                                                                                                     ra
                                                                                                            rw




                                                                                                                                                                            at
                                      an




                                                                                         e




                                                                                                                      ed



                                                                                                                                a




                                                                                                                                                              na
                                                            rtu


                                                                       Sp
                               i




                                                                                                nm
                                                  m
                            lg
                 rla




                                                                                      re




                                                                                                                             nl




                                                                                                                                                   st




                                                                                                                                                                          St
                                                                                                                                         ng
                                                                                                          No
                                    Fr




                                                                                                                    Sw




                                                                                                                                                             Ca
                          Be




                                                er




                                                                                                                            Fi
                                                          Po




                                                                                     G




                                                                                                                                                  Au
                e




                                                                                              De




                                                                                                                                       Ki




                                                                                                                                                                       d
             th




                                             G




                                                                                                                                                                    ite
           Ne




                                                                                                                                    d




                                                                                                                                                                  Un
                                                                                                                                 ite
                                                                                                                             Un




Notes: All tax rates apply to a single worker earning the average production wage without
children. For the US no consumption tax data were available. We assumed a US-consumption
tax of 5%.



                                                                                                                                    65
                                                       Figure 17: Labor force attachment older workers across countries




                                             Labor force participation rates by age (2002)
                                             Source: OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics
                              100


                               90


                               80


                               70


                               60




66
                               50


                               40




     Participation rate (%)
                               30


                               20


                               10


                                0
                                    15-19   20-24          25-29      30-34         35-39            40-44   45-49      50-54      55-59        60-64
                                                                                        Age group

                                             Netherlands           Belgium                  France            Germany           Portugal
                                             Spain                 Italy                    Greece            Denmark           Norway
                                             Sweden                United Kingdom           Australia         Canada            United States
                                            Figure 18: Labor force participation 55-59 year older workers across countries over time



                            Labor force participation rates 55−59 year old cohorts
                                 Australi                    Belgium                    Canada                     Denmark                    Finland




        .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                 France                      Germany                    Greece                       Italy                    Netherla




        .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                 Norway                      Portugal                    Spain                     Sweden                     United K




67
        .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                                                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000   1960 1970 1980 1990 2000   1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

                                 United S                   West Ger




        .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                        1960 1970 1980 1990 2000    1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

                                                                                      year
                                                   participation rate all                                      participation rate men
                                                   participation rate women


     Source: OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics
                                                                           68
                                            Age                                                                 Age
                        56
                             58
                                  60
                                       62
                                             64
                                                  66
                                                       68
                                                            70
                                                                 72
                                                                                            56
                                                                                                 58
                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                           62
                                                                                                                 64
                                                                                                                      66
                                                                                                                           68
                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                     72




                 1960                                                               1960
                 1962                                                               1962
                 1964                                                               1964
                 1966                                                               1966
                 1968                                                               1968
                 1970                                                               1970
                                                                      Netherlands




                 1972                                                               1972
   Denmark




                 1974                                                               1974
                 1976                                                               1976
                 1978                                                               1978
                 1980                                                               1980
   Norway
                                                                      Belgium




                 1982                                                               1982
                 1984                                                               1984
                 1986                                                               1986
                 1988                                                               1988
                 1990                                                               1990
   Sweden
                                                                      France




                 1992                                                               1992
                 1994                                                               1994
                 1996                                                               1996
                 1998                                                               1998
   Finland




                 2000                                                               2000
                 2002                                                               2002
                                                                      Germany
                                                                                           56
                                                                                                 58
                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                           62
                                                                                                                64
                                                                                                                      66
                                                                                                                           68
                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                     72




                        56
                             58
                                  60
                                       62
                                            64
                                                  66
                                                       68
                                                            70
                                                                 72




                                                                                    1960
                 1960
                                                                                    1962
                 1962
                                                                                    1964
                 1964
                                                                                    1966
                 1966
                                                                                    1968
                 1968
                 1970                                                               1970
                 1972                                                               1972




Canada
                                                                                    1974
                                                                      Portugal




                 1974
                 1976                                                               1976




United Kingdom
                 1978                                                               1978
                 1980                                                               1980
                                                                                                                                              Source: OECD (2005c) Social Indicators




                                                                      Spain
                 1982                                                               1982
                 1984                                                               1984
                 1986                                                               1986
                                                                                                                                          Average effective retirement age men (1960-2001)




                 1988                                                               1988

                                                                      Italy
                 1990                                                               1990




Australia
                 1992                                                               1992




United States
                 1994                                                               1994
                 1996                                                               1996




                                                                      Greece
                 1998                                                               1998
                 2000                                                               2000
                 2002                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 19: Development retirement age across countries over time
Figure 20: Labor force participation older workers and education level across countries




                         Labor force participation rates 55-59 year old cohorts by level
                                              of education (2002)
                                 Source: OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics

                   100

                    90

                    80

                    70

                    60
      Percent




                    50

                    40

                    30

                    20

                    10

                     0
                                                                                                        ay


                                                                                                        en




                                                                                                          a
                             s




                                         l




                                                                                 k
                                       ce




                                                      n




                                                                          e




                                                                                                        nd


                                                                                                         m
                                                                ly
                            m




                                                                                                        es
                                                                                                        lia
                                      ga
                           nd




                                                                              ar




                                                                                                       ad
                                                                       ec
                                                   ai

                                                            Ita
                          iu




                                                                                                     do
                                                                                        w




                                                                                                     ra
                                    an




                                                                                                     at
                                                                                                    ed


                                                                                                      a
                                   rtu


                                                 Sp




                                                                             m
                       rla




                                                                     re
                        lg




                                                                                                   an
                                                                                                    nl
                                                                                      or




                                                                                                   st




                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                  ng
                                 Fr




                                                                                                Sw
                                                                           en
                     Be




                                                                                                 Fi
                                 Po




                                                                     G




                                                                                     N




                                                                                               Au
                    he




                                                                                                C
                                                                                               Ki




                                                                                                d
                                                                          D




                                                                                             te
                  et




                                                                                             d




                                                                                           ni
                 N




                                                                                          te




                                                                                         U
                                                                                        ni
                                                                                       U




                            Less than upper secondary level                            Upper and post-secondary level
                            Tertiary non-university level                              Levels that correspond to both ISCED 5A and 6




                         Labor force participation rates 60-64 year old cohorts by level
                                              of education (2002)
                                 Source: OECD (2006a) Labor Force Statistics

                    90

                    80

                    70

                    60

                    50
       Percent




                    40

                    30

                    20

                    10

                     0
                                                                                                        ay


                                                                                                        en




                                                                                                          a
                             s




                                                                                 k
                                             l
                                    ce




                                                      n




                                                                          e




                                                                                                        nd


                                                                                                         m
                                                                ly
                            m




                                                                                                        es
                                                                                                        lia
                                           ga
                           nd




                                                                              ar




                                                                                                       ad
                                                                       ec
                                                   ai

                                                            Ita
                          iu




                                                                                                     do
                                                                                        w




                                                                                                     ra
                                 an




                                                                                                     at
                                                                                                    ed


                                                                                                      a
                                        rtu


                                                 Sp




                                                                             m
                       rla




                                                                     re
                        lg




                                                                                                   an
                                                                                                    nl
                                                                                      or




                                                                                                   st




                                                                                                  St
                                                                                                  ng
                                 Fr




                                                                                                Sw
                                                                           en
                     Be




                                                                                                 Fi
                                      Po




                                                                     G




                                                                                     N




                                                                                               Au
                    he




                                                                                                C
                                                                                               Ki




                                                                                                d
                                                                          D




                                                                                             te
                  et




                                                                                             d




                                                                                           ni
                 N




                                                                                          te




                                                                                         U
                                                                                        ni
                                                                                       U




                            Less than upper secondary level                            Upper and post-secondary level
                            Tertiary non-university level                              Levels that correspond to both ISCED 5A and 6




                                                                                                 69
                                       Figure 21: Pension benefits as a fraction of pre-retirement earnings across countries




                        Gross and net pension replacement incomes for workers with average
                                           earnings (% of final earnings)
                                    Source: OECD (2005d) Pensions at a Glance

           120.0



           100.0



            80.0




70
            60.0




     (%)
            40.0



            20.0



             0.0
                            s           m         ce            y              al          in       ly        e            k            ay          en         d                m              lia            a                  es
                       nd             iu                      an           g           a        Ita         ec           ar         w                        an              do           ra               ad                 at
                     la            lg          an         m            rtu          Sp                    re            m         or              ed       nl                          st             an                   St
                  er            Be          Fr          er          Po                                   G         en            N           Sw          Fi             i ng                         C                 d
                h                                      G                                                          D                                                    K            Au
              et                                                                                                                                                   d                                           n   ite
             N                                                                                                                                                  te                                            U
                                                                                                                                                              ni
                                                                                                                                                             U

                                                                                                              Gross        Net
                          Figure 22: Implicit tax rates (pre-)retirement schemes across countries




   Fall in male labour participation between two consecutive age groups and implicit tax rates on continued work, 1999 1

Panel A.

  Percentage change in labour force participation between 50-54 and 55-592
  0
             ISL
                         JAP
  -5                           NOR          SWE
            NZL
 -10               USA
                                            GBR
            AUS                                                          DEU
 -15                                                         IRL                                 ESP
                   CAN                CHE                                             PRT

 -20
                                                                                                                         FIN          NLD
 -25                                                                                 FRA        AUT

 -30
                                                                              ITA               BEL
 -35

                                                                                                                                                  LUX
 -40
       0                  10          20          30         40                 50               60                 70                80                90         100

                                                                                                 Implicit tax on continued work, 55-59, per cent

Panel B.

                                                                                           3
  Percentage change in labour force participation between 55-59 and 60-64
  0

 -10               ISL
                                       CHE
 -20         KOR                                       JAP
                                           NOR    IRL                                                      PRT
 -30 USA           NZL
                                      GBR
           AUS                 SWE
 -40                     CAN
                                                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                 ESP
 -50
                                                                                                         FIN
 -60                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                BEL                                 NLD
 -70                                                                                                            LUX
                                                                                               AUT                    FRA
 -80
       0             10          20          30         40         50           60              70             80              90           100              110    120

                                                                                                      Implicit tax on continued work, 60-64, per cent

1. Implicit tax rates are calculated for a single worker with average earnings in 1999. In some cases, the results differ from those
presented in Figure 4, which refer to currently legislated systems. These differences reflect either policy changes that took place
after 1999 (e.g. Finland, France) or the future implementation of measures that were already legislated but had not yet come into
effect in 1999 (e.g. the future maturation of the Superannuation Guarantee Scheme in Australia, the transition from the "old" to the
"new" pension sytem in Italy).
2. (Pr55-59 - Pr50-54) / Pr50-54, per cent.
3. (Pr60-64 - Pr55-59) / Pr55-59, per cent.

Source: OECD.




Source: OECD (2004c).




                                                                                                  71
                                                                   Figure 23:
                             Rates of Return to Human Capital Investment Initially
                                Setting Investment to be Equal Across all Ages
       Rate of
       Return to                              Preschool Programs
       Investment
       in Human
       Capital

                                                               Schooling


                 r




72
                                                                                          Job Training




                         Preschool          School                          Post School
                     0                                     Age
               Rates of Return to Human Capital Investment Initially Setting Investment to be Equal Across all Ages




     Source: Carneiro and Heckman (2003).
                          Figure 24: Optimal paths of labor supply, education, and retirement with exogenous OJT and varying policies


                          Optimal paths of labor supply, education, and retirement for various policies


                                                     A: Labor taxation                                                                B: Education subsidies

       1                                                                                              1
      0.9                                                                                           0.9
      0.8                                                                                           0.8
      0.7                                                                                           0.7
                                                                                                    0.6
      0.6
                                                                                                    0.5
      0.5
                                                                                                    0.4
      0.4
                                                                                                    0.3
      0.3                                                                                           0.2
      0.2                                                                                           0.1
      0.1                                                                                             0
       0                                                                                                  6   9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81
            6    9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81                                                              Age
                                                              Age
                                                                                                                      Baseline (σ = 0.75)            σ=0                    σ = 0.25
                Baseline (τ = 0.5)         τ = 0.2                    τ = 0.3             τ = 0.4                     σ = 0.5                        σ = 1.0                σ = 1.25
                τ = 0.6                    τ = 0.7                    τ = 0.8                                         σ = 1.5



                                             C: Implicit tax retirement                                                            D: International comparison




73
       1                                                                                             1
      0.9                                                                                           0.9
      0.8                                                                                           0.8
      0.7                                                                                           0.7
      0.6                                                                                           0.6
      0.5                                                                                           0.5
      0.4                                                                                           0.4
      0.3                                                                                           0.3
      0.2                                                                                           0.2
      0.1                                                                                           0.1
       0                                                                                             0
            6    9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81                6   9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81
                                                              Age                                                                                       Age

                                Baseline (ς = 0.3)          ς = 0.1             ς = 0.2                                         Continental Europe             Mediterranean countries
                                ς = 0.4                     ς = 0.5             ς = 0.6                                         Nordic countries               Anglo-Saxon countries




     Baseline parameters: pure rate of time preference ρ = 0.02, real interest rate r = 0.04, intertemporal elasticity of substitution
     in consumption θ = 2, intertemporal elasticity of labor supply ε = 0.5, human capital production function: W (S) ≡ AS α ,
     α = 0.55, A > 0, uncompensated elasticity labor supply 0.2, uncompensated elasticity retirement 0.2, direct costs of education
     P = 10, time horizon T = 75 years. Baseline policy: tax rate labor τL = 0.5, tax rate savings τA = 0, subsidy on education
     s = 0.75, and retirement wedge % = 0.3. See Jacobs (2009a) for more details.
                                                   Figure 25: Optimal paths of OJT-investment, earnings, and retirement for varying policies


                 Optimal paths of OJT-investment and retirement for tax and retirement policies


                    OJT-investment as a fraction of total time over the life-cycle                                                           Labor earnings over the life-cycle for varying labor tax rates
                                   for varying labor tax rates


      0.8                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                              45
      0.7
                                                                                                                              40
      0.6
                                                                                                                              35
      0.5                                                                                                                     30
      0.4                                                                                                                     25
      0.3                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                              15
      0.2
                                                                                                                              10
      0.1                                                                                                                     5
      0.0                                                                                                                     0
            20         25          30             35             40         45        50         55        60            65        20   25       30       35      40     45     50        55       60        65           70        75       80
                                                                      Age                                                                                                      Age

                                 tl=0              tl=0.2              tl=0.4          tl=0.6          tl=0.8                                          tl=0         tl=0.2           tl=0.4             tl=0.6             tl=0.8



                    OJT-investment as a fraction of total time over the life-cycle                                                      Labor earnings over the life-cycle for varying implicit tax rates on




74
                            for varying implicit tax rates on retirement                                                                                            retirement


      0.9                                                                                                                     60
      0.8
                                                                                                                              50
      0.7
      0.6                                                                                                                     40
      0.5
                                                                                                                              30
      0.4
      0.3                                                                                                                     20
      0.2
                                                                                                                              10
      0.1
      0.0                                                                                                                      0
            20    25        30          35        40        45        50        55    60        65    70        75       80        20   25       30       35      40     45     50        55       60            65       70        75      80
                                                                      Age                                                                                                      Age

                 tr=-0.4                tr=-0.2             tr=0             tr=0.2         tr=0.4              tr=0.6                       tr=-0.4           tr=-0.2        tr=0             tr=0.2                 tr=0.4             tr=0.6




     Baseline parameters: pure rate of time preference ρ = 0.02, real interest rate r = 0.04, intertemporal elasticity of substitution
     θ = 1.25, uncompensated elasticity retirement = 0.2, Cobb-Douglas production function for OJT: F (It , Ht ) ≡ (It Ht )α , α = 0.6,
     time horizon T = 60 years. Baseline policy: tax rate labor τL = 0.5, tax rate savings τA = 0, and retirement wedge % = 0.3.
     See Jacobs (2009b) for more details.
