                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    COMMODITY PRICES, COMMODITY CURRENCIES, AND GLOBAL ECONOMIC
                          DEVELOPMENTS

                                            Jan J. J. Groen
                                           Paolo A. Pesenti

                                         Working Paper 15743
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15743


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2010




We thank Kalok Chan, Takatoshi Ito, Warwick McKibbin, Roberto Mariano, John Romalis, Andrew
Rose, two reviewers, and conference participants at the EASE-20 conference in Hong Kong for many
helpful suggestions, as well as Spencer Amdur for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
here are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, the Federal Reserve System, any other institution with which the authors are affiliated,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jan J. J. Groen and Paolo A. Pesenti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Commodity prices, commodity currencies, and global economic developments
Jan J. J. Groen and Paolo A. Pesenti
NBER Working Paper No. 15743
February 2010
JEL No. C23,C53,F47

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper we seek to produce forecasts of commodity price movements that can systematically
improve on naive statistical benchmarks, and revisit the forecasting performance of changes in commodity
currencies as efficient predictors of commodity prices, a view emphasized in the recent literature. In
addition, we consider different types of factor-augmented models that use information from a large
data set containing a variety of indicators of supply and demand conditions across major developed
and developing countries. These factor-augmented models use either standard principal components
or partial least squares (PLS) regression to extract dynamic factors from the data set. Our forecasting
analysis considers ten alternative indices and sub-indices of spot prices for three different commodity
classes across different periods. We find that the exchange rate-based model and especially the PLS
factor-augmented model are more prone to outperform the naive statistical benchmarks. However,
across our range of commodity price indices we are not able to generate out-of-sample forecasts that,
on average, are systematically more accurate than predictions based on a random walk or autoregressive
specifications.


Jan J. J. Groen
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
jan.groen@ny.frb.org

Paolo A. Pesenti
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
aOVR&(35Dnd NBER
paolo.pesenti@ny.frb.org
1       Introduction
In a June 2008 speech, signi…cantly titled “Outstanding Issues in the Analysis of In‡ation”,
Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke [3] singled out the role of commodity prices among the
main drivers of price dynamics, “underscoring the importance for policy of both forecasting
commodity price changes and understanding the factors that drive those changes”. While
in‡ationary pressures were very much in the minds of monetary policymakers across the
globe at that time, the macroeconomic outlook changed rapidly and dramatically in the
months following the speech, as the global economy experienced the near-collapse of trade
volumes and the associated plunge in commodity prices was the harbinger of pervasive
disin‡ation risks. During the second half of 2009 the signs of an approaching recovery did
re-emerge worldwide. At the time of this writing (end 2009) a rally in commodity prices,
once again, is resurrecting in‡ationary threats.
     Are they justi…ed? Are they premature? The answers to these questions depend on
a long list of variables, and are subject to many caveats. First, pass-through of commod-
ity price swings to …nal retail prices takes time; IMF [25] reports estimates of an average
propagation lag of about 9-12 months for the transmission of oil price shocks, and up to
30 months for the transmission of food price shocks. Second, intensity of use a¤ects a
country’s CPI vulnerability to commodity price swings. For instance, energy intensity is
typically lower in advanced economies than in emerging and developing countries, and food
expenditure represents over one-third of consumption in emerging economies, but only one
tenth of consumption in advanced economies. Third, monetary policy credibility matters.
Under regimes of high credibility, changes in the prices of oil, industrial metals and agricul-
tural commodities can have a signi…cant impact on headline in‡ation without unmooring
medium-term in‡ation expectations. But expectations under weak policy credibility depend
on current and past in‡ation, enhancing the impact of commodity price shifts on core in-
‡ation. Fourth, exchange rates can amplify or mitigate the transmission mechanism, as
commodities are typically priced in dollars, while retail prices are denominated in local cur-
rencies (according to IMF [25], a 1 percent e¤ective dollar depreciation raises oil prices in
dollars by more than 1 percent).1
     More than anything, the link between commodity price cycles and in‡ation is bound to
be a¤ected by the size and persistence of commodity price movements, and in this respect,
recent swings in commodity prices have been nothing short of spectacular. Following large
increases between 2003 and 2006, oil prices accelerated and more than doubled between

    1 See   also Key…tz [26] and Verleger [33].




                                                  1
the end of 2006 and the time of the aforementioned Bernanke speech. Food prices rose by
about 50 percent over the same time horizon, with particularly rapid trajectories for corn,
wheat, rice and soybeans. To …nd traces of a comparable boom one has to go back to the
early 1970s, as no major commodity cycle materialized during the 1980s or the 1990s. The
subsequent price bust in late 2008 was just as dramatic as this most recent pick-up. Between
July 2008 and February 2009, energy prices collapsed by 70 percent, and agricultural prices
by 37 percent.2
   Long-term trends in fundamentals, slower population growth and weaker global income
and output growth suggest that the recent peaks are unlikely to be the new norm (see World
Bank [34]). But what will come next is by no means an easy prediction — which is precisely
the key message of the current contribution.
   The ‘easy way out’of relying on commodity futures as signals of future spot price move-
ments is, in practice, highly inadequate.3 A long literature emphasizes that commodity price
dynamics are in‡uenced in theory and in practice by a large variety of factors, including
but not limited to growth in large emerging economies, inventory and supply constraints,
monetary and exchange rate policies, and possibly …nancial speculation. Section 2 of this
paper provides a succinct summary of the di¤erent arguments. In light of these consid-
erations, the search for a comprehensive approach to forecasting is bound to be quixotic.
Nevertheless, a recent paper by Chen, Rogo¤ and Rossi [8] (hereinafter CRR) appears to
provide a pragmatic Ariadne’s thread to approach the maze.
   According to CRR, exchange rate ‡uctuations of relatively small commodity-exporting
countries such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Chile and South Africa with market-
based ‡oating exchange rates have “remarkably robust power in predicting future global
commodity prices.” While the basic notion that changes in commodity currencies are cor-
related with commodity prices is not new in the literature, CRR provides a systematic
attempt to document and test the forecasting properties of a small set of commodity cur-
rencies as explanatory variables, with surprisingly promising results both in-sample (using
Granger-causality tests robust to parameter instabilities) and out-of-sample.
   The results from CRR [8] are the direct motivation for our contribution. The basic idea is
to take a broad index of di¤erent spot commodity prices as the forecast variable (we consider
ten alternative indices and sub-indices for three di¤erent commodity classes), and compare
the forecasting properties of three approaches against a baseline autoregressive or random

   2 On the links between commodity prices and in‡ation see also Cecchetti and Moessner [7] and Hobijn

[22].
  3 See   the paper by Chan, Tse and Williams in this volume for a recent assessment.




                                                     2
walk process. The three approaches include a model in which forecasts are based only on the
information embedded in observed past movements of commodity currencies, as in CRR,
and two variants of a factor-augmented regression model that makes use of information from
a relatively large data set, as described below. The purpose of our exercise is ultimately to
provide an agnostic but reasonably systematic look at the global roots of commodity price
dynamics. Rather than attempting to answer questions such as “why are commodity prices
so high or so low ”and “how long are they going to stay where they are”, our contribution
has the more modest purpose of providing an empirical assessment of the extent to which
information embedded in indicators of global economic developments may help in predicting
movements of commodity prices, by improving upon the naive statistical benchmarks or the
CRR approach.
   The main conclusions of the paper can be summarized as follows. We are able to provide
some corroboration, albeit rather mild, for the CRR results. For one speci…c commodity
index, at the shortest forecasting horizons (up to one-quarter ahead), the predictions of
an exchange rate-based model are signi…cantly better than those based on a random walk,
although they do not outperform an autoregressive speci…cation; at the one-year ahead
horizon, the performance is reverted, as the CRR model signi…cantly outperforms the au-
toregressive benchmark but not the random walk. When other indices are considered, the
results are nuanced. We also …nd that a model encompassing principal components extracted
from a panel of global economic explanatory variables generally performs poorly. We obtain
more promising results when we replace the principal components approach with a di¤erent
methodology (a partial least squares factor-augmented model), suggesting that information
from a larger set of macrovariables can have some predictive power. However, across com-
modity indices we cannot generate forecasts that are, on average, structurally more accurate
and robust than those based on a random walk or autoregressive speci…cations.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a synthetic survey of the di¤erent
arguments used to rationalize and predict shifts in commodity prices. Section 3 describes the
methodology used in constructing our exchange rate-based and factor-augmented regression
models and assessing their forecasting properties against the naive statistical benchmarks.
Section 4 reports and discusses our results. Section 5 concludes.




                                             3
2     Interpreting commodity price cycles
In retrospect, and with the advantage of hindsight, one can always attempt to rationalize
movements of commodity prices in terms of supply and demand fundamentals.4 Taking for
instance the case of oil prices, Hamilton [20] emphasizes that, while historical oil price shocks
were primarily caused by physical disruptions of supply, the price run-up of 2007-08 was
caused by strong demand confronting stagnating world production and little spare capacity.5
A mismatch between fast demand growth and increasing intensity of GDP in countries such
as China on the one hand,6 and slow-growing supply capacity due to sluggish investment
until the early 2000s on the other hand, similarly explains the path of industrial metals
(see [34]). As far as food prices were concerned, weather shocks and supply bottlenecks
certainly played a role in the recent cycle. But the decline in global inventory in the mid-
2000s was mainly the result of strong growth of consumption in emerging and developing
economies. Also, attempts to avoid the consequences of rising fuel prices by exploring
alternative sources of energy led governments to revise their biofuel mandates and subsidize
production. The outcome was soaring demand for corn and some vegetable oils. Because
of corn-based ethanol production in the U.S., about 30 percent of the entire corn crop was
diverted toward production of biofuels (see [25]).7
    Understanding long-run trend movements in fundamentals, however, does little to en-
hance our ability to predict the extent, persistence, or volatility of changes in short-term
supply and demand, nor their e¤ects on commodity prices. Take once again the case of
oil. The argument can be made that increasing extraction costs in marginal …elds imply
that future capacity will be built at higher costs. At the same time, short-term demand
price elasticity is likely to remain rather low (below 0.1 according to most estimates), even
though income elasticities are somewhat higher.8 As a result, small revisions in the expected

   4 Structural macroeconomic fundamentals were emphasized in early papers on the determination and

forecasting of commodity prices such as Reinhart [28] and Borensztein and Reinhart [5].
   5 Kilian [27] downplays the contribution of current supply disruptions to price movements, attributing

‡uctuations in the price of oil to “precautionary demand associated with market conditions about the
availability of future oil supplies”.
  6 Currently GDP metal intensity in China is four times higher than in developed countries. Going forward,

China’s metal intensity is expected to peak and move closer to the world’s average (see [34]).
   7 Going forward, even assuming that food demand will slow with lower population growth and strong

productivity growth will ensure adequate food supply, biofuels could expand demand rapidly, with associated
upside risks for corn prices (see [34]).
   8 The price elasticity may be time varying. For instance, in the early part of the past decade the initial

response of U.S. consumers to oil price increases was relatively muted due, among other factors, to the low
share of gasoline in consumption spending. By 2007-8 energy had returned to an importance for a typical
budget not seen since the 1970s, enhancing the sensitivity of consumers’behaviors to bad news about energy
prices (see [20]).




                                                     4
path of future supply expansion can have large and highly volatile e¤ects on expected fu-
ture prices. Heuristically, one can understand the di¢ culties related to predicting oil price
changes by visualizing the market for oil as the overimposition of a virtually vertical line
(inelastic demand) with another vertical line (inelastic supply). While the quantity traded
is not in doubt, the equilibrium price in such market is very much in the eye of the be-
holder. Minor movements of either curves, related to small adjustments in inventories or
marginal changes in extraction decisions, can have sizable (and unpredictable) e¤ects on
prices.9 Similar considerations may apply, ceteris paribus, to other commodity classes.
    The extent and volatility of recent swings have prompted some observers to dismiss at-
tempts to rationalize and predict commodity price movements in terms of fundamentals,
and focus instead on the role of other factors such as speculative behaviors in the futures
markets. The basic idea is that speculative strategies that drive futures prices up must be
re‡ected in higher spot prices today regardless of long-term fundamentals, or agents would
have an incentive to accumulate inventories which could be sold later at higher prices. More
generally, commodity prices are forward-looking variables that re‡ect and process expecta-
tions about future price changes. The e¤ects of speculative and forward-looking behaviors
are likely to be stronger in an environment of rapid declines in short-term interest rates,
lowering the opportunity cost of physical commodity holding as emphasized by Frankel [15],
and prompting investors in money-market instruments to seek higher yields in alternative
asset classes such as commodity futures. In this light, very rapid declines of short-term rates
in early 2008 may have “fanned the ‡ames of commodity speculation”as Hamilton [20] puts
it.10
    The jury is still out on whether speculation can e¤ectively drive spot prices. A 2008
report of the Interagency Task Force on Commodity Markets [24] did not …nd speculation
behind higher oil prices: if anything, speculators tended to react after, rather than in
anticipation of, price changes. Skeptic rebu¤s of the speculation theory point out that
speculation in the futures market can raise spot prices to the extent that it is accompanied
by increasing physical hoarding. But there is no systematic inventory hoarding evidence
in recent episodes of high volatility in spot commodity prices. If anything, oil inventories
were moving downward, not upward at the time of sharpest price movements, suggesting
that inventory changes served to mitigate rather than aggravate the magnitude of oil price

   9 The observed large volatility in the rate of change of non-renewable minerals and fossil fuels, as well

as the absence of long-term positive trends makes it di¢ cult to reconcile the empirical evidence with the
prescriptions of the Hotelling’s rule [23]. According to this rule, the price of non-renewable resources should
be growing continuously at a rate that tends towards the rate of interest as the share of cost in price gets
smaller and smaller over time. For a recent assessment see Gauded [16].
  1 0 See   also Akram [1].



                                                      5
shocks (see [24]). A related mechanism linking futures and spot prices requires current
production to be foregone (including the deliberate choice to keep oil in the ground) in
response to anticipated higher future prices. The fact is that, to rationalize a speculation-
based interpretation of the oil shocks of 2007-08, one needs a combination of two elements:
low price elasticity of demand and failure of physical production to increase. But these
are precisely the two key ingredients of a fundamentals-only explanation as pointed out by
Hamilton [20], so that, ultimately, the two approaches are observationally equivalent.11
   One could argue that, regardless of speculation, futures prices should help to predict the
direction of future price movements, as they e¢ ciently incorporate information available to
market participants. But futures prices provide, at best, highly noisy signals about future
spot prices.12 The di¤erence between the futures price and the current spot price (or futures
basis) is not in itself an indicator of the expected direction of change of spot commodity
prices, as it re‡ects both the expected decline in the spot price and a risk premium. Gorton
and Rouwenhorst [19] suggest that the basis “seems to carry important information about
the risk premium of individual commodities”, somewhat downplaying the role of market
expectations about the expected spot return. Also, it is unclear whether prices in relatively
illiquid segments of the futures market such as longer-dated contracts can be considered
unbiased and e¤ective aggregators of information.
   A di¤erent — and more promising — approach exploits the forward-looking nature of a
di¤erent category of asset prices, namely exchange rates. As shown forcefully by Engel and
West [14], bilateral exchange rates between any pair countries re‡ect expectations about
future changes in the underlying relative economic fundamentals. Therefore, exchange rates
of predominantly commodity-exporting economies vis-à-vis, say, the U.S. should re‡ect ex-
pectations about demand and supply conditions in world commodity markets. This is the
rationale for the …nding by CRR [8] that commodity exchange rates can be remarkably
e¤ective predictors of future commodity prices. CRR observe that primary commodity
products represent a key component of output in the …ve commodity-exporting countries
under consideration, a¤ecting a large fraction (between 25 and more than 50 percent) of their
export earnings. At the same time these countries are too small to have monopoly power
on international relative prices through the manipulation of the supply of their exports,
so that global commodity price changes end up representing sizable term of trade shocks
for these countries. Market expectations of these changes are priced into current exchange
rates, through standard forward-looking mechanisms. Ultimately, observable movements in

 1 1 See   also Slade and Thille [30].
 1 2 For   a survey of the evidence see Bowman and Husain [6].



                                                     6
a small number of exchange rates embed valuable information on the direction of change of
future commodity prices, making commodity currencies signi…cantly better predictors than
standard approaches based on traditional statistical models (such as a random walk or a
mean-reverting autoregressive process).
    In light of the above considerations, a pragmatic approach to commodity prices forecast-
ing is to use information from a large variety of indicators of supply and demand conditions
across major developed and developing countries, complementing the forecasting power of
commodity currencies with the one embedded in current global economic developments.
The set of macro-economic time series we consider includes industrial production, business
and consumer con…dence data, retail sales volumes, unemployment rates, core consumer
prices (excluding food and energy), money aggregates and interest rates, as well as data on
inventories and production of industrial metals, oil, natural gas and coal, and more unusual
variables such as the Baltic Dry Index (BDI) — an index which captures the average price
of ocean shipping, aggregating prices of many di¤erent routes and types of shipping vessels.
The complete list of variables we consider can be found in the Data Appendix.


3     Methodological issues
3.1     Three speci…cations of the forecasting equation

Turning now to the formal aspects of our exercise, in what follows we focus on the perfor-
mance of direct forecasts from fundamentals-based regressions for a number of commodity
price indices.13 Following standard practice in the forecasting literature, we use an autore-
gressive (AR) model as the forecasting benchmark for such regressions. The AR benchmark
model in the context of direct forecasting can be written as:
                                          k
                                          X
                                  h
                      pt+h;t =        +          i   pt   i+1;t i      +   t+h;t ;     t = 1; : : : ; T             (1)
                                          i=1

where pt = ln(Pt ) and Pt is a spot commodity price index,                                pt+h;t = pt+h      pt for the
forecasting horizon h > 0, and            pt   i+1;t i    = pt     i+1     pt    i   for i = 1; : : : ; k. The number of
lagged …rst di¤erences k in (1) is determined by sequentially applying the standard Schwarz
[29] Bayesian information criterion (BIC) starting with a maximum lag order of k = kmax
down to p = 1. The unconditional mean benchmark is simply:

                                                               h
                                               pt+h;t =            +   t+h;t ;                                      (2)

  1 3 While the time-series reduced-form approach of the paper provides a simple and ‡exible framework

for our forecasting exercise, it sacri…ces the information embedded in a medium- or large-scale econometric
model. As an example of a stochastic dynamic general-equilibrium model dealing with the transmission of
commodity prices in the global economy, see [13].



                                                           7
which implies a random walk (RW) forecast for the level of the forecast variable pt .
   The benchmark models in (1) and (2) use solely the information embedded in the com-
modity price time series itself. However, when forecasting commodity price changes, it might
be useful to incorporate information from additional, theoretically relevant, variables. For
instance, CRR [8] explore the usefulness of exchange rates to predict commodity prices.
Consistently, we follow CRR [8] and modify (1) by adopting the following speci…cation for
the exchange rate-based model :
                                               M
                                               X                  k
                                                                  X
                                       h
                            pt+h;t =       +         m    em
                                                           t +               i    pt    i+1;t i   +   t+h;t :   (3)
                                               m=1                i=1

In (3)      e1t ; : : : ; eM
                           t are the …rst di¤erences of the log U.S. dollar exchange rates of M

commodity-exporting economies.
   More generally, from a forecasting vantage point it might be useful to exploit information
from a set of economically relevant variables not limited to commodity exchange rates. For
this purpose, factor-augmented regressions provide a convenient approach. One seminal
application of the use of factor-augmented regressions is Stock and Watson [32], where
a limited number of principal components extracted from a large data set are added to a
standard linear regression model, that is then used to forecast key macroeconomic variables.
Stock and Watson [31] and Bai [2] formalized the underlying asymptotic theory, which allows
the use of principal components to identify the common factors in very large data sets. Our
factor-augmented regressions adhere to the following speci…cation:
                                               r
                                               X                  k
                                                                  X
                                       h             h PC
                            pt+h;t =       +         i fi;t   +          i       pt    j+1;t j    +   t+h;t :   (4)
                                               i=1                j=1

Following Stock and Watson [32] we take a T                             N matrix of N indicator variables, say
X =      (x01    x0T )0 ,   and normalize X such that the variables are in zero-mean and unity
variance space, which results in the T                            ~ We then compute the r eigenvectors
                                                         N matrix X.
of the N                 ~ 0X
                N matrix X  ~ that correspond to the …rst r^ largest eigenvalues of that matrix.
                    ~ with these eigenvectors we obtain the estimated factors f P C used in
By post-multiplying X                                                          i;t

(4).
   The drawback of the aforementioned factor-augmented regression approach is that the
use of principal components does not always guarantee that the information extracted from
a large number of predictors is particularly useful in the context of the speci…c forecasting
exercise. Boivin and Ng [4] make it clear that if the forecasting power comes from a certain
factor, this factor can be dominated by other factors in a large data set, as the principal
components solely provide the best …t for the large data set and not for the target variable
of interest. We therefore consider an alternative to principal components in which only


                                                              8
the factors relevant for modeling the target variable, commodity price changes in our case,
are extracted from the predictor variable set. One possible approach is partial least squares
(PLS) regression. As Groen and Kapetanios [17] show, PLS regression outperforms the usual
principal components-based approach both in simulations and empirically, and especially
when the underlying factor structure is weak.14
    We implement PLS regression by constructing the factors as linear, orthogonal combina-
tions of the (normalized) predictor variables assembled in the T                               ~ = (~
                                                                                      N matrix X    x01           ~0T )0 ,
                                                                                                                  x
such that the linear combinations maximize the covariance between the h-period ahead com-
modity price changes and each of the common components constructed from the predictor
variables. In practice, we specify the corresponding factor-augmented regression model as:
                                             r
                                             X                   k
                                                                 X
                                     h              h P LS
                       pt+h;t =          +          i fi;t   +         i   pt   j+1;t j   +   t+h;t ;                (5)
                                             i=1                 j=1

where the PLS factors are extracted according to a similar scheme as in Groen and Kapetan-
ios [17], namely:

   1. Demean        pt+h;t resulting in            p~t+h;t and set ut =         p~t+h;t and vi;t = x
                                                                                                   ~l;t , l = 1; :::N .
      If lagged price changes are included in (5), regress both                           p~t+h;t as well as the x
                                                                                                                 ~l;t ’s
                                                                           15
      on     pt   j+1;t j   for l = 1; : : : ; N and j = 1; : : : ; k.          Denote the resulting residuals as
         pt+h;t and xl;t ’s l = 1; : : : ; N . Set ut =           pt+h;t and vi;t = xl;t , l = 1; :::N . Finally,
      set i = 1.

   2. Determine the N            1 vector of loadings wi = (w1i                  wN i )0 by computing individual
      covariances: wli = Cov(ut ; vit ), l = 1; :::; N and t = 1; : : : ; T                    h. Construct the i-th
      PLS factor by taking the linear combination given by wi0 vt and denote this factor by
       P LS
      fi;t  .

                                                                                 P LS
   3. Regress ut and vl;t , l = 1; :::; N , t = 1; : : : ; T               h on fi;t  . Denote the residuals of
      these regressions by u
                           ~t and v~l;t respectively.

   4. If i = r stop, else set ut = u
                                   ~t , vl;t = v~l;t l = 1; ::; N and i = i + 1 and go to step 2.

  1 4 One condition under which principal components provide consistent estimates of the unobserved factor

structure in a large data set is when these factors strongly dominate the dynamics of the series in such
a data set relative to the non-factor components of the data (see, e.g., Bai [2]). However, in practice the
factors might not dominate the non-structural dynamics as strongly as assumed in the underlying asymptotic
theory. This a¤ects the accuracy of the factors estimated through principal components. PLS regression,
on the other hand, yields consistent factor estimates even in the latter case — see [17].
  1 5 As the weights (also known as loadings) of the predictor variables in each of the constructed PLS factors

depend on the covariance of these with commodity price changes, the inclusion of lagged commodity price
changes will a¤ect these loading estimates.




                                                             9
   Selecting the optimal number of factors in the aforementioned factor-augmented regres-
sion approaches is a crucial issue, as is the optimal lag order. Moreover, this selection
process is complicated by the fact the factors in (4) and (5) are generated regressors. In
…nite samples, the estimation error from a generated regressor adds to the overall estimation
error variance in a regression. So in determining whether to include a regressor one should
balance in the standard case the increase in goodness of …t with adding the noise of an
extra free parameter, whereas in the case of a generated regressor the trade-o¤ is between
improvement of …t and adding noise of both an extra parameter and an extra, estimated,
variable. The latter model selection problem rules out the usage of standard measures such
as BIC. Instead, in the cases of (4) and (5) we adopt the factor- and lag-order selection
criterion as proposed in Groen and Kapetanios [18]. The following information criterion is
valid for both regressions (4) and (5) under the framework spelled out in Theorem 2 of [18]:

                               T                                          T
                  BICM =         lnf^^2 g + (1 + k) ln(T ) + r ln(T ) 1 +           ;              (6)
                               2                                          N

where ^^ is the standard OLS variance estimator. The third right hand side term in the
BICM measure above is a penalty term for adding the estimated factors to regressions (4)
and (5). This term is motivated by the result that, when in the underlying panel of predictor
variables the dimensions T and N go to in…nity, the factors become observed. Therefore,
the dimensions of this underlying panel determine the penalization for the number of factors
in …nite samples. Hence, searching for the optimal values of the modi…ed IC in (6) provides
the econometrician with a consistent, simultaneous, estimate of the optimal values of r and
k in regression (4) and (5).

3.2    Assessing the forecasting properties

Before we proceed we need to deal with the realistic possibility that the dynamics of the
forecasting variable (commodity prices in our case) has not been stable over time. Our
approach is to update the forecasting models based on a …xed rolling window of historical
data encompassing ! periods. In detail, the steps are as follows:

  1. For any given forecast horizon h, the …rst forecast is generated on t0 = !.

  2. Extract rmax principal components and PLS factors from the N predictor variables
      over the sample t = t0     ! + 1; : : : ; t0    h.

  3. Determine over the sample t = t0          ! + 1; : : : ; t0   h the optimal lag order and optimal
      number of factors in both (4) and (5) for our criterion BICM (see (6)) across the
      range j = 0; : : : ; k max and i = 1; : : : ; rmax . This results in (k^BICM
                                                                              PC       PC
                                                                                   ; r^BICM ) and


                                                     10
     (k^BICM
        P LS     P LS
             ; r^BICM ). In a similar vein, determine also the optimal lag order for the AR
     benchmark (1) and the exchange rate-based model (3) based on BIC.

  4. Given the outcome of step 3, estimate (1)-(5) over the sample t = t0                             ! + 1; : : : ; t0    h
     for each h.

  5. Extract rmax principal components and PLS factors from the N predictor variables
     over the sample t = t0         ! + 1; : : : ; t0 .

  6. Generate the forecast          p^t+h;t using the estimated dimensions from step 3 and the
     parameter estimates from step 4 as well as, in case of (4) and (5), the factors from
     step 5.

  7. Repeat for t0 + 1; : : : ; T        h and for any forecast horizon h.

   To assess the forecasting performance of the respective models we consider the mean of
the squared forecast errors [MSE]:
                                                                 T
                                                                 Xh
                                                      1
                                    MSE =                                "2s;s+h ;                                        (7)
                                               T      t0       h s=t
                                                                     0


where "s;t+h is the forecast error of the model-generated prediction of the commodity price
change, based on the previously described recursive updating scheme, relative to the observed
commodity price change over h periods. It is, however, questionable whether one should
compare the ‘raw’MSE (7) of the fundamentals-based predictions, i.e. those based on (3),
(4) or (5) (denoted as MSEF ), with the MSE of our, more parsimonious, benchmark models
(labeled as MSEB . Clark and West [9, 10] show both theoretically as well as in Monte
Carlo simulations that MSERW              MSEF or MSEAR                  MSEF is biased downwards as MSEF
is in‡ated by spurious noise as the result of inappropriately …tting a larger model on the
data. Asymptotically this spurious noise in MSEF disappears, but it can be quite pervasive
in …nite samples, especially in the case of (4) and (5) where the factors have to be estimated
…rst before a forecast can be constructed. Thus, for sample sizes comparable to those used in
practice, tests based on ‘raw’MSE di¤erentials relative to (1) or (2) are severely undersized,
which makes it harder to …nd any evidence against the benchmark forecast.
   Following Clark and West [9, 10], we compare the MSE (7) based on either (1) or (2)
with corrected MSE measures for (3), (4) and (5), i.e.,
                                             T
                                                                                         !
                                    1        Xh                                      2
    MSEadj
       F = MSEF                                           p^Bs;s+h        p^Fs;s+h           ;   B = AR or RW             (8)
                             T      t0     h s=t
                                                 0




                                                          11
where     p^Bs;s+h and   p^Fs;s+h are the h-period ahead commodity price change forecasts from,
respectively, the benchmark models and the ‘fundamentals’ models (3), (4) and (5). We
then report the relative MSE di¤erentials as:

                                               MSEB MSEadj
                                                       F
                                   RM SE =                 ;                                       (9)
                                                  MSEB

with B = AR or RW. So, a positive (negative) value of (9) equal to x ( x) suggests that
the fundamentals-based h-quarter ahead forecast is on average 100 x percent more (less)
accurate than the corresponding benchmark forecast.
   Given (8) we can formulate a test statistic for H0 : MSEB MSEF = 0
                                   0                     1
                      p              MSEB MSEF A     adj
               adj
              zM SE =   T t0 h @ q                         ; B = AR or RW                         (10)
                                          V ar(~uadj
                                                 t+h )

with
                                ~adj
                                u        adj
                                  t+h = ut+h    (MSEB     MSEadj
                                                             F )


and
          uadj    2
           t+h = "B;s;s+h      "2Fs;s+h   ( p^Bs;s+h    p^Fs;s+h )2 ;   s = t0 ; : : : ; T   h:

                               ~adj
We compute the variance of the u t+h terms based on a heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation

consistent (HAC) variance estimator, as time-varying variance is a feature of commodity
price changes and the overlap in observations at forecast horizons h > 1 induces serial
correlation in the disturbances of our forecasting models.
   More speci…cally, we employ the parametric HAC variance estimator proposed by Den
Haan and Levin [11], which has been shown to have good …nite sample properties.16 Clark
and West [9, 10] show that in case of rolling window -based parameter updating, as is the
case in our speci…cation, (10) will be asymptotically distributed according to a standard
                            adj
normal distribution, i.e., zM SE      N (0; 1) in (10). In the forecast evaluation, we use (10)
to conduct a one-sided test for the null hypothesis that fundamentals-based commodity
price predictions do not signi…cantly outperform those based on our naive, parsimonious
benchmark speci…cations vis-à-vis the alternative hypothesis that (3), (4) or (5) outperform
either (1) or (2).

 1 6 In                                                                                ~adj
       our case the Den Haan and Levin [11] approach entails …tting an AR model to the u t+h terms,
with the lag order determined by minimizing BIC, and using this estimated AR model to compute the
                              ~adj
unconditional variance of the u t+h terms.




                                                 12
4     Empirical results
4.1    Data description

There are 10 spot indices in total, taken from four distinct sources. Details about the
composition and calculation of the di¤erent indices appear in the Data Appendix.
    From the Commodity Research Bureau, we use the Reuters/Je¤eries-CRB Index (CRB),
which dates back the farthest of any cross-commodity index: both the overall index and the
industrial metals sub-index start in 1947. However, we only go as far back as 1973, based
on the availability of the economic fundamental variables. The next longest series, the
S&P/Goldman Sachs Index (SPG), starts in 1970, although once again we use data from
1973 onward. The SPG sub-indices for industrial metals and energy start in 1977 and 1983,
respectively. We also evaluate the series used in [8], the IMF Non-fuel Commodity Prices
Index (IMF), which starts in 1980, along with the IMF industrial metals sub-index. Finally,
the Dow Jones-AIG Commodity Index (DJAIG) is the shortest series we use, beginning
in 1991, along with its sub-indices for energy and metals. All commodity price data come
directly from the companies who publish them, except for the SPG sub-indices, which come
from Bloomberg. As discussed in Section 3.1 we take log …rst di¤erences of all commodity
price indices, a transformation chosen to guarantee covariance stationarity.
    The exchange rate data for the CRR model come from Bloomberg. We use monthly
averages of daily bilateral dollar exchange rates for the Canadian dollar, the Australian
dollar, the New Zealand dollar, the South African rand, and the Chilean peso. Chilean
exchange rate data are only used when evaluating our models for the DJ-AIG indices, since
these data only extend back as far as 1991.
    For the factor-augmented models (4) and (5) we combine the exchange rate data with
additional fundamental predictor variables in a panel. These additional variables comprise a
set of standard macro-economic time series across major developed and developing countries,
such as industrial production, business and consumer con…dence data, retail sales volumes,
unemployment rates, core consumer prices (excluding food and energy), money aggregates
and interest rates (source: OECD). They also include data on inventories and production of
industrial metals, oil, natural gas and coal (source: Energy Information Administration), as
well as the Baltic Dry Index (BDI). The BDI is an index which captures the costs of ocean
shipping, aggregating the prices of many di¤erent routes and types of shipping vessels. It
is maintained by the Baltic Exchange, a commodity exchange. Our BDI data come from
Bloomberg as far back as 1985, and they are averaged over the month from daily data.
Before that, going back to 1973, we use monthly data on aggregated ocean shipping rates



                                              13
that we splice onto our BDI data for the pre-1985 period.17
    The predictor variables are also transformed to guarantee covariance stationarity. In
general, this means that the real variables are expressed in log …rst di¤erences, and the rate
variables, such as unemployment and interest rate, are simply expressed in …rst di¤erences;
see the Data Appendix for more details. With respect to prices and monetary aggregates,
we transform these series into …rst di¤erences of annual growth rates to guarantee that the
dynamic properties of the transformed series are comparable to those of the rest of the
predictor variable panel.18 Except for the BDI, exchange rate data and interest rates, the
remaining series in our predictor variable panels for models (4) and (5) are assumed to be
observable with a one-month lag. So, for example, in February 2009 agents only observe
industrial production or the consumer price index up to January 2009. Hence, for these
(typically macroeconomic) time series we lag the series by one month before including them
in our panels, thus reducing the potential bias in favor of our factor-augmented models in
the forecast evaluations.
    The cross-sectional sizes of the panels used in the factor-augmented models vary across
the di¤erent commodity price indices we evaluate, as di¤erent indices have di¤erent time
spans that determine the availability of the variables used in the panel. For the CRB
aggregate and industrial metals indices, the full sample for both the commodities prices and
the predictor variables panel is 1973.03-2009.2 with a total of N = 96 series in the panel.
For the aggregate SPG commodities price index, the full sample also equals 1973.03-2009.2
with N = 96. For the SPG industrial metals sub-index, the full sample equals 1977.02-
2009.2 with cross-sectional size of N = 112 for the predictor variable panel, whereas for the
SPG energy sub-index they are 1983.02-2009.02 and N = 127, respectively. For the two
IMF commodities price series, the full sample spans the period 1980.02-2009.02, and we use
N = 122 series in the panels used for our factor-augmented models. Finally, for the three
DJAIG series, the data span the period 1991.02-2009.02, and there are N = 143 series in
the corresponding panels of predictor variables.

4.2     Results

As discussed in Section 3.1, for all ten commodity price indices listed above we assess
the forecasting performance of our three fundamentals-based forecast methods (the CRR

  1 7 We thank Lutz Killian for providing us with this data, which he uses in [27]. For our purposes, we use

the nominal raw version of his series, instead of the real detrended version used in his paper.
  1 8 This particular transformation acknowledges that series like log price levels and log money aggregate

levels behave as if they were I(2), possibly because of mean growth shifts due to policy regime changes,
…nancial liberalizations and other phenomena.




                                                    14
exchange rate-based model (3) and our two factor-augmented models (4) and (5)) relative
to two simple benchmark forecasts: those based on an autoregressive (AR) speci…cation
and those based on the unconditional mean or random walk (RW) model (respectively (1)
and (2)). In Tables 1-10 the last columns (denoted FX) report comparisons of the factor-
augmented models against the CRR model used as a benchmark, as will be explained below.
All forecasting models, including the benchmark models, are updated for each forecast based
on a …xed rolling window of data (see Section 3.2), which we set equal to a 10-year period
resulting in 120 monthly observations.19
   The forecasts for our ten commodity price indices apply to …ve time horizons (in months):
h = 1, h = 3, h = 6, h = 12 and h = 24, as commonly analyzed in the literature. In each
re-estimation of our forecasting models, we determine a version of each of our two factor-
augmented regressions (4) and (5) based on our modi…ed information criterion in (6). Using
this criterion in (6) we simultaneously select the optimal lag order from j = 0; : : : ; 12 (where
p = 0 means no lagged commodity price changes included in the model) as well as the optimal
number of factors across i = 1; : : : ; 6 such that the value of the criterion is minimized. In
case of the AR benchmark (1) as well as the CRR exchange rates-based model (3) we select
that lag order from p = 0; : : : ; 12 that minimizes the BIC criterion for these two models.
   The forecasting results for the CRB commodity price indices are reported in Tables 1
and 2. When we …rst focus on the performance of the CRR speci…cation (3), it becomes
clear that in an out-of-sample context it is not structurally outperforming random walk and
autoregressive forecasts: at the shortest horizons its predictions are only signi…cantly better
than those based on a random walk, whereas one- and two-years ahead the CRR model can
only signi…cantly outperform the AR benchmark.
   Factor-augmented models that utilize principal components extracted from the corre-
sponding panel of global economic data perform quite poorly and never really signi…cantly
outperform the naive benchmark predictions. However, when PLS regression is used to gen-
erate factor-augmented commodity price forecasts, the results are more encouraging. For
the overall CRB index (see Table 1), PLS regression-based speci…cations provide signi…-
cantly better predictions than both benchmark models at the one-month and one-quarter
horizons. In Table 2, we have a similar outcome for the industrial medals CRB sub-index,
although PLS-based factor models are also outperforming both benchmarks one-year ahead.
   In case of the DJ-AIG commodity price indices in Tables 3-5, there is arguably some
value added in using exchange rate-based models when predicting the overall index (Table 3),
but a lot less so for the energy and metals sub-indices (Tables 4 and 5). Compared to the

 1 9 Thus,   ! = 120 in the forecast scheme outlined in Section 3.2.



                                                      15
CRB indices factor-augmented models appear to be less useful: only in case of the overall
DJ-AIG index PLS-based models are able to signi…cantly outperform both benchmarks at
the 3-month and 6-month horizons.
   Tables 6-8 reports on the out-of-sample performance for our next group of commodity
price indices: the S&P/Goldman-Sachs (SPG) indices. The CRR exchange rates-based
model (3) is able to signi…cantly outperform naive benchmark projections only at the two-
year horizon. Also, forecasts based on both (4) and (5) cannot be deemed to be structurally
more accurate than those based on a random walk or autoregressive speci…cations, although
PC-based regressions are successful at h = 24 in case of the SPG-Energy index.
   Finally, we discuss the results for the IMF indices, as reported in Tables 9 and 10. The
CRR speci…cation is doing well in outperforming both benchmark models at the one-month
horizon in case of the aggregate index (Table 10), but not for the industrial metals sub-index.
Turning to the factor-augmented approaches we …nd a rather counter-intuitive result: PLS-
based factor model forecasts signi…cantly outperform the benchmark projections 1-month
and 3-months ahead for aggregate IMF index, but this result disappears in case of the metals
sub-index.
   The results above suggest that neither the exchange rate approach (as in the CRR model)
nor a broader approach that uses information from larger data sets including both exchange
rates and other macrovariables (as in our factor-augmented models) are overwhelmingly
successful in predicting commodity price dynamics. Nonetheless, the results in Tables 1-10
show that the CRR and the PLS-based factor models are occasionally able to outperform
simple benchmark models in an out-of-sample context. In light of this outcome, one wonders
whether the extra information of the PLS-based factor model vis-à-vis the CRR model is
signi…cant enough to warrant its use. To investigate this we compare the out-of-sample
commodity price changes from the CRR framework with the following model:
                                M
                                X                r
                                                 X                   k
                                                                     X
                        h                               h P LS
             pt+h;t =       +         m   em
                                           t +          i fi;t   +         i   pt   j+1;t j   +   t+h;t ;   (11)
                                m=1              i=1                 j=1

where the r PLS factors are now extracted from a panel of predictor variables that excludes
the M commodity dollar exchange rates, and we again use the BICM criterion (6) to deter-
mine r and k. An out-of-sample comparison between model (11) and model (3), therefore,
provides insight about how valuable for forecasting purposes is the extra information (on top
of the exchange rates) embedded in the large data set. The out-of-sample analysis for (11) is
carried out as outlined in Section 3.2, but now with the CRR model (3) as the benchmark.
   In the last columns of Tables 1-10, denoted FX, we report the results of the out-of-sample
comparison between (11) and (3). Of these 50 out-of-sample exercises (5 horizons for 10


                                                       16
commodity price indices), the extra information embedded in the predictor variable panels
turns out to improve signi…cantly their forecasting performance against the exchange-rate
approach in 24 cases, in particular for the CRB and DJ-AIG indices. And in the majority of
those 24 cases, both the CRR model and the original PLS-based factor model signi…cantly
outperform at least one of the two simple, naive, benchmark models. Hence, the case can be
made that the PLS-based factor model has a slight edge over the CRR model in modeling
commodity price dynamics.
    A potential reason why both the CRR and the factor-augmented models cannot struc-
turally outperform naive benchmark forecast might well be due to the fact that market-
speci…c information is the dominant driver of commodity price dynamics. This market-
speci…c information, such as speculative strategies, should, however, be present in futures
and forwards contracts that price in expectations for commodity prices in the near future.
We therefore collected a number of time series on 1-, 3-, 6- and 12-months ahead futures
and forward rates for prices of food commodities, oil, precious metals and industrial metals;
see the Data Appendix for more details. Next, we took appropriate transformations of these
futures and forward rates (to make them covariance stationary), added them to our panels
of predictor variables, and evaluated whether the addition of such market-speci…c informa-
tion enables the factor-augmented models to structurally outperform the naive benchmark
predictions. Regrettably, however, consistent time series on a broad set of commodity fu-
tures and forward rates are only available from the mid-1980s onwards. Thus, a proper
comparison with the factor-augmented results in Tables 1-10 is not feasible for all 10 com-
modity price indices. We therefore limit the above mentioned experiment to the DJ-AIG
price indices, and the corresponding results can be found in Tables 11-13.
    If one compares the results in Tables 11-13 with the results of the factor-augmented model
in Tables 3-5, which exclude information embedded in commodities futures/forwards rates,
it becomes quite clear that the forecasting performances are substantially unchanged across
data sets. Thus, qualitatively, the factor-augmented model results in Tables 11-13 relative
to the naive benchmark models remain as weak as was originally the case in Tables 3-5.


5     Conclusion
Can we obtain forecasts of commodity price movements that systematically improve upon
naive statistical benchmarks? The basic message of the paper is one of inconclusiveness.
While our results corroborate the notion that commodity currencies are somewhat privileged
variables in terms of their predictive power, we are unable to obtain robust validation of this
notion across commodity indices and across forecasting horizons. Information from larger


                                              17
sets of macrovariables can help improve our predictions, but their forecasting properties are
nuanced and by no means overwhelming.
   To make a point of some potential relevance for the current (late 2009) policy debate
in light of our results, stronger exchange rates in commodity-exporter countries, improved
con…dence and business conditions in China and other Asian NICS, as well as the positive
drift of the BDI, all point to buoyant conditions in commodity markets going forward. The
risks of a recrudescence in global headline in‡ation are skewed on the upside. But acknowl-
edging these risks is not tantamount to fostering concerns about policymakers’ ability to
guarantee price stability, thus advocating a fast withdrawal of accommodation worldwide.
Analyses like ours suggest that forecasts of commodity prices provide at their very best only
highly noisy information about their actual future trajectories and persistence. All the more
so, estimates of the in‡ationary pressures associated with expected commodity price swings
remain tentative at best. Excessive con…dence in the forecast of a forthcoming commodity
price surge, or even increased dispersion in global policymakers’ views and beliefs about
future in‡ation risks, can become the catalyzer of (or the pretext for) a premature tight-
ening of the global policy mix even though the international outlook remains vulnerable to
negative shocks, with potentially devastating consequences for the real economy worldwide.
   Concluding as we started with a quote by Bernanke [3], there is a key open question
for a research agenda focused on understanding and predicting swings in commodity prices:
“What are the implications for the conduct of monetary policy of the high degree of uncer-
tainty that attends forecasts of commodity prices? Although theoretical analyses often focus
on the case in which policymakers care only about expected economic outcomes and not the
uncertainty surrounding those outcomes, in practice policymakers are concerned about the
risks to their projections as well as the projections themselves. How should those concerns
a¤ect the setting of policy in this context?”It is our (strong) prediction that future research
will very much take these questions to heart.


References
 [1] Akram, Q. F., 2008. “Commodity Prices, Interest Rates and the Dollar.”Norges Bank
    Research Department Working Paper No. 2008/12, August.

 [2] Bai, J., 2003. “Inferential Theory for Factor Models of Large Dimensions, Econometrica
    71, pp. 135-172.

 [3] Bernanke, B. S., 2008. “Outstanding Issues in the Analysis of In‡ation,”speech at the
    Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 53rd Annual Economic Conference, Chatham MA,



                                              18
    June 9.

 [4] Boivin, J. and S. Ng, 2006. “Are More Data Always Better for Factor Analysis?”,
    Journal of Econometrics 132, pp. 169-194.

 [5] Borenszeiten, E. and C. M. Reinhart, 1994. “The Macroeconomic Determinants of
    Commodity Prices,” Washington D.C., International Monetary Fund Working Paper
    No. WP/94/9, January.

 [6] Bowman, C. and A. M. Husain, 2004. “Forecasting Commodity Prices: Futures Ver-
    sus Judgment”, Washington D.C., International Monetary Fund Working Paper No.
    WP/04/41, March.

 [7] Cecchetti, S. G. and R. Moessner, 2008. “Commodity Prices and In‡ation Dynamics.”
    Bank for International Settlements Quarterly Review, December, pp. 55-66.

 [8] Chen, Y., K. Rogo¤ and B. Rossi, 2008. “Can Exchange Rates Forecast Commodity
    Prices?”, NBER Working Paper No. 13901, March 2008.

 [9] Clark, T. E. and K. D. West, 2006. “Using Out-of-Sample Mean Squared Prediction
    Errors to Test the Martingale Di¤erence Hypothesis”, Journal of Econometrics 135,
    pp. 155-186.

[10] Clark, T. E. and K. D. West, 2007. “Approximately Normal Tests for Equal Predictive
    Accuracy in Nested Models”, Journal of Econometrics 138, pp. 291-311.

[11] Den Haan, W. J. and A. Levin, 1997. “A Practitioner’s Guide to Robust Covariance
    Matrix Estimation,” , Handbook of Statistics 24, pp. 291-341.

[12] Diebold, F. X. and R. S. Mariano, 1995. “Comparing Predictive Accuracy”, Journal of
    Business and Economic Statistics 13, pp. 253-263.

[13] Elekdag, S., R. Lalonde, D. Laxton, D. Muir and P. Pesenti, 2008. “Oil Price Movements
    and the Global Economy: a Model-Based Assessment.” IMF Sta¤ Papers 55, pp.297-
    311.

[14] Engel, C. and K. D. West, 2005. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals”, Journal of
    Political Economy 113, pp. 485-517.

[15] Frankel, J., 2008. “The E¤ects of Monetary Policy on Real Commodity Prices,” in J.
    Y. Campbell, ed., Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, Chicago IL, The University of
    Chicago Press, pp. 291-334.



                                            19
[16] Gauded, G., 2007. “Natural Resource Economics under the Rule of Hotelling.” Cana-
    dian Journal of Economics / Revue Canadienne d’Économique 40, pp. 1033-1059.

[17] Groen, J. J. J. and G. Kapetanios, 2008. “Revisiting Useful Approaches to Data-Rich
    Macroeconomic Forecasting”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Reports No.
    327.

[18] Groen, J. J. J. and G. Kapetanios, 2009. “Model Selection Criteria for Factor-
    Augmented Regressions,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Reports No. 363.

[19] Gorton, G. and K. G. Rouwenhorst, 2005. “Facts and Fantasies About Commodity
    Futures.” Yale ICF Working Paper No. 04-20, February.

[20] Hamilton, J., 2009. “Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007-08,” in D.
    Romer and J. Wolfers, eds., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, forthcom-
    ing.

[21] Hannan, E. J. and B. G. Quinn, 1979. “The Determination of the Order of an Autore-
    gression”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 41, pp. 190-195.

[22] Hobijn, B., 2008. “Commodity Price Movements and PCE In‡ation.” Federal Reserve
    Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol. 14 No.8, November.

[23] Hotelling, H., 1931. “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources.” Journal of Political
    Economy 39, pp. 137–175.

[24] Interagency Task Force on Commodity Markets, 2008. Interim Report on Crude Oil,
    Washington D.C., July.

[25] International Monetary Fund, 2008. “Is In‡ation Back? Commodity Prices and In-
    ‡ation”, in World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries,
    Washington D.C., International Monetary Fund, October, pp.83-128.

[26] Key…tz, R., 2004. “Currencies and Commodities: Modeling the Impact of Exchange
    Rates on Commodity Prices in the World Market,”Washington D.C., The World Bank,
    Development Prospects Group.

[27] Kilian, L., 2009. “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and
    Supply Shocks in the Crude Oil Market”, American Economic Review 99, pp. 1053-69.

[28] Reinhart, C.M., 1988. “Real Exchange Rates and Commodity Prices in a Neoclassical
    Model”, Washington D.C., International Monetary fund Working Paper No. WP/88/55,
    June.


                                             20
[29] Schwarz, G., 1978. “Estimating the Dimension of a Model”, Annals of Statistics 6, pp.
    461-464.

[30] Slade, M.E., and H. Thille, 2004. “Commodity Spot Prices: An Explanatory Assess-
    ment of Market-Structure and Forward-Trading E¤ects,” University of Warwick and
    University of Guelph Working Paper, September.

[31] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson, 2002. “Forecasting Using Principal Components from
    a Large Number of Predictors”, Journal of the American Statistical Association 97, pp.
    1167-1179.

[32] Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson, 2002. “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Di¤usion
    Indexes”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20, pp. 147-162.

[33] Verleger, P. K., 2008. “The Oil-Dollar Link.” The International Economy, Spring,
    pp.46-50.

[34] World Bank, 2009. Global Economic Prospects. Commodities at the Crossroads. Wash-
    ington D.C., The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World
    Bank.




                                           21
       Table 1: Forecast evaluation for the aggregate CRB commodity price index;
       1973.03 - 2009.02

                             CRR               PC Regression                          PLS Regression
        h             RW            AR         RW       AR                 RW             AR              FX

        1           0.07            -0.01      0.00        -0.01           0.20            0.14           0.18
                   (1.34)**        (-0.56)    (0.03)      (-0.63)         (1.86)**        (0.99)*        (1.44)**

        3           0.02            0.02       -0.02        0.00           0.14            0.14           0.25
                   (0.34)          (0.59)     (-0.88)     (-0.16)         (1.26)**        (0.82)*        (1.95)***

        6           0.02            0.05       -0.06       -0.02           -0.10          -0.09           -0.05
                   (0.25)          (1.14)*    (-0.71)     (-0.55)         (-0.56)        (-0.73)         (-0.41)

        12          0.02            0.06       -0.09       -0.02           0.00            0.02           0.14
                   (0.25)          (0.93)*    (-0.85)     (-0.24)         (0.00)          (0.16)         (1.43)**

        24          -0.01           0.07       -0.19       -0.05           -0.59          -0.48           -0.09
                   (-0.08)         (1.56)**   (-1.97)     (-0.57)         (-2.84)        (-2.40)         (-0.37)


             Notes: The table reports the relative improvement in the MSE for either the CRR exchange
             rate-based model (3), versions of the principal components-based factor-augmented model
             (4) or versions of the PLS regression-based factor-augmented model (5) relative to either
             the AR model (1) or the random walk-based model (2). This relative MSE improvement is
             de…ned in (9). In parentheses we report the test statistic (10) for the null hypothesis that
             the corresponding MSE di¤erential is zero, whereas a ( ) [       ] denotes a rejection of this
             null hypothesis in favor of the alternative hypothesis that the MSE di¤erential is positive at
             a 10% (5%) [1%] signi…cance level. Under the heading ‘CRR’we report the results for model
             (3) relative to the AR benchmark (column ‘AR’) and the random walk-based benchmark
             (column ‘RW’), under the heading ‘PC’we report these for the principal components-based
             model (4) with factor- and lag order selection based on the BICM criterion as in (6), and
             under the heading ‘PLS’we report the results for the PLS regression-based model (5) with
             factor- and lag order selection also based on the BICM criterion as in (6). Finally, in case
             of PLS regression the column dented by ‘FX’ reports forecast results of (11), using PLS
             factors extracted from a predictor variable panel without exchange rates, relative to (3) as
             a benchmark.



    Table 2: Forecast evaluation for the CRB Industrial Metals sub-index; 1973.03 - 2009.02

                       CRR                      PC Regression                                    PLS Regression
h             RW               AR              RW           AR                       RW               AR              FX

1             0.12             0.01            0.11              0.03                 0.20            0.09            0.10
             (2.30)***        (0.43)          (2.71)***         (1.37)**             (3.88)***       (1.10)*         (1.26)**

3             0.06             0.00            0.00               0.00                0.14            0.10            0.18
             (1.23)**         (0.04)          (0.11)            (-0.11)              (0.90)*         (0.72)          (1.33)**

6             0.03             0.02            -0.01             0.02                -0.01            0.01            0.03
             (0.70)           (0.70)          (-0.19)           (0.26)              (-0.04)          (0.10)          (0.27)

12            0.02             0.04            -0.09             0.00                 0.13            0.17            0.23
             (0.22)           (0.73)          (-1.01)           (0.04)               (0.92)*         (1.26)**        (2.12)***

24             0.00            0.08            -0.13             0.01                -0.37            -0.30           0.08
             (-0.04)          (1.80)**        (-1.42)           (0.07)              (-1.92)          (-1.64)         (0.23)


     Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




                                                           22
Table 3: Forecast evaluation for the aggregate DJ-AIG commodities price index; 1991.02 -
2009.02

                         CRR                           PC Regression                             PLS Regression
 h             RW                   AR                RW           AR                   RW           AR                  FX

 1             0.24                 0.09              0.19              0.03           0.40              0.18            0.19
              (2.96)***            (1.59)**          (0.58)            (0.95)*        (0.60)            (1.03)*         (1.48)**

 3             0.05                 0.05              0.00              0.03           0.48              0.48            0.43
              (1.16)*              (0.98)*           (0.05)            (1.06)*        (0.94)*           (0.93)*         (0.98)*

 6             0.00                 0.01              -0.08             0.03           0.06           0.17               0.18
              (0.00)               (0.50)            (-0.22)           (0.55)         (1.31)**       (0.80)             (3.85)***

 12            0.18                 0.09              0.25              0.34           0.20              0.33            0.39
              (0.83)*              (1.93)***         (0.84)*           (1.33)**       (0.62)            (0.86)*         (1.26)**

 24            0.17                 0.13              0.62              0.82           0.04           0.08               0.17
              (0.71)               (1.62)**          (2.14)***         (1.80)**       (0.07)         (0.19)             (0.57)


      Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




         Table 4: Forecast evaluation for the DJ-AIG Energy sub-index; 1991.02 -
         2009.02

                                  CRR                   PC Regression                       PLS Regression
          h            RW                   AR          RW        AR               RW           AR         FX

          1             0.17             -0.05          0.24           0.01        0.29         0.06           0.16
                       (1.44)**         (-1.23)        (0.13)         (0.32)      (0.51)       (0.30)         (0.33)

          3          -0.03               -0.05          -0.03          -0.04       0.35          0.37          0.40
                    (-0.52)             (-1.24)        (-0.62)        (-0.88)     (0.72)        (0.83)*       (0.96)*

          6          -0.08               -0.04          -0.09          -0.03       0.10         0.22           0.28
                    (-0.69)             (-2.89)        (-0.62)        (-1.43)     (0.28)       (0.48)         (0.55)

          12            0.07              0.00          -0.12          0.02        -0.03        0.22           0.32
                       (0.32)            (0.11)        (-0.49)        (0.10)      (-0.07)      (0.49)         (0.79)

          24            0.12              0.12           0.37          0.51        0.02         0.48           0.52
                       (0.05)            (2.05)***      (1.01)*       (1.11)*     (0.04)       (0.56)         (0.93)*


               Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




                                                                 23
Table 5: Forecast evaluation for the DJAIG Industrial Metals sub-index; 1991.02 -
2009.02

                      CRR                         PC Regression                                      PLS Regression
 h           RW                  AR              RW          AR                        RW               AR               FX

 1            0.30               0.04            0.23               -0.02               0.21           -0.12            -0.05
             (1.43)**           (1.16)*         (0.32)             (-0.54)             (1.15)*        (-0.68)          (-0.31)

 3            0.10              -0.03            0.04                0.00               0.18            0.08              0.13
             (1.09)*           (-0.50)          (0.64)              (0.02)             (0.77)          (0.36)            (0.87)*

 6            0.01               0.00            0.02                0.07               0.03            0.10              0.13
             (0.10)            (-0.39)          (0.04)              (0.69)             (0.07)          (0.71)            (1.16)*

 12        -0.08                -0.04            0.22                0.32               0.20            0.26              0.33
          (-0.36)              (-0.73)          (1.36)**            (1.53)**           (0.12)          (1.92)***         (2.42)***

 24        -0.24                 0.00            -0.19               0.02              -0.13            0.06            0.11
          (-1.35)              (-0.13)          (-1.26)             (0.27)            (-0.34)          (0.66)          (0.64)


      Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




        Table 6: Forecast evaluation for the aggregate SPG commodities price index;
        1973.03 - 2009.02

                                CRR                         PC Regression                            PLS Regression
         h             RW                  AR              RW         AR                        RW       AR         FX

         1             0.15               -0.02            0.16               -0.02          0.10        -0.06      -0.02
                      (1.80)**           (-1.02)          (0.89)*            (-1.16)        (0.69)      (-0.71)    (-0.20)

         3             -0.06              -0.01             0.00              0.04           -0.03       0.04       0.11
                      (-1.65)            (-0.54)          (-0.13)            (1.86)**       (-0.27)     (0.30)     (0.71)

         6             -0.03              -0.01            -0.04              0.01           -0.04       0.02       0.08
                      (-0.23)            (-0.30)          (-0.01)            (0.87)*        (-0.49)     (0.23)     (1.15)*

         12            0.10                0.04            0.03               0.01           -0.07       -0.07      0.06
                      (0.69)              (1.13)*         (0.14)             (0.22)         (-0.59)     (-0.45)    (0.35)

         24            0.13                0.14            -0.07              -0.02          -0.49       -0.39      -0.07
                      (1.16)*             (1.55)**        (-0.73)            (-0.23)        (-0.89)     (-2.04)    (-0.31)


              Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




                                                                     24
Table 7: Forecast evaluation for the SPG Energy sub-index; 1983.02 - 2009.02

                  CRR                  PC Regression                         PLS Regression
h            RW             AR         RW          AR               RW            AR            FX

1            0.14         -0.04        0.15        -0.01            0.35           0.18         0.23
            (1.46)**     (-1.56)      (1.51)**    (-0.63)          (1.59)**       (1.15)*      (1.54)**

3            -0.06        -0.02        -0.02        0.01            0.13           0.21         0.25
            (-0.67)      (-0.90)      (-0.19)      (0.52)          (0.71)         (0.92)*      (1.08)*

6            -0.05        0.00         -0.10       -0.03            -0.01          0.02         0.06
            (-0.46)      (0.10)       (-0.35)     (-0.84)          (-0.09)        (0.18)       (0.54)

12           0.10         0.02         -0.08       -0.09            -0.05          -0.09        -0.03
            (0.32)       (0.71)       (-0.94)     (-1.92)          (-0.19)        (-0.27)      (-0.11)

24           0.18         0.04         0.27         0.16            0.40           0.23         0.31
            (1.59)**     (0.77)       (2.09)***    (1.21)*         (0.65)         (0.45)       (0.43)


     Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




Table 8: Forecast evaluation for the SPG Industrial Metals sub-index; 1977.02
- 2009.02

                      CRR                PC Regression                         PLS Regression
    h          RW            AR        RW           AR                 RW           AR        FX

    1          0.13          -0.02      0.17            0.02           0.16         0.01       0.02
              (1.61)**      (-1.16)    (0.28)          (0.97)*        (1.22)*      (0.08)     (0.15)

    3          -0.03         -0.07      0.07            0.06           0.11         0.06       0.13
              (-0.59)       (-1.97)    (1.65)**        (1.95)***      (0.74)       (0.47)     (1.13)*

    6          -0.03         -0.04      0.01            0.02           -0.08        -0.12      -0.05
              (-0.25)       (-1.36)    (0.11)          (0.62)         (-0.24)      (-0.45)    (-0.26)

    12         -0.02         0.01      -0.03            0.02           -0.05        -0.10      -0.04
              (-0.16)       (0.16)    (-0.28)          (0.22)         (-0.19)      (-0.67)    (-0.25)

    24         -0.12         -0.01     -0.38            -0.25          -0.19        -0.12      -0.09
              (-0.49)       (-0.63)   (-2.01)          (-1.58)        (-1.29)      (-0.88)    (-0.51)


         Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




                                                  25
Table 9: Forecast evaluation for the aggregate, non-fuel IMF commodities price index;
1980.02 - 2009.02

                        CRR                    PC Regression                         PLS Regression
 h             RW                AR            RW         AR               RW              AR                   FX

 1             0.34              0.03          0.32         -0.01           0.44             0.18               0.17
              (1.49)**          (1.49)**      (1.20)*      (-0.69)         (2.33)***        (1.37)**           (1.48)**

 3             0.15             -0.01          0.13         -0.01           0.25             0.10               0.14
              (3.31)***        (-0.29)        (1.86)**     (-0.37)         (2.15)***        (1.00)*            (1.31)**

 6             0.01              0.01           0.00         0.03          -0.10            -0.10               -0.06
              (0.36)            (0.37)        (-0.01)       (0.98)*       (-0.37)          (-0.46)             (-0.24)

 12            0.03              0.04          -0.07        -0.02          0.15              0.14               0.23
              (0.40)            (0.93)*       (-0.75)      (-0.06)        (0.18)            (0.41)             (0.83)*

 24            -0.08             0.00          -0.39        -0.29          -0.14            -0.07               -0.03
              (-1.03)          (-0.03)        (-2.31)      (-2.20)        (-0.91)          (-0.49)             (-0.26)


      Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




        Table 10: Forecast evaluation for the IMF Industrial Metals sub-index; 1980.02
        - 2009.02

                              CRR                PC Regression                      PLS Regression
         h             RW            AR          RW         AR             RW           AR         FX

         1           0.15            0.01        0.14            0.02      0.10         -0.04          0.01
                    (1.80)**        (0.25)      (1.35)**        (0.46)    (0.85)*      (-0.32)        (0.04)

         3           0.02            -0.05       0.05            0.02      0.14         0.06           0.12
                    (0.34)          (-0.80)     (0.71)          (0.39)    (0.90)*      (0.50)         (1.38)**

         6           0.01            -0.02       0.05            0.07      0.10         0.08           0.12
                    (0.05)          (-0.50)     (0.18)          (0.84)*   (0.24)       (0.31)         (0.59)

         12          0.05            0.03        -0.01           0.02      0.23         0.19           0.25
                    (0.41)          (0.92)*     (-0.06)         (0.14)    (0.30)       (0.63)         (0.90)*

         24          -0.08           0.01        -0.38           -0.30     -0.09        -0.08         -0.05
                    (-0.52)         (0.47)      (-1.78)         (-1.83)   (-0.32)      (-0.37)       (-0.24)


              Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




                                                           26
Table 11: Forecast evaluation for the aggregate DJ-
AIG commodities price index with futures included
in the underlying panel; 1991.02 - 2009.02

             PC Regression               PLS Regression
 h         RW         AR                 RW        AR

 1       0.26            0.09             0.58         0.32
        (0.33)          (0.87)*          (1.23)*      (0.46)

 3       0.10            0.11             0.45         0.45
        (0.68)          (1.15)*          (0.95)*      (0.98)*

 6       0.03            0.05             0.07         0.17
        (0.27)          (2.17)***        (1.04)*      (0.75)

 12      0.10            -0.02            0.22         0.32
        (0.25)          (-0.18)          (0.58)       (0.36)

 24      0.00            -0.04            0.09         0.12
        (-0.02)         (-0.19)          (0.15)       (0.35)

     Notes: See the notes for Table 1.



      Table 12: Forecast evaluation for the aggre-
      gate DJ-AIG Energy sub-index with futures
      included in the underlying panel; 1991.02 -
      2009.02

               PC Regression        PLS Regression
       h       RW       AR          RW       AR

       1       0.25       0.03       0.32          0.07
              (0.73)     (0.58)     (0.37)        (0.27)

       3       0.04       0.02       0.39          0.40
              (0.37)     (0.59)     (0.66)        (0.78)

       6       -0.07      -0.03      0.13          0.24
              (-0.25)    (-0.56)    (0.27)        (0.76)

       12      -0.30      -0.40      0.02          0.19
              (-0.47)    (-0.97)    (0.04)        (0.26)

       24      -0.03      0.10       0.02          0.41
              (-0.09)    (0.34)     (0.03)        (0.83)*

           Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




                              27
Table 13: Forecast evaluation for the aggregate DJ-
AIG Industrial Metals sub-index with futures included
in the underlying panel; 1991.02 - 2009.02

          PC Regression               PLS Regression
 h       RW        AR                RW          AR

 1       0.35         0.08           0.41       0.07
        (0.30)       (1.08)*        (1.29)**   (0.54)

 3       0.16         0.09           0.17       0.08
        (0.70)       (1.59)**       (0.73)     (0.42)

 6       0.07         0.08           -0.03      0.03
        (0.28)       (1.06)*        (-0.04)    (0.12)

 12      0.06         0.10           0.15       0.24
        (0.23)       (0.30)         (0.13)     (1.78)**

 24      -0.20        0.04           -0.09      0.11
        (-0.90)      (0.37)         (-0.25)    (1.54)**

     Notes: See the notes for Table 1.




                               28
Data Appendix




                         Data Codes
Code   Country          Code   Transformation Xt of raw series Yt
 a     Canada            1     Xt = ln(Yt ) ln(Yt 1 )
 b     France            2     Xt = Yt Yt 1
 c     Germany           3     Xt = ln(Yt =Yt 12 ) ln(Yt 1 =Yt 13 )
                                       P                    P
 d     Italy             4     Xt = ln( 11k=0 Yt k =12)  ln( 12k=1 Yt   k =12)
 e     Japan             5     Xt = Yt
 f     United Kingdom
 g     United States
 h     Brazil           Code   Commodity price series
 i     India             v     CRB, CRB ind. metal, SPG
 j     Indonesia         w     DJAIG, DJAIG energy, DJAIG ind. metal
 k     South Africa      x     IMF, IMD ind. metal
 l     OECD              y     SPG energy
 m     G7                z     SPG ind. metal




                                      29
                                        Data Description
Variable                                             Countries    Source     Transform   Indices


Australian Dollar Exchange Rate                          -       Bloomberg       1       vwxyz
Canadian Dollar Exchange Rate                            -       Bloomberg       1       vwxyz
New Zealand Dollar Exchange Rate                         -       Bloomberg       1       vwxyz
South African Rand Exchange Rate                         -       Bloomberg       1       vwxyz
Chilean Peso Exchange Rate                               -       Bloomberg       1         w
Baltic Dry Index (BDI)                                   -       Bloomberg       1       vwxyz
Industrial Production                                 abcdefg      OECD          1       vwxyz
Industrial Production                                     j        OECD          1         w
Nominal Short Term Interest Rates (3 Month)            abceg       OECD          2       vwxyz
Nominal Short Term Interest Rates (3 Month)              df        OECD          2        wxyz
Real Short Term Interest Rates (3 Month)               abceg       OECD          2       vwxyz
Real Short Term Interest Rates (3 Month)                 df        OECD          2        wxyz
Long Term Interest Rates (10 Year)                    abcfgk       OECD          2       vwxyz
Long Term Interest Rates (10 Year)                       e         OECD          2         w
Business Con…dence Indicator                             g         OECD          5       vwxyz
Business Con…dence Indicator                             e         OECD          5        wxyz
Business Con…dence Indicator                          bcde‡m       OECD          5         w
Consumer Con…dence Indicator                            bcdf       OECD          5        wxyz
Consumer Con…dence Indicator                             ‡         OECD          5        wxy
Consumer Con…dence Indicator                             a         OECD          5         w
Unemployment                                            aefg       OECD          2       vwxyz
Unemployment                                             b         OECD          2        wxy
Unemployment                                             h         OECD          2         wy
Retail Trade Volume                                    acefg       OECD          1       vwxyz
Retail Trade Volume                                      b         OECD          1        wxyz
Retail Trade Volume                                      k         OECD          1        wxy
Retail Trade Volume                                      d         OECD          1         w
Hourly Earnings in Manufacturing                        dfg        OECD          1       vwxyz
Hourly Earnings in Manufacturing                         e         OECD          4       vwxyz
Hourly Earnings in Manufacturing                         a         OECD          1        vxyz
Goods Exports                                        abcgefghk     OECD          1       vwxyz
Goods Exports                                            ij        OECD          1         w
Goods Imports                                        abcgefghk     OECD          1       vwxyz
Goods Imports                                            ij        OECD          1         w




                                              30
Term Slope Structure (Long term - short term rates)            abcg         OECD          5   vwxyz
Term Slope Structure (Long term - short term rates)              f          OECD          5    wxy
Term Slope Structure (Long term - short term rates)              e          OECD          5     w
Core CPI                                                     abcdefgl       OECD          3   vwxyz
Core CPI                                                        m           OECD          3     vz
Broad Money (M3)                                               agk          OECD          3   vwxyz
Broad Money (M3)                                                 i          OECD          3    wxyz
Broad Money (M3)                                                el          OECD          3     wy
Broad Money (M3)                                                 f          OECD          3     w
Narrow money (M1)                                              aegl         OECD          3   vwxyz
Narrow money (M1)                                               ik          OECD          3    wxyz
Narrow money (M1)                                                f          OECD          3     w
LME Copper Warehouse Stocks                                      -           EIA          1   vwxyz
LME Lead Warehouse Stocks                                        -           EIA          1   vwxyz
LME Zinc Warehouse Stocks                                        -           EIA          1   vwxyz
LME Aluminum Warehouse Stocks                                    -           EIA          1    wxy
LME Nickel Warehouse Stocks                                      -           EIA          1    wxy
LME Tin Warehouse Stocks                                         -           EIA          1     w
Crude Oil Stocks, Non-SPR (Strategic Petrol Reserve)             -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Crude Oil Stocks, Total                                          -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Crude Oil Stocks, SPR                                            -           EIA          1    wxy
Jet Fuel Stocks                                                  -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Motor Gasoline Stocks                                            -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Residual Fuel Oil Stocks                                         -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Other Petroleum Products Stocks                                  -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Total Petroleum Stocks                                           -           EIA          1   vwxyz
United States Crude Oil Production                               -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Non-OPEC Crude Oil Production                                    -           EIA          1   vwxyz
World Crude Oil Production                                       -           EIA          1   vwxyz
OPEC Crude Oil Production                                        -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Total World Coal Stocks                                          -           EIA          1   vwxyz
Distillate Fuel Oil Stocks                                       -           EIA          1    wxyz
Propane/Propylene Stocks                                         -           EIA          1    wxyz
Lique…ed Petroleum Gases Stocks                                  -           EIA          1    wxyz
Natural Gas in Underground Storage - Working Gas                 -           EIA          1    wyz
Natural Gas in Underground Storage - Total                       -           EIA          1    wyz
Currency: Banknotes and Coin                                     f      Bank of England   1   vwxyz
Wheat Futures Price (1, 3, and 6 month)                          -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Corn Futures Price (1 and 3 month)                               -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Hogs Futures Price (1, 3, and 6 month)                           -        Bloomberg       1     w*
WTI Futures Price (1, 3, 6, and 12 month)                        -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Heating Oil Futures Price (1, 3, 6, and 12 month)                -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Brent Crude Futures Price (3 and 6 month)                        -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Copper Futures Price (3 and 6 month)                             -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Gold Futures Price (3, 6, and 12 month)                          -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Silver Futures Price (3, 6, and 12 month)                        -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Lead Forward Price (3 and 15 month)                              -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Copper Forward Price (3 month)                                   -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Nickel Forward Price (3 month)                                   -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Tin Forward Price (3 month)                                      -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Zinc Forward Price (3 month)                                     -        Bloomberg       1     w*
Aluminum Forward Price (3 month)                                 -        Bloomberg       1     w*

Dependent Variables
Reuters/Je¤eries Commodity Price Index                          -           CRB           1    v
CRB Industrial Metals Price Index                               -           CRB           1    v
S&P/Goldman Sachs Commodity Price Index                         -       Goldman Sachs     1    v
Dow Jones/AIG Commodity Price Index                             -        Dow Jones        1    w
DJAIG Energy Commodity Price Index                              -        Dow Jones        1    w
DJAIG Industrial Metals Price Index                             -        Dow Jones        1    w
IMF Global Commodity Price Index                                -           IMF           1    x
IMF Industrial Metals Price Index                               -           IMF           1    x
S&P/Goldman Sachs Energy Commodities Price Index                -       Goldman Sachs     1    y
S&P/Goldman Sachs Industrial Metals Price Index                 -       Goldman Sachs     1    z


 These are only used in the DJAIG models for Tables 11-12.


                                                31
