                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  COLLECTIVE PEGGING [O A SINGLE
                   CURRENCY: THE WEST AFRICAN
                          MONETARY UNION


                      Jorge Braga de Macedo



                      Working Paper No. l51I




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1985




An earlier version was presented at a World Bank conference on Real
Exchange Rates and Adjustment in Developing Countries and in a
seminar at the University of Pennsylvania. Comments from par-
ticipants are gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here
is part of the NBERVs research program in International Studies and
project in Productivity and Industrial Change in the World Economy.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #1574
                                         March 1985


          Collective Pegging to a Single Currency:
               The West African Monetary Union

                            ABSTRACT


     The paper presents a model of a monetary union designed to illumi-

nate monetary and exchange rate policy in the West African Monetary Union

(UMOA). Emphasis is placed on the interaction of the members of UMOA

with each other, through the common central bank, and on their interac-

tion with France and the rest of the world. As a consequence, the

structure of the national economies depends essentially on their size.

The relative size of the partners is reflected in the source and type of

disturbances as well as in the trade pattern: large countries are not

affected by disturbances originating in small countries. Small countries

are affected by all external disturbances. The collective nature of the

pegging becomes important because the small countries are taken to be of

equal size.

     Using a four—country, two—tier macroeconomic model, it is shown that

the pseudo-exchange rate union with the large partner has no effect on

the real exchange rates of the small countries but affect their price

levels, whereas a full monetary union requires in principle a transfer

whose allocation between the two small countries by their common central

bank may have real effects. This transfer is precisely provided by the

large country, as guarantor of the fixed exchange rate arrangement. When

both small countries are in surplus, there is a reverse transfer to the

large   country, with no monetary consequences. In line with the findings
of the model, evidence is provided on monetary allocations in UMOA and on
the real exchange rates of its major members, as compared to other
African   countries.

Jorge   Braga de Macedo
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
609-452-6474
                                     1




Introduction



     In the present international monetary system, there is a large

number of countries who peg their exchange rates in some way, and a fair

number of small countries who peg to a single currency. Few countries,

however are members of exchange-rate unions whereby exchange rates are

collectively pegged to a single currency.

     Even fewer countries establish a full monetary union, with an union-

wide central bank. In fact, until the transformation of the East Carib-

bean Currency Authority into a central bank in October 1983, the closest

example was provided by the West African Monetary Union (known by its

French acronym UNOA), whose members have agreed to fix their bilateral

exchange rates against the French franc.

     Perhaps paradoxically, there exists a considerable analytic litera-

ture on monetary unions. It emerged during the sixties, in connection

with the celebrated controversy about the relative desirability of fixed

and flexible exchange rates, and was revived with the creation of the

European Monetary System in 1979.1

     There is a general agreement that the key factors on which the

impact of a union depends are, first, the sources and types of economic

disturbances giving rise to exchange rate fluctuations, second, the trade

patterns of the country joining the union, and, third, wage and price

behavior at home and abroad. As Marston (1984) states, the conditions

under which a fixed exchange rate regime is superior to floating accord-

ing to some social welfare criterion involve a complicated weighting of

these key factors, making generalizations difficult.
                                    2




     The present paper presents a model of a monetary union designed to

illuminate monetary and exchange rate policy in the West African Monetary

Union. Emphasis is placed on the interaction of the members of UNOA with

each other, through the common central bank, and on their interaction

with France and the rest of the world. As a consequence, the structure

of the national economies is highly stylized. Indeed, size is the major

structural characteristic of a country.

     The relative size of the partners is of course reflected in the

source and type of disturbances as well as in the trade pattern. While

the model can also account for real and nominal wage rigidities, the

focus is on the first two key factors mentioned earlier. In the model,

therefore, large countries (such as France) are not affected by distur-

bances originating in small countries but small countries (such as the

members of UMOA) are affected by large countries' domestic disturbances.

The collective nature of the pegging becomes important because the small

countries are taken to be of equal size.

     The paper is divided into two parts. A four-country macroeconomic

model is presented in part A. The set-up is such that one of two large

countries establishes what Corden (1972) would call a pseudo-exchange

rate union with two small countries, which in turn form a full monetary

union, with their own central bank. The effect on monetary and real

disturbances originating inside and outside the union is analyzed.

     It is shown that the pseudo-exchange rate union with the large

partner has no effect on the real exchange rates of the small countries

but affect their price levels, whereas a full monetary union requires in

principle a transfer whose allocation between the two small countries may

have real effects. This transfer is precisely provided by the large
                                       3



country, as   guarantor of the fixed exchange rate arrangement. Due to
size, the converse is not true. When both small countries are in sur-

plus, there is a reverse transfer to the large country, with no monetary

consequences.

     Part B characterizes the West African Monetary Union, in line with

the findings of the model. Evidence is provided on monetary allocations

within the union and on the real exchange rates of its members, as

compared to other African countries.



A. Collective pegging to a single currency



I. A two-tier, four country model



     The model consists of standard aggregate demand and aggregate supply

relationships, with trade and capital movements linking national

economies.2 Account is taken of the unequal size of the potential

partners by modelling two pairs of identical economies, large and small.

These are two identical large economies whose bilateral exchange rate

floats freely and two identical small economies who decide on whether

they will float or fix their exchange rate with one of the large coun-

tries. In so doing, they also allow the union-wide central bank to

decide on monetary allocations.

     Due to the difference in size between the partners in the union,

only the distribution of money between the two small countries is

endogenously determined. Even there, it can be modified by the alloca-

tion of a monetary transfer from the large partner. There is a

pseudo-exchange rate union between one of the large countries and the two
                                       4



small countries but full monetary integration between the two small

countries.

     Each national economy is highly stylized, and the focus of the model

is on the interaction of the members of the monetary union, two small

countries labelled country one (viz. Senegal) and country two (viz. Ivory

Coast), who take as given the member of the pseudo-exchange rate union,

labelled country star (viz. France) and the country outside the union,

labelled country double-star (viz, the United States). The model is

therefore recursive.

     When the French franc devalued against the dollar under the

Bretton-Woods system (1958 and 1969 during the sample period) it also

devalued against most of the European currencies, and the same holds for

the Smithsonian revaluation of 1971. Similarly, there were several

recent devaluations of the French franc against the Ecu. These are

ignored in the theoretical analysis. For simplicity, we refer to France

rather than the ENS as country star.

     A more accurate procedure would be to specify a three -   (rather   than

two -)   tier   structure. If the two large countries are the U.S. and

Germany (as a proxy for the ENS), and France is treated as a small

country, the recursiveness of the model is preserved. The structure of

the monetary union between two (very) small countries would allow them to

trade with France and the two large countries, or at least one of them

(the U.S.), but not with each other. This would again preserve the

recursiveness of the model but there would be two exogenous exchange

rates, the franc-dollar rate and the franc-Ecu rate shocking the (very)

small economies. In order to illustrate the interaction between France
                                    5



and the West African Monetary Union, though, a three-tier structure would

be too cumbersome.

     The four national economies are described by conventional aggregate

relationships. Demand for domestic output (the IS curve) is a function

of foreign outputs, relative prices or the real exchange rate, and the

real interest rate and it can also be changed by an exogenous demand

disturbance. Demand for real balances (the 111 curve) is a function of

domestic output and the nominal interest rate, as a measure of the. return

differential. By eliminating the nominal interest rate, we obtain an

aggregate demand curve which relates domestic output to the real exchange

rate, to foreign output and to the exogenous demand and monetary distur-

bances. A real depreciation increases the demand for domestic output

along conventional foreign trade multiplier lines.

     The supply of domestic output is derived from labor market equilib-

rium, where the suply of labor by workers responds to the wage deflated

by a consumer price index and the demand for labor by firms responds to

the wage deflated by price of the domestic good. Eliminating the nominal

wage, we obtain an aggregate supply curve relating domestic output to the

real exchange rate and an exogenous supply disturbance, which can be

interpreted as an increase in the productivity of labor. A real depreci-

ation lowers the supply of domestic output because it raises the product

wage. Prices change as a proportion of the difference between demand and

supply, so that a Philipps curve allowing for real wage rigidity is

featured.

     The model is closed by the assumption that domestic and foreign

assets are perfect substitutes, so that interest rates are equalized in

the stationary state. This determines recursively the real exchange rate
                                    6



and the price of domestic output, in terms of the exogenous real and

monetary disturbances respectively. Then, under flexible exchange rates,

the nominal exchange rate is given by monetary disturbances, whereas,

under fixed rates, the nominal money stock is determined endogenously.

     Size does not affect the interest-rate elasticities of money demand

and aggregate demand, which are common to all four countries, and the

other parameters are identical between the pairs of large and small

countries. In particular the two small countries' steady-state money

stocks are the same. These assumptions could be somewhat relaxed but an

analytical solution does require a strong symmetry between economic

structures.3

     The assumptions of labor market equilibrium and of perfect substi-

tutability between domestic and foreign assets are particularly strong.

Nevertheless, the case of an infinitely elastic supply of labor has often

been used in the context of developing countries. The exchange rate

union, on the other hand, does rule out some special risks attached to

small countries' assets, making the perfect substitutability assumption

slightly more palatable but the comparison with a perfectly flexible

exchange rate regime less appropriate.

     The model is used to assess the effect of fixing the bilateral

exchange rates of the two small countries with one of the large coun-

tries. Under price flexibility, the exchange rate regime has no effect

on the real exchange rate, since the effect on the nominal exchange rate

and the price level offset each other. Nevertheless, a monetary union

between one of the large countries and the two small countries may

require a transfer from the large partner to offset internal and external

disturbances. To that extent, the union allows the small countries'
                                                               7




central bank to enforce an asymmetric monetary allocation rule. Then

prices will not be adjusted to the nominal exchange rate and the real

exchange rate will also have to change as a consequence of the price

rigidity.



II. Flexible exchange rates



1.    The two large economies



      Assuming perfect foresight about prices and exchange rates, the

model of the two large economies consists of the following set of

equations:




(1)                                                                IS equations
            y**vy*_aO*_b(i**_ *)+u**
                                          -
(2)          6* = e +          p**            p*                   real exchange rate


(3)         p* =         p*   ÷                                    consumer price indexes


(4)         p** p** -


            u    -
                         p* = y*          -   ci
(5)                                                                LM equations
                     -
                         p**      =   y**      -    ci**

                     =   y[y*
(6)         p*                     ÷ k6* -
                                                         u]
                                                                   Price adjustment rules
                     =   y[y**        -
                                              k6*    -
                                                         u*]
(7)         i* =         i** +                                     interest parity
                                           8



where        y is the real output of country j

             p     is the price of the output of country j

             e     is the price of the double starred currency in units of the

                   starred currency

                   is the nominal interest rate in country   j
                   is   a demand disturbance in country j

                   is   a supply disturbance in country j

             u     is a monetary disturbance in country j

             v     is the (common) foreign output multiplier

             a     is a (common) term involving trade elasticities divided by

             the multiplier

             b     is the (common)real interest semi-elasticity of aggregate

             demand

             c     is the (comnion)interest semi-elasticity of money demand

                   is the (common)share of foreign goods in the consumer

                   price indexes

             y     is the (common)speed of adjustment of domestic prices

and          k is the (common) real exchange rate elasticity of aggregate

             supply

       We concentrate here on the stationarystate solution of the model.4
The   real exchange rate is obtained from the difference in the cyclical
positions    of the two countries whereas the interest rate is obtained by

their sum.       In other words, relative disturbances are channeled through
the   exchange rate and global disturbances through the interest rate:
                          d
                        U.,-
             0*—_—
                 ll
                                                     9



                                  S
               *        **       11*
(9)            1 =i
       where IL. = a         +   k(1+ v)
                   =         - (1. + v)*ud        is a composite relative real disturbance



               u *u -            (1    -
                                           v)*u   is a composite global real disturbance



                             -
                         1        1
                             2
                                                      A—
                                                  1 — k, Il
                        u*1 + u•*
                               1
and            "u. =
                 1           2



       Note that, given 0*, we obtain y* and y** by equating to zero the

right-hand side of (6) and we get the price of domestic output from (5):



(10)


       where 4i =      b/c
       Given prices and the real exchange rate, the nominal exchange rate

is also determined:



(11)
            e(1+2k)G*+2*u_2*u

                                 u* -
                         d        m        m
       where
                        m              2



       Let us now consider the effect of the disturbances in turn. Mone-

tary disturbances have no effect on the real exchange rate and offsetting

one-to-one effects on the nominal exchange rate and on the own price
                                          10




level. An increase in the demand for the good of the starred country, u

> 0, appreciates the real exchange rate by IL. The size of this

multiplier is smaller the larger the demand elasticities, a and V, and

the larger the supply elasticity k weighted by the share of traded goods

in the price index, 3.

       Note that, according to (11), the effect of a change in the real

exchange rate on the nominal exchange rate is augmented by 2k because of

the effect of aggregate demand expansion in country star in raising

prices in country double star. The real appreciation of the domestic

currency is always less than the nominal appreciation.

       Looking at demand expansion in country double star, it increases the

price level there by one half of (1/4) -        (k/H)       so that the nominal

exchange rate depreciates by more, with the factor given by the effect of

real on nominal exchange rate change, 1 + 2k13. The effect of supply or

productivity disturbances is also stronger on the nominal exchange rate,

the difference being proportional to the trade elasticities.

       Equally distributed demand, supply or monetary disturbances (such

that *u = 0) leave the exchange rates unchanged (8* =             e   0). The size

of the effect on the price level of the supply shock differs from the one

of the demand shock, by a factor of 1 +           -    U:


(12)        p** =         -
                              (1 +    -
                                          v)    +
                                                      tim




where       u.u*u*
             1 1   1 iA,it,m.



       Negatively correlated real disturbances (such that *u =
                                                                        u)   leave

interest rates unchanged (i =    j*   = 0).    They have no effect on the price

level when there are no supply effects (k =
                                                      u = 0):
                                         11




(13)




where        u*=u**
              1  1
                    iA,n
       We   can thus simplify the structure of the large economies by ruling

out supply effects. If, in addition, their monetary policies are per-

fectly correlated (u1 = 0) and there are only relative demand

disturbances (u =      0),   the nominal and real exchange rates are the same

and they will be the only channel of external disturbances to the small

countries. The solution in this "superkeynesiant' case is simply:


(14)         e--
2. The two small economies



       The model of the small economies consists of the same relationships

as the large economies. Care is taken, though, to distinguish trade with

the two foreign countries, one of which, the starred one, will turn out

to be a partner in the exchange rate union. We present the model of what

we will call the domestic economy in log-linear form, expressed again as

deviation from steady-state (the Appendix contains the derivation). It

will be easy to modify it when we consider the other (identical) small

country, which will be the partner in the monetary union.



(15)         y =                                       IS equation
                   (a*+a**)e_a*O*+v*y*+v**y**_b(i_p)


(16)          0    e** +   p**   -
                                     p                 real exchange rate




(17)                                                   consumer price index
                                                              12




(18)         Urn -   p    =       y   -   ci                                                  LH equation



(19)         p =     y[y      -    haO* + h(1          -
                                                           a)O     -
                                                                        u1]             price adjustment rule



(20)           i =   i*   + e*                                                          interest parity



(21)         e* =    e**          - e
                                                                                        triangular arbitrage



       Concentrating again on a particular solution to the model (with 1c                                              =
  =      = 0),    we solve for the real exchange rate 0 as a function of the

foreign real exchange rate 0* and the common interest rate i*, supply

disturbances in the two large countries and domestic disturbances:



(22)         HO [* + (v*                       -   v**)k]O*        +   bi*    +
                                                                                  V*u   +
                                                                                            V**U*
                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                        uA
                                                                                                             +
                                                                                                                 u7t


       where              a -f-ha.                   j = *,
       and      11a*+a**
       The role of trade patterns is apparent. Indeed, when trade multi-

pliers are the same (v* =                       v* = v/2),             (22) simplifies to:



(23)




       Even in this special case, global disturbances abroad affect the

small countries' real exchange rate unless they are the same as domestic

disturbances (u. =
                      1
                                  u*1     =   u**,
                                               1
                                                     i = A,    it).


       Using the right-hand-side of (19) into (18), we get an expression
for the price of domestic output in the same form as (10) above:
                                        13



                                        S
(24)
             p=h[(1_)O_a*O*]+_u+u

       Substituting for e, we get in the strongly symmetric case of equa-

tion (23):



                                 S
(25)               *e*++(*s*s)                 X'hlA (1-X)u+u

       where A* =   a*c4.   -
                                 a***

       and X =    h(1   -




       If there is no difference between the relative shares of foreign
output in the domestic price index and the relative trade elasticities,

then A* =   0.    This is the case, emphasized by Marston (1984), of "bal-

anced" sensitivities. Then, with equal real disturbances at home and

abroad, the effect of a supply shock differs from the effect of a demand

shock by the same factor 1 ÷ - v as in (12) above.

       When foreign real disturbances are perfectly negatively correlated

and A* = 0, the price of domestic output is a function of domestic

disturbances alone and output is given by a x-weighted average of demand

and supply disturbances:



(26)        y =
                  XuA
                        + (1 -
                                 x) u

       Similarly, the real exchange rate can be written as:
                                          14



(27)



where          =      = cL/(1   -
                                    a) when A* = 0


       To solve for the nominal exchange rate of the small country with the

numeraire currency, use the definition of the real exchange rate. It is

obtained by adding 0 and p in (25) and (27) and subtracting p** in (10).

In the absence of supply and interest rate effects in the large coun-

tries, we get:



(28)               e**=Ce_U+um
       where       U = Uj + (1 -     )u
       and



       To sum up the results under flexible exchange rates, monetary

disturbances have no effect on the real exchange rate and only domestic

monetary disturbances (urn) have an effect on the price of domestic output

(the effect is one—to-one as before). An increase in the demand for

domestic output (uA > 0) appreciates the real exchange rate and an

increase in labor productivity (u > 0) depreciates it by the same amount

1/H.

       In the two—country model, the effect was not symmetric because

account had to be taken of the output repercussion on the foreign coun-

try, which is zero for the small open economy. Thus the depreciation was

larger than the appreciation by v/21L.

       Another difference refers to the unambiguously negative effect of

demand expansion on the domestic price level. Since the fall in prices
                                        15




induces a real depreciation, the nominal exchange rate has to appreciate

by more than the real rate.

         The effect of the supply shock on prices is also unambiguously

negative but the nominal exchange rate will only depreciate if the trade

elasticities are small (a* ÷ a** < 1 or equivalently       >   1),   because in

that case the fall in prices is less than the real depreciation.



III Fixed exchange rates



         Before investigating the effect of alternative monetary arrange-

ments, it is useful to define the effective exchange rate of the domestic

economy, a weighted average of the exchange rates of the two partners,

with the weights given by the respective shares in the foreign component

of the consumer price index, that is by .



(29)


         The second equation is obtained by triangular arbitrage. Taking it

into account, it is seen from (28) that, in this simplified setting, the

effective exchange rate is only a function of domestic disturbances. If

the home country    fixes   its exchange rate with country star e* = 0 and e**

=   e.   We thus have the effective exchange rate under the union, denoted

by a tilde:



(30)
             E     (1- )    e
                                           16




       The effective exchange rate under the union appears in the expres-

sion for the exchange rate with the potential partner, obtained from (28)

by triangular arbitrage. Recalling that u =         =   by assumption, we

get:




(31)        e* =   -(1   -   e   - U   + U -    U




       Under the union, (31) becomes an equation for the endogenous money

stock of the home country, denoted by m:



(32)        m+U+um
       Due to the difference in size between the two partners, however, the

money stock of country star continues to be policy determined and there

is no problem of monetary allocation between the two partners. Thus Urn

can be interpreted as an exogenous increase in the union-wide money

stock, which will increase the domestic money stock one-to-one since

there is no induced depreciation of the exchange rate of country star.

       Associated with the money stock under the union, there is a price of

domestic output, denoted by a tilde. From (25), in the absence of global

real disturbances and when sensitivities are balanced, we get:



(33)        -y+m
       It is clear from (26) and (27) that since y and 0 are given by real

domestic disturbances, the difference between the fixed and flexible
                                    17




exchange rate solutions is matched by the difference in money stocks and

prices:



(34)        e**_eu _p-p
                      in




       Equation (34) shows that if the fixed exchange rate is lower than

the one prevailing before the agreement, the money stock and the price of

domestic output will fall by the same amount. The fall in the money

stock is brought about by a capital outflow which would increase in

magnitude if the government attempted to increase the supply of domestic

assets to the public. Since real output does not change, the real money

stock remains fixed and the fall i.n money balances is transmitted to

prices. Only by increasing demand for real output could the government

enforce a different nominal income. Alternatively, as well will see, the

loss in reserves can be offset by a. transfer from abroad.

       In general, the price of domestic output has to be different from

its equilibrium level for the real exchange rate to be different under

the union. For example, domestic prices may be rigid downward.

       Consider thus a price level T which, under the union, gives a real

exchange rate 0T Then, the difference in real exchange rates is given

by:




(35)        GT_Oe_e+p_pT=_pT
       The difference in the price prevailing in the two situations can be

decomposed further into the difference in real outputs and in money
                                     18




stocks. The latter, in turn, can derive from an increase in the foreign

money stock:



(36)
            PPT_m_UT_Y+YT
                      1 T -T
                     -—u
                      HA -um
       where 0 = 0 under the "neutralt' union (i.e. UA =
                           T
                                                           u = 0).
       A demand expansion uA, perhaps in the form of fiscal expansion,

appreciates the real exchange rate by 1/H, whereas a monetary transfer

from abroad, has a one-to-one effect.

       When account is taken of the induced real appreciation, the demand

expansion increases output by x < 1. Given monetary policy, this expan-

sion would reduce prices by the same amount it expands output so that the

nominal appreciation would be given by x + 1/H .       Ruling   out the

exchange rate change and the fall in prices requires therefore an in-

crease in the money stock by the same factor ,    which will be less than
one if the trade elasticities are high enough. The real appreciation is

therefore accompanied by a rise in prices in the same amount 1/H. In

other words, to keep the nominal rate constant, demand expansion must be

consistent with the increase in the money stock or UA =              Of the
                                                        UT/C.
equivalent rise in nominal income, a proportion xI goes to real output

expansion and the remainder (1 -   x)I goes to the rise in prices and fall
in the real exchange rate.

       In sum, the effects of a fixed exchange rate regime are confined to

nominal variables unless there is a price rigidity, an induced demand for

domestic output, as a consequence of fiscal expansion, or a transfer from

abroad. The latter possibility becomes quite relevant when there is a
                                      19




monetary union involving the two small countries, henceforth indexed 1

and 2.




V. Two-tier monetary unions



1.      A monetary union of two small countries



        If country one fixes its exchange rate with country two, we will

have e =
             e   in equation (31). Unlike the previous case, we must keep

track of the monetary allocation. In fact, any exogenous increase in the

union-wide money stock - denoted by t -    will   be allocated between the two

partners in proportion to their steady-state shares (assumed to be

equal).



(37)



(38)
            m2t-U
(39)        e*t_(1_C)e_U5

where       t is the increase in the union wide-money stock;



                 —   ____
                      2


                      12
                     U÷U
and         U
                      2

       Given the unchanged real exchange rates, equations (37) through (39)

are the solution of the exchange-rate union between two small countries.
                                       20



If t =    0,   the money stocks are unchanged when demand and supply distur-

bances are perfectly correlated          =   0).   In that case, the exchange
                                              S     1
rate with country star appreciates by U = U



2.      A three-country monetary union



        In general, fixing the exchange rate with country star requires an

increase in the union-wide money stock given by making e* = 0 in (39).

If real disturbances are exogenous, the transfer must adjust. Denoting

this endogenous monetary transfer from abroad by a tilde, we get:



(40)
               "
               t
                   E'e+Us


        According to equation (40), a depreciation of the franc against the

dollar requires an increase in       which is larger the higher the

consumption share of goods from country double star relative to goods

from country star (the lower ).       On the other hand, a union-wide demand

expansion requires an increase in which is larger the larger the

consumption share of non-union relative to union goods (the lower a).

        We interpret the endogenous increase in the union-wide money stock

(    > 0) as a transfer from the large partner which guarantees the fixed

exchange rate agreement. While t could be zero in equation (37) through

(39),     will generally be non-zero in (40).

        Conversely, the transfer may remain exogenous if expenditure is

adjusted by fiscal policy in both countries such that (with u =         0):


(40)           UA= (t -
                                     21



union-wide demand or supply disturbances and no external real

disturbances either, so that U1 = e =     0.
       We analyze next how the allocation of the transfer can have real

effects.



4.     A monetary allocation rule



       If the union-wide central bank allocates the transfer in (40)

according to (37) and (38), the full monetary union will have no real

effects. This is easy to verify by eliminating t =

       Consider now a monetary allocation rule whereby money increases in

each country, denoted earlier as 4,    are     based on a share w of the sum of

the equilibrium money stock increases. The percentage change in each

money stock is given by 2w when the two small countries are identical in

steady-state:
             1
            UT = 2wt

(41)

            u = 2(1    -




       Using equations (40) and (41) in (35), we obtain:



            O61+(l-2w)+(l-w)U1-wU2
(42)


            O=O2-(l-2w)-(l-w)jJ1+wU2

       The effects of various disturbances on       are collected in Table 1.

Since the gaps are of the same magnitude and of opposite sign (if         >

then 0 <    °2'   the results for country two are easy to obtain. Thus, in
                                      22



                                  Table 1

                         Effect of Disturbances
                                                         T
              on the Real Exchange Rate of Country One (Oi)


                                      j=A                                            both



                                      demand          supply


1.   Foreign Ce)              c&.+ a(1-2w)             n.a.                          n.a.
                                      1 -a



2.   Domestic (ui)            x   -                     1 -   x - w(1    -
                                                                                 )   1-w


3.   Partner (u)                                       -w(1 -   )                    -w

4.   Union-wide


4.1 Global (uu)               x — 2w                    1-    x — 2w(1       -   ) 1-2w
4.2 Distribution (u-u2)       x                         1 - X                        1
                                      23



the first column, first row, we see that the effect of a depreciation of

the franc-dollar rate is ambiguous when w >            It will be a real depre-

ciation in the small countries if trade is sufficiently biased toward

France. When w =     the effect is the same as under flexible exchange

rates.

     The first column, second row shows that demand expansion in country

one has an ambiguous effect on the real exchange rate, unless the whole

transfer goes to country two (ui =   0),   in which case the effect will be

positive. The condition for a negative effect will be weaker than w >

if the supply elasticity is high enough, i.e., if hO. -         a)   >   1.   When the

whole transfer goes to the expanding country (w =        1),   the effect is the

same as in equation (27) above.

     The effect of demand expansion in country two is a real appreciation

in country one and the same is true of a productivity improvement if

trade elasticities are high enough ( <       1).    As shown in the third row,

both effects are dampened by w, so that they vanish when the whole trans-

fer goes to country two (w =   0).   The effect of a domestic productivity

improvement is an unambiguous real depreciation, so that a harvest

failure (u < 0) causes the real exchange rate to fall. When the whole

transfer goes to country one (w =    1),   the effect is again the same as in

equation (27).

     As shown in the fourth rows, the effect of union-wide global distur-

bances are the same as in (27) when w =            On the contrary, inversely

correlated disturbances are independent of w and always have an effect

given by x. In general, the real exchange rategap can be avoided by

suitable choice of w. For example if U' > U2, then to >           for         =
                                                                                  O.
                                  24



     The model described above shows how a monetary allocation rule

induces a change in the real exchange rates of the members of a monetary

union. This implies that there is also a pseudo-exchange-rate union

which includes, aside from the members of the monetary union, a large

country ready to ensure the fixed-exchange rate agreement by transferring

real resources to the union. While the transfer is the counterpart of

the administrative monetary allocation rule, we showed under what condi-

tions a fixed exchange rate arrangement could have real effects.

     Due to the size difference, an increase in the large partner's money

stock could also imply a change in the real exchange rate of the small

partner, to the extent that the price level was different from the one at

which the exchange rate was pegged. Similarly, the real effects of

demand expansion could be interpreted in terms of a fiscal expansion

induced by the union, as long as the large partner is willing to transfer

real resources and therefore increase real money balances.

     Nevertheless, the focus of the analysis was on the allocation of a

given transfer between the two small countries, because this is an

important feature in the recent experience of the West African Monetary

Union. The major implication of the model was therefore that change in

the real exchange rate of the small partners are to be expected when the

allocation of a given transfer is different from the one implied by the

assumed equality of the steady-state monetary shares of the two small

countries. Needless to say, much more work needs to be done in order to

reflect the structural characteristics of their economies.
                                       25




B.   The West African Monetary Union (UMOA)



I.   The Franc Zone



     Established in the mid-forties between France and its colonies., the

Franc zone survived their independence in the early sixties and the move

to generalized floating in the early seventies.

     Summing up the African monetary experience of the Bretton-Woods era,

Mundell (1972) writes: "The French and the English economic traditions in

monetary theory and history are different. At the risk of gross oversim-

plification (...)   the   French tradition has stressed the passive nature of

monetary policy and the importance of exchange stability with convert-

ibility (within the franc area); stability was achieved at the expense of

institutional development and monetary experience. The British countries

by opting for monetary independence have sacrificed stability, but gained

experience and better developed monetary institutions. The simplest test

of this is the extent of development of money substitutes" (p. 93)..

     He goes on to present indicators of financial intermediation for

eleven "rich countries" and 33 African countries, classified into "Franc

Africa", "Sterling Africa", "North Africa" and "Central East Africa".

His figures show that, in 1968, the median propensity to hold cash was

21% in OECD countries, 33% in the "Sterling" category, 47% in the Franc

category and 45% in the remaining two.

     Table 2 provides evidence along the same lines for the United States

and France, as rich countries, Kenya, a Sterling Africa country, several

countries of Franc Africa, Barbados, a member of the East Caribbean
                                                       26



                                             Table 2

                       Indicators of Financial Intermediation (%)


                                              (1)                         (2)
                         Propensity to hold near-money Propensity to hold cash

                           1962        1972         1982    1962   1972         1982


1.   Rich countries

     United States           60         71          80        8      6            6
     France                  36         60          70       25     11            6


2.   Sterling Africa

     Kenya                   29*       30           37       21*    21           18


3.   Franc Africa

     Cameroon                 7         18          36      52      38          27
     Ivory Coast              8         17          30      56      42          33
     Senegal                  3         9           28      51      39          32
     Mauritania               3         8           26      49      40          31
     Madagascar               2         19          21**    55      39          31**
     Mali                     3         3            6      61     59           62


4.   Other

     Barbados                57*       71           70      13*     10           13
     Sudan                    6         13          18      50     45           32


             Notes:    *1966; **1979

             Source: International Monetary Fund, International Financial
                        Statistics (IFS)
                      (1) Line 35 'over lines 34 + 35 (M2)
                       (2) Line 14a
                           unless otherwise noted

             France    (1) Lines 35 +      over lines 54 + 56a (M3)
                       (2) Line 14a   65a}

             US        (1) Lines 59mcb - 59 mab over line 59 mcb (M3)
                       (2) Line 14a
                                   27



Currency Area, and Sudan.5 The figures for 1962 and 1972 confirm the

lower development of money substitutes in Franc Africa.

     The Franc Zone changed considerably over the last forty years. Upon

independence, it was adapted through the creation of common central banks

for the former French colonies of West, Central and East Africa. In

particular, Benin, Ivory Coast, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Togo and

Upper Volta created UMOA, managed by the Central Bank of the West

African States (known by its French acronym BCEAO) whereas Cameroon,

Central Africa, Chad, Congo and Gabon established the union of the

members of the Bank of Central African States. The members of these two

monetary unions signed an agreement of monetary cooperation with France

whereby the exchange rate between the French franc and the franc of

African Financial Cooperation (CFA) was fixed, foreign exchange reserves

were pooled and exchange controls were common to the whole zone. Most

importantly, an "operations account" at the French Treasury guaranteed

the convertibility of the CFA and provided a channel for monetary trans-

fers between France and UNOA.

     While Mali participated in the UNOA negotiations, it refused to sign

the agreement and left the Franc zone in 1962. The justification was

consistent with Mundells view of the British tradition: monetary sover-

eignty, Mali argued, was an essential instrument of development. Mone-

tary stability was a less pressing consideration.

    Mali's criticism of the Franc zone as a neo-colonial obstacle to

"self-centered" development is only one example of a fairly widespread

view that the arrangement benefits France.6 Since the repeated

devaluation of the French franc after 1981 and the implementation of

tighter area-wide exchange controls, the desirable trend toward trade
                                  28



diversification away from France seems to have been reversed. As a

consequence, the British tradition might now provide an argument for

leaving the Franc zone: there will be no monetary stability in UMOA if

there is none in France.

     This controversy about the costs and benefits of the Franc zone

merely illustrates how the volatility of major exchange rates over the

last ten years has changed the terms of the Mundellian trade-off between

monetary stability and development. Stability relative to one currency

means instability relative to other floating currencies, so that fixing

"the" exchange rate is no longer an option. The figures for 1982 reort-

ed in Table 2 also suggest a blurring of the difference between the

French and English monetary traditions. Certainly, the propensity to

hold cash remains higher in the former French colonies than in Knya but,

except for Madagascar, the propensity to hold near-money increased much

faster in the countries of Franc Africa than it did in Kenya or Sudan.

     To the extent that both groups were subject to the global shocks of

the seventies, the acceleration of financial development casts the

agreements of monetary cooperation with France in a new light. The

originality of their design has been emphasized in the work of the

Guillaumonts (1984). Rather than a historic relic, the Franc zone

represents in their view a conscious choice of monetary and exchange rate

policy by sovereign states. Similarly, for Vinay (1980), it is a "unique

organization" where "the traditional legalism of French institutions was

replaced by a fertile pragmatism".The fact that some former French

colonies, such as Madagascar and Mauritania, left the union in 1972 is of

course consistent with the idea of choice.7

     Pragmatism can also be found in the attitude of Mali. Three years

after choosing monetary sovereignty, negotiations began for a return to
                                         29



the Franc zone, and a special arrangement was agreed upon in 1967,

whereby the Malian franc was devalued by 50% relative to the CFA. Also,

France was to lobby for the accession of Mali to UMOA. The agreement

involved two preliminary phases. A one-year fiscal adjustment-

cuin-liberalization was followed by bilateral cooperation with France

along BCEAO lines. The duration of this phase was not specified since

full membership for Mali might not be welcome by the other members. This

is not surprising in light of its singular monetary underdevelopment,

apparent from Table 2, and a persistently negative operations account

with France.

     Nevertheless, Malian membership in UNOA was agreed upon at Niamey,

Niger in October 1983. The third phase was thus completed in 1986. Due

to the increasing transfer of resources from France to UNOA, the reversal

of Mali's position might be explained by a desire to receive the transfer

through UNOA rather than directly from France.

     If fixing is impossible in a floating world and a pure float is not

a viable -   let   alone desirable —   option   for a developing country, an

alternative to the institutions of the Franc zone would be for UNOA to

collectively peg to a basket of currencies. This was proposed by

Nascimento (1984) on the basis of an econometric analysis of the costs

and benefits of various exchange rate regimes for the unjon as a whole.

He measures the trade-off between monetary sovereignty and "liquidity"

respectively by the loss in reserves associated with an excess supply of

money (the offset coefficient) and by the variances of departures from

purchasing power parity. According to this operationalization of the

Mundellian trade-off, offset coefficients and real exchange rate vari-

ability in UNOA are smallest under a basket peg and largest under a

crawling peg relative to the French franc.
                                   30



     Both the neglect of the French transfer - which allows the continued

sterilization of the loss in reserves - and the assumption of purchasing

power parity cast doubt on the applicability of Nascimento's analysis to

UMOA, let alone to its persistent deficit members, such as Senegal. All

the same, for a given transfer, pegging to a basket allows for the choice

of optimal weights. Since It is unlikely for the optimal weight of a

particular currency to be one, such a regime would dominate the present

arrangement. Similarly, it is unlikely that the rate of crawl be zero,

so that a regime where indicators are optimally chosen will also dominate

the basket peg.8 This would make UNOA look like the EMS rather than part

of the Franc Zone. The problem for a deficit country in UNOA would then

be how to ensure a continued transfer from its surplus partners, if there

are any.



II. Monetary allocations in UNOA



     During its first decade, UNOA followed the prudent course cited

earlier as being characteristic of the French monetary tradition. From

its Paris headquarters, BCEAO managed to keep the composition of the

union's money stock (M2) virtually constant. The net foreign assets of

the banking system grew almost without interruption and remained at about

one third of the money stock, so that domestic assets accounted for the

other two thirds (Table 2, column 3). The propensity to hold near-money

increased from 4% in 1962 to 13% ten years later (column 4). Finally, as

a share of the French money stock, UNOA's money showed a slight increase

(column 5).
                                            31



                                          Table 2

                            Composition of Money Stock in IJMOA

            Net Foreign           Money          Ratio            Ratio Time     Share of
              Assets               (M2)          (1)/(2)         Deposits/(2)     France

                 (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)           (5)

                       (CFAF billion)                      (%)

1962           31.0                88.3             35               4.3            1.2
1963           31.0                90.2             34               4.1            1.1
1964           32.2               103.1             31              10.0            1.1
1965           43.5               103.6             40               7.8            1.0
1966           43.5               108.0             40               8.2            1.0
1967           38.8               112.1             35              10.3             .9
1968           43.8               133.6             33              12.7             .9
1969           53.7               159.6             34              16.9            1.1
1970           79.5               185.7             43              16.1            1.1
1971           81.3               204.1             40              16.4            1.0
1972           63.7               217.0             29              13.3             .9
1973           52.9               261.0             20              18.3             .9
1974           81.0               387.2             21              21.1            1.2
1975           30.2               437.4              7              20.9            1.2
1976           37.1               596.0              6              21.8            1.4
1977           62.8               811.7              8              23.5            1.7
1978           38.5               941.2              4              25.4            1.7
1979          —73.0               945.1             -8              22.4            1.5
1980         -282.0              1024.7          —28                23.5            1.5
1981         -431.1              1186.2          —36                25.1            1.6
1982         -547.5              1273.9           -43               27.0            1.5

Sources: (1) IFS line 3m      summed over country pages:         excludes long

             term borrowing (line 36c1) and SDR allocations (included

             in other items, line 37r).


         (2) IFS lines 34 and 35 summed over country pages.


         (4) IFS line 35 over (2).


         (5) (2) + (3) over IFS lines 34 + 35 for France.
                                   32



     The situation changed in the seventies, but the reversal was ob-

scured by the drastic increases in the reserves of Ivory Coast in 1974

and 1977, largely due to higher world prices for coffee (19% and 20%

respectively) and cocoa (56% and 69% respectively). Reserves also jumped

for Togo in 1974 due to the rise in the price of phosphates (483%) and,

as a share of the union money stock, went from 14% to 27%. At the same

time, the institutional reforms allowed greater freedom for BCEAO to

conduct monetary policy from its newly established African headquarters.9

     As shown in Table 3, the negative foreign asset position of the

commercial banks overtook the claims of the central bank in 1979 and the

operations account of the central bank moved from a claim of CFAF 54.6

million on France in December 1979 to a liability of CFPIE 13.2 million in

March 1980. The steep increases in the reserves of Togo in 1981 and 1982

were no longer sufficient to offset the declines of the two major part-

ners, Ivory Coast and Senegal. The external liabilities of the banking

system increased from 10% of the money stock in December 1979 to 36% in

June 1982 and reached 56% in June 1983.

     Put in another way, domestic assets increased from 96% of the union

money stock in 1978 to 143% in 1982. In the meantime, France's domestic

assets fell from 82% to 69% of the money stock in 1980 and increased to

77% in 1981 and 1982. This reflected the loss of foreign exchange

reserves associated with the expected devaluations of the franc during

these two years (and thus offset the revaluation of existing resources).

    The evolution of the shares of UNOA members is summarized in Table

4. Measuring volatility by the coefficient of variation, the Senegalese

share in UNOA's money stock was the second most stable, whereas it was

the most unstable over the whole period 1962-82. Concentrating on
                                    33



                                  Table 3



                      Net Foreign Assets of UNOA
                            (CFAF billion)



                          (1)                (2)               (3)

                      Assets of       Liabilities of
                       Central          Commercial           (1)—(2)
                        Bank               Banks




December
1975                    66.4                44.8              19.7
1976                     70.2                44.0             26.2
1977                    94.6                 41.3            53.3
1978                    125.2                90.4             34.9
1979                    32.5                131.5            -99.0
1980                   -120.2               189.5           —309.7
1981                   -237.8               190.1           -427.9
1982                   -356.8               203.6           -560.5
June
1982                   -260.4               174.1           -434.5
1983                   -533.0               180.3           —713.3


Notes: Total in (3) may not add due to rounding.
       Figures in (2), new series since 1979.
       June 1983 figure in (3) excludes Benin (data not available).


Source: BCEAO (includes long—term borrowing and SDR allocations which
        are excluded in the IFS presentation of Table 2).
                                                 34



                                             Table 4



                                        Monetary Shares

                                           in UMOA (%)

                                       Summary   Statistics
                                             1973—82



                          Mean                   Coef. var.*        Correlation



Ivory   Coast        58      (54)                  6     (12)       .33           (.37)

                     19                            8            -   .72
Senegal                      (22)                        (29)                    (—.37)

Togo                  7          (7)              14     (19)       .24           (.43)

Niger                 6          (6)              18     (14)       .26           (.06)

Benin                 5          (6)              18     (14)   -   .42          C— .46)

                                                                -   .44
Upper Volta           5          (5)               9     (12)                    (— .47)

Total/France          1          (1)              17     (22)             1.00




Note: numbers in parentheses refer to 1962—82



*standard deviation divided by mean times 100



          Source: IFS, lines 34 and 35.
                                   35



the two larger shares, the share of Ivory Coast has been positively

correlated with the share of UMOA in the French monet stock whereas

the corresponding correlation for Senegal ha been negative. During

the sixties, the converse was true (-.55 for Ivory Coast and .62

for Senegal). Senegal's allocation was therefore insulated from the

decline of the total for the last few years. That on average the

insulation was at the expense of Ivory Coast is clear from a negative

correlation of .8 between the two monetary allocations (Table 5). The

strength of the inverse link between the two economies was even higher in

the sixties (for 1962-72 the correlation reached —.99), largely because
                                                                    10
of the deterioration of the Ivorian external position after 1980.        If

the French transfer decreases, however, the negative shares correlation

will increase again.

     The increase in IJNOA's money relative to France's has reversed in

the last few years, in line with France's emerging reluctance to continu-

ously replenish the operations account. This implies that, in the

future, the monetary allocation of the transfer will become a central

policy issue for the members of UNOA. The membership of Mali, another

structural deficit country, also tightens the constraint on the shares.



III. Nominal Stability and Real Volatility



    Table 6 lists the 1980 trade shares of France, Senegal and the other

African countries covered in Table 2 by loosely-defined Ecu and dollar

areas. The shares of the Franc zone (including France) and of the United

States are also indicated. The non-U.S. members of the dollar area are

obtained residually.
                                       36



                                    Table 5



                  Correlation of Monetary Allocations

                                    1973—1982




                  Ivory Coast         Senegal              Togo         Niger       Benin



Senegal              - .76(- .96)
Togo                 —.71(.60)              .41(—.76)

Niger                - .52(-.24)
                                        -.1O(.02)           .52(.20)

Benin                -.78(—.65)             .60(.51)        .24(—.27)    .24(.21)

Upper Volta          -.82(—.88)             .65 (   .81)    .27(—.58)    .34(.31) .84(.66)




Note: Numbers in parentheses refer to 1962-1982.



Source: Same data as Table 4.
                                       37



                                     Table 6

                        Trade Shares by "Currency Area"

                                     (1980, %)



Imports           ECU        of which       Dollar    of which
                            Franc Zone                Franc Zone


Senegal (1)       53            37               47        4
France (1)        47             0               53        8
Ivory Coast (2)   52            42               48        7

Cameroon (3)      51            43               49        5

Mali (3)          79            67               21        0
Mauritania (5)    37            29               70        5

Madagascar (3)    62            41               38        4

Kenya (1)         31             0               69       17

Sudan (5)         29             5               71        8


Exports


Senegal           56            46               44        0
France            48             0               52        5
Ivory Coast       63            29               37        9

Cameroon          53            21               47       29
Mali              59            26               41        0

Mauritania        48            29               52        0

Madagascar        40            23               60       19

Kenya             34             0               66        4
Sudan             16             5               84        0


Notes: Number in parentheses indicates the minimum share, e.g. for

Senegal all partners with 1% share or larger were included in the compu

tation. Except for U.S., dollar area is obtained residually. France

shares refer to 1981.

Source: International Monetary Fund, Direction of Trade
                                    ._) 0




     Ivory   Coast, Madagascar and Mali show a lower share for imports from

the dollar-area than Senegal. The share of imports from the U.S. is

similar to that of Mauritania, Cameroon arid Madagascar. The Franc zone

export share is highest in Senegal, followed by Mauritania, Mali and

Ivory Coast. On the import side, however, Senegal has the lowest share

among Franc zone countries. Thus trade diversification increased the

dollar-area share in the trade of the Franc zone countries, but the trend

has probably been reversed by the franc devaluations of 1981/82 and the

associated tightening of exchange controls.11

     Due to the different trade patterns, there are sizable differences

between the nominal effective exchange rate of France, and the ones of

the Franc Zone countries. In the seventies, changes in the effective

exchange rate of the U.S. dollar have also become an important source of

divergence. Taking a 1972 base, the French rate in 1980 (using same year

import weights) was 105, whereas the Senegalese rate was 95 and the

Ivorian rate was at par. Eliminating the effect of the franc-dollar rate

shows a range of variation from 80(91) in 1979-80 to 95(99) in 1976 for

France (Ivory Coast) and from 97 in 1973-74 to 105 in 1977 for Senegal.

The appreciation of the dollar in the early eighties brings these indices

to 102 for France, 107 for Ivory Coast and 117 for Senegal. Similarly,

the devaluations of the French franc bring the effective rates to 127,

111 and 101 respectively.

    After a decade of experience with flexible exchange rates, the

notion that real exchange rates would be stabilized by the offsetting of

nominal variations by inflation differentials, very popular in the

mid-seventies, has been abandoned even by its most ardent defenders. The

failure of purchasing power parity is evident in the substantial
                                  39




variability of most measures of real effective exchange rates for indus-

trial countries.'2 Data availability precluded the computation of

effective exchange rates using more narrowly based indexes than the

so-called African consumer price index or even correcting prices for

exchange rate changes.13

     Table 7 compares the experience of African countries during the

floating rate period. The lowest nominal changes by far are in Senegal

(they rise to about 1/3 for Ivory Coast and Senegal when export weights

are used) and the mean nominal appreciation of Mauritania becomes large

in absolute value. The evolution of the real rate is even more striking

because Senegal and France are the only French-speaking countries to have

depreciated in real terms.14

     Nominal variability increased enormously in Senegal (28 vs. 3 for

Ivory Coast). In terms of real variability, Senegal was close to France

(6), Mauritania highest (8), and Ivory Coast lowest (4). The mean

changes are close in absolute values but the correlation between nominal

and real changes is lower in Ivory Coast. Also, the correlation between

real rates in the two countries increased to .45 in the seventies. Chart

1 shows a real depreciation of the franc since 1968 and pronounced swings

around the upward trend, which are most pronounced when the 1981 weights
            15
are used.

     It is also evident from Chart 1 that, after 1976, Senegal moved

opposite to France, whereas Ivory Coast magnified the French movement.

There is a substantial gap between the real rates of the two partners

until 1980, as would be expected from the automatic adjustment mechanism

of the balance of payments. This suggests that the monetary allocation

rule did respond to the economies' external performance, particularly
                                        40




                                     Table 7



                     Nominal and Real Exchange Rates

                                     1973—1982



                  Mean (%   p.a.)            Coef. Variation     Correlations

                 Nominal     Real            Nominal    Real    Nominal & Real



Export Weights
IVORY COAST         .32      -1.92             15.53     3.18         .63
CANEROON           1.95       -.24              2.93    26.04         .82
MADAGASCAR         2.84       -.96              2.41     5.78         .10
MAURITANIA        -1.61       -.64              4.14    14.95         .96
SUDAN             11.19       3.28               1.51    4.39         .82
KENYA             -2.08      -2.41              4.97     5.36         .90
SENEGAL             .36        .84              6.66     7.83         .70
FRANCE             1.70        .83              2.92     5.12         .96

Import Weights
IVORY COAST        1.11      -1.51              2.85    4.16          .62
CANEROON           1.37       —.41               1.72   7.41          .57
MADAGASCAR         1.91      -1.32              2.14    4.08         -.19
MAURITANIA        -1.76      -1.13              3.66    8.52          .98
SUDAN             11.43       3.44              1.60    4.33          .87
KENYA              4.26        .87                .90   5.24          .33
SENEGAL             .16       1.69             28.13    5.60          .77
FRANCE             2.54       1.44              2.28    5.53          .86

SOURCE: IFS, weights described in Macedo (1983b).
                                   41




when the total share of UMOA ceased to increase in relation to the French

money stock.

     The correlation of the relative shares of the two countries in UtIOA

and the ratio of their real effective exchange rates was rather weak in

the period 1965-82 C- .25 usin 1980 import shares) and basically disap-

peared in the 70's (-.05). TL s was also the case, but to a less extent,

of the correlation between mor y shares and relative consumer prices,

which dropped from -.35 to -.   between the two sample periods.
                          Chirt I


        REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE INDICES
                (1980 IMPORT WEIGHTS)



125

120

115

Ito
105
                     /
                 I
100             -F

9
                                                       //
                                                     I
                                                      /
                                                 I
                                                 /
85         SENEGAL
           FRANCE
80         IVORY cOAST'


 1965          1970           1975        1980       1982
                                       43




Conclusion




     While there are few monetary unions, there are many models thereof.

Most of these models are concerned with the choice of a single country to

peg to a single currency. The case analyzed in this paper is even more

unusual, since it involves a collection of countries pegging to a single

currency. Nevertheless, an effort was made to analyze the workings of a

full monetary union which has been in existence for almost forty years.

     The theoretical model presented in part A emphasized the interaction

of two small and two large countries, and showed under what conditions

the monetary union would involve changes in the real exchange rates of

its members. A transfer of real resources from the large partner was an

especially relevant instance since this is what has happened in the last

few years.

     Building on the available studies of the institutional structure of

UNOA, the process of monetary allocation was described in part B. The

drastic deterioration of the net foreign asset position of IJMOA in the

last five years shows the importance of the French transfer. Over the

last twenty years, however, monetary allocation within the union involved

a very high negative correlation between the two major partners, Senegal

and Ivory Coast. To the extent that the transfer from France disap-

pears, a fixed exchange rate with the French franc will require a resto-

ration of this pattern rather than the growing union-wide deficit which

has been observed since 1979.

     The comparison of the interaction between exchange rate and relative

price changes in Senegal, Ivory Coast and France confirmed the expected

failure of purchasing power parity to stabilize the real exchange rate.

More surprising -   despite   the presence in the price index used of
                                   44




non-traded goods and goods whose price is controlled - was the insulation

of (African) consumer price inflation in UMOA from French consumer price

inflation. Therefore, UMOA's stable nominal effective rates were accoin-

panied by unstable real effective exchange rates. Since this relative

price is weakly positively correlated with the terms of trade, it can be

said that the monetary union achieved nominal stability at the expense of

the real volatility. The unfortunate consequences of this pattern for

resource allocation led Nascimento (1983) to propose a basket peg for

UNDA. But his argument ignores the increasing French transfer of the

last four years.

     The comparison of the real effective exchange rates of Senegal and

Ivory Coast with several other African countries confirms the singularity

of Senegal's experience. All depreciated in nominal terms, but Senegal

achieved a real depreciation during the floating rate period whereas

other former French colonies appreciated in real terms. Real exchange

variability over the sample period was less pronounced in Madagascar,

Mauritania and Sudan.

     This suggests that, if the loss of monetary autonomy did not induce

a gold-standard type adjustment to external inflation in Senegal (as it

did in Ivory Coast before 1980), the reason is to be found in the in-

crease of the union-wide money stock relative to the exogenously deter-

mined French money stock in the seventies. More importantly, from 1975

to 1980, if the monetary allocation rule allowed Ivory Coast to drain

money from Senegal through the balance of payments it would have induced

real appreciation in the former and real depreciation in the latter, as

was indeed observed.

     As mentioned, the present paper merely scratches the surface of the

problem of the choice of an exchange rate regime for the members of UNOA
                                   45




and for developing countries in general. The model does not capture

enough stylized features of the small African economies and much more

work needs to be done on characterizing them empirically. Some features

of the large industrial economies were also left out, especially the

effect of the changes in the franc-Ecu rate.

    Finally, the model suggested an exogenous administrative procedure

to determine the crucial monetary allocation parameter. Therefore, the

effect of the recent threat of reduction in the transfer from France is

likely to be increasing conflicts about the monetary allocation rule,

making it endogenous. A set-up like the one presented in part A can of

course be extended to incorporate some of these conflicts.
                                       46




                                   APPENDIX I



                        DERIVATION OF A LOG LINEAR MODEL



      This appendix derives the log-linear model used in the text for one

small country. It can easily be adapted to the large countries. The

supply side is an extension of the three-country model in Marston (1984)

which introduces domestic SUi        disturbances   and an endogenous labour

supply. The wage contract set-up is left out. Supply disturbances are

features in the two-country model of Narston (1982). The demand side is

adapted from Macedo (1983a).



1.    Supply



       Consider a Cobb-Douglas technology for domestic output, subject to a

random productivity disturbance. For a given stock of capital, set to

one by choice of units, we have



(1)         Y =



where       Y is domestic output

            L is employment

                  is a supply disturbance

            X is the share of labor (a constant)



By marginal productivity pricing, we have:

(2)                =A
                                        47




where         W is the wage rate

              P is the price of domestic output



        Substituting for Y in (2), we get labor demand as a function of the

real product wage and the disturbance term:



(3)              =



        We   assume that the supply of is a function of the wage measured in

terms of the consumer price index, defined as a geometric average of the

domestic currency prices of the goods produced in the three countries:



(4)           Pc =       (p*E*)W (P**E**)"


where         P*(P**) is the foreign currency price the good produced in the

              partner (non-partner) country;

              E*(E**) is the price of the partner's (non-partner's) currency

               in units of domestic currency;

and              +     +a=    1




        The price of the partner's currency in terms of the non-partner's is

determined by triangular arbitrage:

(5)           E =    E**/E*


        Using the definition of the two relevant real exchange rates we

have another expression for P:
                                       48



                        -
(6)         Pc =   PU
where          =   PE/P
and         U =   p**E/p

        According to (6), proportional changes in           and P require that the

real exchange rate efffects offset each other or
                                                                       -
                                                                              If the
domestic real exchange rate depreciates, the real exchange rate of the.

partner will have to depreciate by a smaller amount. The larger the bias

in trade toward the partner, measured by ,           the   smaller this dampening

effect.

        We are now in a position to express labor supply as a positive

function of the real wage, with elasticity a:



(7)          LS = N



Using (6) in (7) we get



(8)          LS = N   [(W/P)O*'O(1 - c)1n



        In equilibrium, demand for labor equals supply of labor except for a

frictional unemployment pool. Equating (8) to (34), we obtain the

equilibrium product wage as a function of the terms of trade. Denoting

logarithmic deviations by lower case letters we get:

(9)          [1+n(1-X)](w -   p) = _n(l_X)[cO*   -
                                                      (l-a)O]   +




        Using (2) to substitute for L in (1), we get aggregate supply as a
function of the product wage, which, upon substitution from (9), yields:
                                                   49



(10)        y =   -h(l     -   c)0 +   hc*   0*   + u



where       h =
                      + n(1 -


                       1         1
and         u =                - 1+n(1-A)    U



2. Demand



        The demand side is obtained from the open-economy income identity

which defines aggregate demand:




(11)        Y = A(Y, R, UA) +                              E1P
                                         X1(Y1, E'P1) -          M1(Y, E1P1)



where       A =   C   + I + G Is real absorption

            X1 (M') are exports (imports) to (from) country i, I               **

            R is real interest rate

            UA is a demand disturbance



       In (11) the trade balance is expressed in units of the domestic good

and the effects of foreign (domestic) income on exports (imports) are to

be interpreted In common units, not made explicit to avoid cluttering.

To linearize (11), log differentiate, denote again logarithmic deviations

by lower case letters and define r = dR, to obtain:




(12)        y =       [a1(p1 + e1 -      p) + vy] - br    + UA
                                                      Fl




                      I
a,                          tI
                    a,a,
                                 I-"
                     +
                                            *
            a'              .    I-    F<
            N.                          ,. Z*
'—I          p.4.   a, a,
'
p..'
                                        ). *


                                                  *
                                                      +    U,

                                            +
       I,                                   .::
                                      51




                              Appendix Table I

                        Monetary Shares in UMOA




                            Senegal         Ivory Coast   Other UNOA



1962                         41.3                36.0        22.7
1q6                          'c h                IA
                                                 tJ..)        ,.,L   —


1964                         30.0                48.0         22.0
1965                         29.0                47.2        23.8
1966                         25.7                49.9        24.4
1967                         23.2                51.9        24.9
1968                         22.2                54.3        23.5
1969                         18.6                57.6        23.8
1970                         20.1                57.5        22.4
1971                         18.6                57.6        23.8
1972                         19.7                56.6        23.7
1973                        20.1                 56.7        23.2
1974                        20.0                 57.6        22.4
1975                         19.7                55.9        24.4
1976                         19.1                58.7        22.2
1977                         16.1                64.6        19.3
1978                         16.9                61.8        21.3
1979                         17.0                59.9        23.1
1980                        17.3                 56.8        25.9
1981                        18.3                 53.9        27.8
1982                        20.6                 51.9        27.5


SGurce: IFS Lines 34 ÷ 35
                                   52




                           Appendix Table 2



                         Shares of Ml in UNOA

                           Summary Statistics

                               1962 - 1982




                        mean (%)        coef.     var,*   correlation

Ivory Coast               51.31              13               .54

Senegal                    23.58             27              -.56

Togo                        6.55             20               .55

Niger                       6.57             14               .07

Benin                       6.07             13              -.48

Upper Volta                5.92              11              -.61


Memo: Total/France          1.60             31              1.00


* standard deviation divided by the mean times 100

Source: IFS, line 34.
                               53



                        Appendix Table 3



              Correlation of Monetary Allocations

                            1962-1982




              Ivory Coast     Senegal       Togo    Niger   Benin



Senegal         — .96

Togo              .60          - .76


Niger           -.24             .02         .20

Beam            -.65             .51        -.27     .21

Upper Volta     -.88             .81        -.58     .31     .66




Source IFS.
                                    54



                                   Notes



1.   it was surveyed some years ago by Tower and Willet (1976). Since

     then, there have been contributions by Allen and Kenen (1980),

     Marston (1980 and 1984), Aoki (1983), Melitz (1984) and Huizinga

     (1984), among others. On exchange rate policy in developing coun-

     tries, see Lewis (1977) and Kenen (1978).

2.   See Macedo (1983a) for a two-country model along the same lines.

3.   It is possible to introduce further asymmetries by marginal changes

     in the parameters, using the methodology developed by Aoki (1981).

4.   The homogeneous solution is in Macedo (1984).

5.   The relation of monetary and real integration in Africa is empha-

     sized in Letiche (1971). On the West African experience, see

     NcLenaghan et al. (1982) and Robson (1983). Helleiner (1983) has an

     assessment of prospects in Africa's relations with the Fund. Note

     that, since Sudan is in the Middle Eastern Department at the Fund,

     it is not included in IMF   (1968-77).
6.   Raffinot (1982) has one of the most systematic attempts at defending

     this view. It surfaces, however, in Mulumba (1976) -   cited   almost

     approvingly by Connolly (1983).

7.   Indeed, Allen (1983) reviewed the institutional structure of IJMOA as

     part of the preparation for setting up the East Caribbean Central

     Bank.

8.   See the analysis of Branson and Katseli (1982), and, on the choice

     of indicators, Branson and Macedo (1982).

9.   Bhattia (1982) emphasizes the importance of the 1974 reform in his

     study of UtIOA up to that date. The need for a more active interest

     rate policy is clear from Leite (1982).
                                    55



10.   Discreetly, the 1980 Report of BCEAO assigns the responsibility of

      the decline to "un Etat membre de l'Union" (p. 45)

11. The use of export and import shares to measure the relative impor—

      tance of trading partners' currencies neglects the growing weight of

      services and interest. In the case of Senegal the current account

      shares are not too different from the ones reported in Table 7.    See

      Macedo (1983b).

12. Nascimento (1984) and Connolly (1983) assume that purchasing power

      parity holds between UMOA and EMS (or France).

13. A comparison of the African index with the national output deflator

      appears in Plane (1983).

14. Plane (1983) computes "synthetic indices of competitiveness" based

      on ratios of unit values as well as on average market shares. These

      indexes behave quite differently from the real exchange rates.

15. No real rates are reported for Mali due to the absence of a price

      index in IFS. Plane (1983) presents such an index and singles it

      out as showing a clear overvaluation, unlike the other 9 African

      currencies he studies.

15. Using export weights (not shown) the upward trend is much less

      noticeable. Also, the figures are quite different for the whole

      period.
                                     56



                               References



Allen, E.M. 1983, Multi-State Central Banking, with special reference

     to the East Caribbean Currency Area, paper prepared for the IMP

     Institute Seminar in Barbados, August.

Allen, P.R. and P. Kenen 1980, Asset Markets, Exchange Rates and

     Economic Integration, Cambridge.

Aoki, M. 1981, Dynamic Analysis of Open Economies, Academic.

Aoki, M. 1983, A Fundamental Inequality to Compare Dynamic Effects

     of Real and Asset Sector Disturbances in a Three-country Model of

     the World Under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes, Economics

     Letters, 11; 263-267.

Bhattia, R. 1982, The West African Monetary Union - Experience with

     Monetary Arrangements, 1963-74, IMP Departmental Memorandum,

     September.

Branson, W. and L. Katseli (1982), Currency Baskets and Real Effective

     Exchange Rates in N. Gersovitz et al. (eds.), The Theory and

     Experience of Economic Development (Lewis Festwchrift), Allen &

     Unwin.

Branson, W. and J. Macedo (1982), The Optimal Choice ofIndicators for

     a Crawling Peg, Journal of International Money and Finance, 2.

Connolly, N. (1983), Le choix de regimes de change pour l'Afrique,

     draft, USC, Columbia, S.C., July.

Corden, M. (1972), Monetary Integration, Princeton Essay in

     International Finance no. 93.

Guillaurnont, P. and S. (1984), Zone Franc et Dveloppement Africain,

     Paris: Economica.
                                     57




Helleiner, G. 1983, The INF   and Africa in the 1980s, Princeton Essay
     in International Finance no. 152.

Huizinga, H. 1984, An Analysis of Strategic Behavior in a Two-Country

     Monetary Union, Senior Thesis, Department of Economics, Princeton

     University.

International Monetary Fund 1968, Survey of African Economies, vol.

     1: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),

     and Gabon, Washington, D.C.

International Monetary Fund 1969, Survey of African Economies, vol.

     2: Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Somalia, Washington, D.C.

International Monetary Fund 1970, Survey of African Economies, vol.

     3: Dahomey, Ivory Coast, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Togo and

     Upper Volta, Washington, D.C.

International Monetary Fund 1971, Survey of African Economies, vol.

     4: Democratic Republic of Congo (Zaire), Malaysi Republic,

     Malawi, Mauritius, and Zambia, Washington, D.C.

International Monetary Fund 1977, Survey of African Economies, vol.

     7: Algeria, Mali, Morocco and Tunisia, Washington, D.C.

Kenen, P. 1978, The Role of Monetary Policy in Developing Countries

     in Central Bank of the Gambia, The Role of Monetary Policy in

    Developing Countries, Banjul.

Leite, S. 1982, Interest Rate Policies in West Africa, IMP Staff

     Papers, March.

Letiche, J. 1972, Conditions and Objectives of African Economic

    Development, in L. Di Marco (ed.), International Economics and

    Development (Prebisch Festschrift), Academic.

Lewis, W.A. 1977, The LDCs and Stable Exchange Rates, Washington, D.C.
                                       58




Macedo, J. 1983a, Policy Interdependence Under Flexible Exchange Rates.

     WWS   Discussion   Paper in Economics no. 62, Princeton University,

     December.

Macedo, J. 1983b, Small Countries in Monetary Unions: The Case of

     Senegal, draft, Princeton University, October.

Macedo, J. 1984, Small Countries in Monetary Unions: A Two-Tier

     Model, draft, Princeton University, March.

Marston, R. 1980, Exchange rate Unions and the Volatility of the

     Dollar, NBER Working Paper no 492, June.

Marston, R. 1982, Real Wages and the Terms of Trade: Alternative

     Indexation Rules for an Open Economy, NBER Working Paper no. 1046,

     December.

Marston, R. 1984, Exchange-rate Unions as an Alternative to Flexible

     Exchange Rates: The Effects of Real and Monetary Disturbances, in

     J. Bilson and R. Flarston (eds.), Flexible Exchange Rates in Theo

     and Practice, University of Chicago Press.

McLenaghan, J., S. Nsouli and K. Riechel 1982, Currency Convertibility

     in the Economic Community of West African States, IMP Occasional

     Paper no. 13.

Melitz, J. 1984, The Welfare Case for the European Monetary System,

     draft, INSEE, April.

Mulumba, M. 1976, La Cooperation Monetaire en Afrigue: Des Zones

     Monetaires a l'Union Africaine des Paiements, Presses

     Universitaires du Zaire.

Nundell, R. 1972, African Trade, Politics and Money, in R. Tremblay

     (ed.), Africa and Monetary Integration, Afrigue et Integration

     Honetaire, IIRW.
                                   59




Nascimento, J.C. 1983, L'appartenance de i'UMOA a la zone franc dans

     le contexte actual, Le Point Economigue, Dakar, October.

Nascimento, J.C. 1984, The Choice of an Optimum Exchange Currency Regime

     for a Small Economy: an Econometric Analysis, draft, ESGE, Dakar,

     October.

Plane, P. 1983, Taux de Change en Economie Sous-developpee; Essai de

     determination pour dix pays de l'Afrique de l'Ouest, CERDI

     Discussion Paper no. 12, Clermont-Ferrand (France).

Raffinot, N. 1982, Gestion Eatique de la Nonnaie, Parites Fixes et

     Dependance: le ca de a zone franc, Tiers-Monde, July.

Robson, P. 1983, Integ ion. Development and Equity: Economic

     Integration in We    Africa, London: Allen & Unwin.

Tower, E, and T. Willel   i976), The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas and

     Exchange Rate Flex ly, Princeton Special Paper in International

     Economics, no. 11.

Vinay, B. (1980), Zone Fr nc et Cooperation Monetaire, Paris: Ministry

     of Cooperation.
