NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION, MARKUPS AND U.S. WELFARE
Robert C. Feenstra
David E. Weinstein
Working Paper 15749
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15749
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

Previously circulated as "Globalization, Markups, and the U.S. Price Level." The authors thank Jessie
Handbury, Morgan Hardy, Colin Hottman, and Philip Luck for excellent research assistance, along
with Sam Kortum, Bob Staiger and seminar participants at the NBER, Stanford University, UCSD,
and the University of Chicago for their comments. Financial support from the NSF is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Robert C. Feenstra and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Globalization, Markups and U.S. Welfare
Robert C. Feenstra and David E. Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 15749
February 2010
JEL No. E31,F12,F4
ABSTRACT
This paper is the first attempt to structurally estimate the impact of globalization on markups, and
the effect of changing markups on welfare, in a monopolistic competition model. To achieve this,
we work with a class of preferences that allow for endogenous markups and firm entry and exit that
are especially convenient for empirical work – the translog preferences, with symmetry in substitution
imposed across products. Between 1992 and 2005 we find the U.S. market experienced a series of
changes that confirm a pro-competitive effect: import shares rose and U.S. firms exited, leading to
an implied fall in markups, while product variety and welfare went up. We estimate the impacts of
these effects on a national level, and find that U.S. welfare rose by as much as 0.86 percent between
1992 and 2005 as a result of these changes, with product variety contributing one-half of that total.
Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
David E. Weinstein
Columbia University, Department of Economics
420 W. 118th Street
MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
dew35@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
A promise of the monopolistic competition model in trade was that it offered additional
sources of the gains from trade, beyond those from comparative advantage (e.g. Krugman, 1979,
and more recently Melitz, 2003). These additional sources include: consumer gains due to the
expansion of import varieties; efficiency gains due to increasing returns to scale and/or improved
productivity; and welfare gains due to reduced markups.1 While the first two sources of gains
have received recent empirical attention,2 the promise of the third source – reduced markups –
has not yet been realized. To be sure, there are estimates of reduced markups due to trade
liberalization for a number of countries.3 But these cases rely on dramatic liberalizations to
identify the change in markups and are not tied in theory to the monopolistic competition model.
The reason that this model is not used to estimate the change in markups is because of the
prominence of the constant elasticity of demand (CES) system, with its implied constant
markups. To avoid that case, the above authors do not specify the functional form for demand
and instead rely on a natural experiment to identify the change in markups.
For these reasons, we do not have evidence beyond these case studies about how the
broad process of globalization affects markups, and particularly no evidence on the impact of
such markup reductions on U.S. welfare. This paper is the first attempt to structurally estimate
the impact of globalization on markups, and the effect of changing markups on welfare, in a

1

These sources are not mutually exclusive. In Krugman (1979), for example, the welfare gains due to reduced
markups are identical to the gains from increasing returns to scale: as the scale of firms expands due to trade,
average cost is reduced and the gap between price=average cost and marginal cost is also reduced.
2
The consumer gains due to import variety have been estimated for the U.S. by Broda and Weinstein (2006). Gains
due to the self-selection of efficient firms into exporting (as in Melitz, 2003) have been demonstrated for Canada by
Trefler (2004) and for a broader sample of countries by Badinger (2007b, 2008). See also Head and Ries (1999,
2001) for Canada, and Tybout et al (1991, 1995) for Chile and Mexico.
3
See Levinsohn (1993) for Turkey; Harrison (1994) for the Ivory Coast; Krishna and Mitra (1998) for India; Kim
(2000) for Korea; Bottasso and Sembenelli (2001) for Italy; Konings, et al (2005) for Bulgaria and Romania; and
Badinger (2007a) for European countries. Most recently, De Loecker, et al (2012) have found that markups in India
increased following liberalization of trade in intermediate inputs.

2
monopolistic competition model.4 To achieve this we work with a class of preferences that are
relatively new to that literature – the translog preferences, with symmetry in substitution imposed
across products.5 These preferences have good properties for empirical work (Diewert, 1976):
they can give a second-order approximation to an arbitrary expenditure function; and correspond
to the Törnqvist price index, which is very close to price index formulas that are used in practice.
Furthermore, these preferences prove to be highly tractable even as the range of import varieties
changes, and because they are homothetic, we prefer them to the quadratic preferences of Melitz
and Ottaviano (2008) to obtain endogenous markups in a general equilibrium setting.6
In the translog case the elasticity of demand is inversely related to a product’s market
share, so markups fall as more firms enter, which we call the pro-competitive effect. On the other
hand, domestic firms may exit as foreign competition intensifies, offsetting some of this gain to
consumers. This we will refer to as the domestic exit effect. Incorporating these two effects into
the analysis allows us to estimate the impact of globalization on markups. Furthermore, this class
of preferences also allows us to address three potential criticisms of Broda and Weinstein (2006):
first, that CES preferences may overstate the gains from import variety because reservation
prices are infinite; 7 second, that product space might become crowded resulting in diminishing
returns from new varieties, which are not measured in the CES case; and third, that the CES
4

See also Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2012) and Yilmazkuday (2012).
These preferences have been used previously in trade by Bergin and Feenstra (2009) and Rodriguez-Lopez (2011).
6
The quadratic preferences used by Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) lead to linear demand curves with zero income
elasticity, though country population can act as a demand shift parameter. Demand curves of this type and the
associated markups are estimated in the industrial organization literature: see Bresnahan (1989) and the recent trade
application by Blonigen et al (2007). Estimates from gravity equations, however, show that when population is used
as one shift parameter, country income or income per capita is also needed (e.g. Bergstrand, 1989). So the zero
income elasticity assumed in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) is not sufficient for general equilibrium analysis, where it
is often desirable to work with homothetic preferences: see, for example, Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012), who
adopt the translog preferences when analyzing markups in a dynamic model. For these reasons, we find that the
translog is a very attractive functional form to model variable markups. For other non-homothetic preferences that
allow for variable markups see Behrens and Murata (2007), Behrens et al (2008) and Simonovska (2010).
7
While the CES system has an infinite reservation price, the area under the demand curve is still bounded above
(provided the elasticity of substitution exceeds unity). But it can be expected that the gains from new product
varieties in the CES case might exceed the gain from other functional forms such as translog; see note 30.
5

3
model may overstate the gains because the welfare calculations typically assume that foreign
entry results in no exit of domestic firms.
We shall address all these concerns using translog preferences, and surprisingly, obtain
estimates of the gains from trade for the U.S. that are similar to those under CES, but with
different sources. Our point estimate for the cumulative welfare gains to the U.S. from new
varieties and decreased markups in our preferred specification is 0.86 percent over the period
1992 to 2005. While much of the previous literature has focused on the gains from varieties, our
analysis suggests that variety gains only account for one-half of the aggregate gains. That effect
incorporates the loss in variety due to the exit of domestic U.S. firms. The remainder of the
welfare gain is due to the impact of new competitors on markups. Interestingly, our combined
gains for the U.S. due to import variety and the pro-competitive effect are of the same magnitude
as Broda and Weinstein’s CES estimates in our preferred specification. This finding resonates
well with the recent paper of Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson and Rodriguez-Clare (ACDR,
2012), who argue that with a broad class of preferences including translog, the formula for the
gains from trade is the same as that obtained in the CES case analyzed by Arkolakis, Costinot,
Rodriguez-Clare (ACR, 2012). But despite this apparent similarity between our results and
theirs, the reasons for our findings are quite different.
Specifically, ACDR focus on the second reason mentioned above for gains from trade:
the efficiency gains due to improved productivity, as the most efficient firms self-select into
exporting. Under their assumptions that the distribution of firm productivity is Pareto with a
support that is unbounded above, and the only parameter changing between equilibria are trade
costs, they find that the efficiency gains are identical in the translog and CES cases. Furthermore,
by construction in their model the first and third reasons for gains from trade mentioned above

4
do not operate: trade brings about neither changes in product variety nor in the distribution of
markups, both of which remain fixed as the costs of trade change. As shown in Feenstra (2014)
and by numerical methods in ACDR, if the distribution of firm productivity is instead a Pareto
with a bounded support, then the product variety and pro-competitive effects reappear. We focus
exclusively on product variety and firm markups and ignore the impact of trade on productivity
through the self-selection of firms into exporting. Additional efficiency gains due to improved
productivity can certainly apply in our model, but we do not attempt to measure these.
In the next section, we present some features of the data that are used to infer product
variety and markups. In section 3, we introduce the translog expenditure function and solve for
the cost-of-living index in the presence of new and disappearing goods, which allow the gains
from new products to be measured in section 4. Firms are introduced in section 5, where we
solve for the pro-competitive effect of imports. To measure the change in markups we follow the
general approach of the industrial organization literature (Bresnahan, 1989; Berry, 1994):
markups are not observed directly because marginal costs are unknown, so we rely on estimates
of the elasticity of demand to identify the markups. We do not have the data to measure those
elasticities at the firm level, so we rely instead on Herfindahl indexes of concentration for both
U.S. firms and countries exporting to the U.S. We show that these Herfindahl indexes, in
conjunction with the share of each country in the U.S., provide theoretically consistent ways to
measure the pro-competitive and variety effects. Significantly, we have been able to obtain these
indexes for all countries selling to the U.S., by land or by sea, as described in Appendix A. In
section 6 we discuss the procedure for estimating the system of demand and pricing equations,
and results are presented in section 7. Section 8 concludes.

5
2. Data Preview
One of the dramatic changes that globalization has wrought on the U.S. economy is the
declining share of U.S. demand supplied by plants located in the U.S. To see this, we define U.S.
domestic supply as aggregate U.S. sales less exports for agricultural, mining, and manufacturing
goods (see the Appendix A for detailed definitions of all of our variables). We define U.S.
apparent consumption as domestic supply plus imports. Similarly, we define the U.S. suppliers’
share of the U.S. market, as U.S. domestic supply divided by apparent consumption. Finally, we
define each country’s U.S. import share as the exports from that country to the U.S. divided by
apparent consumption.
From Table 1 we see that the share of U.S. apparent consumption sourced domestically
fell by a little more than 5 percentage points between 1992 and 1997 and by 9 percentage points
between 1998 and 2005. This decline corresponds to an annual decline in the U.S. share of 1.4
percentage points per year in the early period and 1.7 percentage points per year in the later
period. The flip side of this decline was an almost doubling of the import share. Interestingly, the
growth of imports was not uniform across countries: depending on the time period, between onehalf and two-thirds of the increase was due to increases in import shares from Canada, China,
and Mexico – countries that were either growing rapidly or involved in free trade agreements.8
One possible explanation for the findings in Table 1 is that the rise in import penetration
was confined to a few important sectors. We can examine whether this was the case by looking
at more disaggregated data. In Figure 1, we plot the U.S. suppliers’ share in 1997 or 2005 against
its level in 1992 or 1998, for each HS 4-digit category. We also place a 45-degree line in the plot

8

The switch in U.S. classification of output data from the SIC system to the NAICS in 1998 makes it difficult to
compare sectoral output levels between 1997 and 1998. We therefore break our sample into two periods (1992-1997
and 1998-2005) to maintain consistent series. For the initial tables, we will present the raw data drawn from two
subsamples, but we will present results for both sub-periods and the full sample in the results section.

6
so that one can easily see that the vast majority of sectors lie below the 45-degree line, meaning
that import penetration was steadily expanding over this time period. This pattern establishes that
the rise in import penetration, though quite pronounced in some sectors, was a general
phenomenon that was common across many merchandise sectors.
To make this clear, it is convenient to work with Herfindahl indexes of market
concentration, defined for each country selling to the U.S. We let i denote countries, j denote
firms (each selling one product), k denote sectors and t denote time. Let sikjt denote firm j’s
exports from country i to the U.S. in sector k, as a share of country i’s total exports to the U.S. in
that sector. Then the Herfindahl for country i is:

 

H itk   sikjt

2

.

(1)

j

The inverse of a Herfindahl can be thought of as the effective number of equally-sized
exporters, or U.S. firms, in an industry. Thus, a Herfindahl of one implies that there is one firm
in the industry and an index of 0.5 would arise if there were two equally-sized firms in the sector.
Similarly, if we multiply the Herfindahl by the share of the country’s suppliers in the market, one
obtains the market share of a synthetic typical firm in the market. This Herfindahl index is a very
useful statistic because in many demand systems, the markup of a firm is monotonically
increasing in its market share, and this feature will also hold in our translog system.
We were able to obtain the Herfindahl indexes for most countries selling to the U.S., by
land or by sea, in 1992 and 2005 (see the Appendix A). In Table 2, we present average
Herfindahls at the HS 4-digit level for the U.S. and for the 10 major exporters to the U.S.9 As
one can see from the table, the average U.S. Herfindahl rose slightly over both sub-periods,

9

For the U.S., we have adjusted the NAICS 6-digit Herfindahls from the Bureau of Economic Analysis data so that
they match the HS 4-digit categories, and detail that procedure in the data Appendix.

7
indicating that increased foreign competition was likely associated with some exit of U.S. firms
from the market. If we multiply this average Herfindahl by the share of each country i in the U.S.
consumption of good k, sitk we can compute the typical market share of a firm from that country,
H itk s itk . We report the weighted average of these per-firm market shares in the last column of

Table 2, where the weights are based on the importance of each sector in total U.S. consumption.
Table 2 reveals that the share in the U.S. market of a typical U.S. firm fell slightly in the first
period and by about 8 percent in the second period. By contrast exporters to the U.S. appear to
have gained market share in both periods. In other words, those U.S. firms that survived ended
up with smaller market shares individually while some foreign firms gained market share. But
the overall average of firm shares, shown by the final averages in the last column Table 2,
decline in both periods.
This data preview suggests that prior work on the impact of new varieties is likely to
suffer from a number of biases. First, as foreign firms have entered the U.S. market there has
been exit by U.S. firms, which serves to offset some of the gains of new varieties. Second, while
U.S. Herfindahls rose, the Herfindahls of many of our largest suppliers fell. The fall in the firmlevel import Herfindahls suggests that there may have been substantial variety growth that is not
captured in industry level analyses. Finally, because the market shares of both U.S. firms and the
average firm fell over this time period, the rise in foreign entry is likely to have depressed
markups overall and therefore lowered prices.10 Thus, estimates of the gains from new varieties

10

While we infer the change in markups for U.S. firms using indirect evidence on their market shares and
Herfindahl indexes, there is direct evidence from other countries to support the idea that trade liberalization is
associated with falling markups. In addition to the work cited in our first paragraph, several studies have also shown
that falls in domestic market share due to imports are associated with lower domestic markups. For example,
Badinger (2007b) shows that when looking within the same manufacturing sectors, OECD countries that have
higher import shares tend to have lower markups in their domestic industries. This result remains robust even when
he instruments for import penetration exogenous factors related to openness such as distance and other gravity
factors. Similarly, Konings et al (2005) find evidence that markups are positively related to Herfindahl indexes and

8
obtained from industry-level data using CES aggregators could either be too large if domestic
exit is an important source of variety loss, or too small if foreign firm entry and market power
losses are important unmeasured gains. We turn to quantifying these gains and losses in the next
sections.

3. Translog Expenditure Function
We begin by considering a translog expenditure function defined over products denoted
by i, and then will later introduce notation that allows us to consider countries, firms, and
industries.11 The translog function is defined over the universe of products, whose maximum
~
number is denoted by the fixed number N . The expenditure needed to obtain a fixed utility (or

the “ideal” price index) in period t is:

N

ln e t  0   i ln pit 
i 1

1
2

 N

N

  ij ln pit ln p jt , with ij = ji .

(2)

i 1 j1

Note that the restriction that ij = ji is made without loss of generality.12 We add the further
restriction that the ij coefficients for all goods are “symmetric,” by which we mean:
  1
N

.
 ii   
  0, and  ij    0 for i  j, with i, j = 1,…, N

N
 N 

(3)

These symmetry restrictions have not been used in past work dealing with estimating the translog
function, but are essential in our monopolistic competition model.
that markups in concentrated sectors fall significantly when trade liberalization leads to higher levels of import
penetration. This study provides additional evidence for a negative relationship between domestic market share and
markups. Finally, Konings and Vandenbussche (2005) find that antidumping protection not only raises the markups
of European firms, but does so even more when importers have high market shares. The fact that protection raises
domestic markups more when domestic market shares are low provides additional support for the notion that firms
with low market shares are likely to have relatively low markups.
11
The translog direct and indirect utility functions were introduced by Christensen, Jorgenson and Lau (1975), and
the expenditure function was proposed by Diewert (1976, p. 122).
12

We also require


N


N

 i 1 i  1,  i 1 ij  0 for the expenditure function to be homogeneous of degree one.

9
The share of each good in expenditure can be computed by differentiating (2) with
respect to ln p i , obtaining:

N

sit  i    ij ln p jt
j1





(4)


N

1
 i   ln pit  ln p(t) , with ln p(t)   ln p jt ,

N
j1

where the second line is obtained using the symmetry conditions in (3). Notice that the term

ln p(t) refers to the average over all the prices of all goods in period t. But that average will
include goods that are not available to the consumer, in which case the appropriate price to use in
the expenditure function is the reservation price, where demand equals zero. So we want to solve
for the reservation prices for goods not available, and then re-express the expenditure and share
equations so that they no longer depend explicitly on these reservation prices.
We let I t denote the set of goods available each period, with number N t . We can solve
for the reservation price of the goods not available by setting the share equation in (4) equal to
zero. More generally, we can invert the share equation to solve for the prices of all goods in
terms of their shares:
ln pit 

i  sit
 ln p(t) ,


(4')

which equals the reservation price of good i when sit  0. It is convenient to substitute (4') back
into the expenditure function (2) to obtain an expression for the cost-of-living in terms of shares.
After some simplification, we obtain:13


ln e t  0 

13

See Appendix B.

1 N
1
( i )2  ln p(t) 

2  i 1
2


N

 (sit )2 .
i 1

(5)

10
While this expression is close to what we shall use to evaluate the cost-of-living, we still
need to eliminate the reservation prices within the overall average ln p(t) . That is done by
expanding this average as:
 j

1
1
ln p jt    ln p jt     ln p(t)   ,


N
 
j1 N
jI t  
 jI t

N

ln p(t)  

where the reservation prices for goods j  I t in the final term are obtained from (4) with s jt  0.
   1 , it follows that:
Since the number of goods available is N t  N
jI
t

ln p(t) 

where:14

ln p t 

j 

1 
  ln p jt     ln p t  t ,


N t  jI
jI t  
 t

1
Nt

 ln p jt and

jI t

t 

(6)

 1 

1 
  j  
1    j  .
 N t  jI

N t  jI
t
 t 



Notice that ln p t is the average of prices over the goods actually available, while t is inversely
related to the range of goods available: as the set I t expands, then the summation

 jI  j rise
t

and Nt also rises, so t falls. We can substitute these two terms into the expenditure function (5)
to obtain:


ln e t  0 


1 N
1
( i )2  ln p t  t 

2 i 1
 2


N

 (sit )2 .
i 1

Taking the change in the expenditure function the first two terms vanish and we obtain:
 e 
 t 1 N 2
   sit .
ln  t    ln p t 
2  i 1

 e t 1 

(7)

Equation (7) is a useful expression for the change in the cost of living and consists of
three terms. The first term is an unweighted average of the change in log-prices for available
products, and will cancel out is subsequent formula, so we focus on the next two terms. The
14

The final equality uses


N

 i 1 i  1,

as in the previous footnote.

11
second term is a shift parameter t/ where, as noted above, where the entry of new products
will result in t < 0 so that the cost of living falls. The third term is the change in the Herfindahl
index of product shares.
To interpret the second term, denote the set of products available both periods by

I  It  I t 1 , with N > 0 elements. For simplicity, suppose that the prices of all products are
unchanging. Then sit   t , and averaging over the N products we obtain:
 t 

 


1
1 
1
sit   1   sit    1   sit 1       sit   sit 1  ,



N i I
N  i I   i I
N  i I
i I
 


where we use the fact that the shares sum to unity each period. Thus, –t is directly related to
the share of expenditure on new goods minus the share of expenditure on disappearing goods.
Feenstra (1994) shows that those shares, in conjunction with the elasticity of substitution,
determine the gains from variety in the CES case. To develop this comparison with the CES case
more carefully, note that from Feenstra (1994) we can express the “ideal” CES price index as:

 e 
1 
ln  t    w it  lnpit 
 ln  sit  ln  sit 1  ,
(   1)  iI
 e t 1  iI
iI


(8)

where I  It  I t 1 is the common set of goods in both periods. The first expression on the right
of (8) is a weighted average of the log price changes, similar in spirit to the unweighted average
appearing as the first term on the right of (7).15 The second expression on the right of (8) is the
welfare gain from new and disappearing goods in the CES case, which involves dividing the net
change in expenditure on new and disappearing goods by the elasticity of substitution minus
unity, ( – 1). As we have shown above, that expression is very similar to the second term t/
on the right of (7), which likewise involves dividing the net change in expenditure on new and
15

The weights wit appearing in (8) are the Sato-Vartia weights defined in Feenstra (19994, pp. 158-159).

12
disappearing goods by the translog parameter . The expenditures on new and disappearing
goods are measured in logs and levels, respectively, in the CES and translog cases, and the
substitution parameters ( – 1) and  correspondingly differ, but otherwise there is a high degree
of similarity between the CES and translog expressions. The key difference between (7) and (8)
is that in the translog case we have an additional term in (8), the change in the Herfindahl index
of product shares, that has no analogue in the CES case. Notice that a fall in the Herfindahl index
raises the cost-of-living index in (7), which is surprising because a fall in the Herfindahl

indicates less concentration of shares, due to more new products for example. So why does the
cost-of-living go up in that case? The answer illustrates a key difference between the translog
and CES formulas.
Consider replacing one good having a high share parameter 1t-1 in period t-1 with two
other goods having lower values of 2t and 3t in period t (while goods 4,…,N are unchanged).
We choose these parameters so that the total share of spending on goods 1 and 2+3 are identical,
s1t-1 = s2t + s3t (with s4t, …, sNt unchanged). Because there are two goods instead of one, the
2
Herfindahl index is lower: s1t2 1   i  4 sit2 1 > s 22t  s3t
  i  4 sit2 , provided that s2t ,s3t  0. That
N

N

would raise the cost of living in (6) because product space is more “crowded,” so that goods are
more substitutable.16 In other words, as the number of varieties increases, we care less about each
new variety. This explains why the Herfindahl index of product shares enters the cost-of-living
index in a counter-intuitive way. Notice that this crowding effect does not occur in the CES case,
because replacing one good with two new goods that have the same total expenditure would have
no impact at all on consumer well being.

16

This claim can be confirmed from the elasticity of demand in (17). With identical prices for all goods, so
sNt  1 / N , this elasticity becomes 1  (N  1) which is increasing in N.

13
4. Consumer Gains from New Varieties

In order to implement the cost-of-living formula in (6), we estimate the shift parameter
t as well as the translog parameter . Because we do not have firm-level data we shall rely on
Herfindahl indexes of U.S. firms and of firms exporting to the U.S. To show how the aggregation
over firms is done in the theory, we will henceforth let i  I t denote the countries selling to the
U.S. each period (including the U.S. itself) and j  J it denote their firms. We shall assume that
each firm sells one product in a given sector with its share denoted by sijt . The total import share
from country i is sit   jJ sijt , and we let sijt  sijt / sit denote firms’ shares within the exports
it

of country i. Then the Herfindahl index for country i is H it   jJ (sijt )2 .
it

We re-writing the share equation in (4) and (6) using this new notation as:





s ijt = (ij  t )   ln pijt  ln p t ,

where  t 

1
Nt

(1   i, j ij ) is the shift parameter already discussed, and ln p t 

(9)
1
Nt

i, j ln pijt

is

the average log-price of all available goods in period t.17 Multiplying the above equation by the
firms’ shares within the exports of a country, sijt  sijt / sit , and summing over firms with

 jJ

it

sijt  1 ,we obtain:





H it s it = it   t   ln pit  ln p t , i  I t ,
where it   jJ sijt ij and ln pit   jJ sijt ln pijt are weighted averages of the taste parameters
it

it

and log prices, respectively. It is natural to model it as a country fixed effect plus an error term:
it   i  it .
17

(10)

We use the summation  as a shorthand for   , i.e. to sum across all available products each period.
i, j

iI t jJ it

14
Substituting this equation above, we obtain the share equation,





H itsit = i  t   ln pit  ln p t  it , i  I t .

(11)

In the next section we show how the translog parameter  is obtained using an estimator
that differences across time and across countries, thereby eliminating the fixed effects i and t
in (11). Supposing that we have the translog parameter, we can move the prices to the left in (11)
and therefore obtain an unbalanced panel from which we can estimate these fixed effects. But
since we are only interested in t, the simplest approach it to difference (11) for a non-empty
set of countries i  I  I t 1  I t , thereby eliminating i, so that we are left with:
 1

  t  ln p t   (Hitsit )   ln pit  it , i  I .
 
 

(12)

By taking a weighted average of the terms on the right, we obtain the terms on the left, which is
what we need to construct the cost-of-living index in (6). The weights that we shall use to form
the average are the average shares shown in the Törnqvist index (9), restricted to the countries
i  I . Specifically, define:
sit  sit 


1
 1   s jt  , for i  I ,
N
j I


(13)

as the shares for the countries in I , re-normalized to sum to unity. Then we apply the Törnqvist
weights 12 (sit 1  sit ) to (12) and sum over i  I to obtain:


1

  t  ln p t    12 ( sit 1  sit )  (H it sit )   ln pit  it  .
 


 i I

(14)

To measure the left-hand side precisely, we need all three terms in brackets on the right,
but only the first two are observed. The final term on the right is the change in the weightedaverage taste parameters for each country, it  it    jJ sijt ij . It is difficult to measure
it

15
exact price indexes when taste parameters are changing, and this difficulty appeared in the CES
case analyzed by Feenstra (1994). To overcome it, Feenstra assumed that there was a subset of
countries i  I for which the CES taste parameters were constant. In that case, it became
possible to measure the exact CES price index for that subset of countries, while the remaining
terms indicated the gains from new or disappearing countries as well as those with changing taste
parameters. Taking the same approach here, we set it  0 in (14) for i  I , and substitute that
expression into (6) to obtain the result:

Proposition 1

Suppose that there is a set of countries i  I  I t 1  I t , I   , with it  0. Then the
Törnqvist cost-of-living index is:

 

 e 
ln  t    1 ( sit 1  sit )ln pit     1 ( sit 1  sit ) (H it sit )  1    H it sit2   ,
2
2 

 e t 1  i I 2
 i I
 iI t
 

Vt

(15)

where the final terms define the variety effect Vt. If it  0 for i  I  I t 1  I t , then:
Vt   1  sit 1sit H it .
2
i I

(16)

The first term on the right of (15) is the conventional Törnqvist cost-of-living index
defined over the prices of those countries i  I with constant taste parameters. The additional
terms define Vt as the extra impact of product variety on the cost of living, with Vt > 0 indicating
greater variety and lower cost of living. The variety effect itself is defined by two terms: the
first is the effective firm shares H it sit , with falling shares indicating welfare gains. In Table 1,
we saw that Hit sit fell for the United States and rose for some other exporters, but on average

16
fell over both sample periods. This average decline in the typical market share of a firm indicates
that there is increased spending on new countries and products, so we should expect to see a gain
from variety. But that gain is potentially offset by the change in the overall Herfindahl appearing
as the last term in (15), which is the share-weighted average of (Hit sit ) as shown in the last row
of Table 1, and reflects crowding in product space. We note that this decomposition of the total
welfare change in (15) is closer to the CES decomposition that we reported in (8), because in
both cases the first term is the exact price index over the set of goods i  I  I t 1  I t , while the
remaining terms reflect the cost-of-living reduction from new varieties: in the translog case in
(15), those remaining terms include the change in the overall Herfindahl, reflecting crowding.
In (16) we provide a simplified expression for Vt that holds if there were no change in the
set of countries selling to the United States, so that we could choose I  I t 1  I t .18 In the CES
case considered by Feenstra (1994) and Broda and Weinstein (2006), there would then be no
gains from import variety because there are no new countries selling to the U.S. But now we can
use the Herfindahl indexes for each country to infer entry or exit of firms and products: falling
Herfindahls due to entry will contribute towards gains with Vt > 0, whereas exit will contribute
towards Vt < 0. We stress, however, that (16) is valid if and only if there is no change in the
average taste parameters for all countries, it  0 for i  I  I t 1  I t .19
The remaining question is how the set of countries I  I t 1  I t , for which the taste
parameters are constant, will be chosen. Broda and Weinstein (2006) chose the set I as the
18

The proof of (16) is provided in Appendix B.
Notice that this assumption did not hold in the example we provided in section 3, where one good having a high
share parameter 1t-1 was replaced with two other goods having lower values of 2t and 3t (while goods 4,…,N are
unchanged). We chose those parameters so that the total share of spending on goods 1 and 2+3 were identical, s1t-1 =
s2t + s3t , resulting in a fall in the Herfindahl index and a consumer loss. In contrast, a fall in the Herfindahl index in
(16), with no change in taste parameters, will lead to consumer gains.
19

17
intersection of countries supplying in the first and last years of the sample. So all countries
selling to the United States in the initial year, and not disappearing by the end of the sample, are
presumed to have no expansion in product varieties within their exports to the United States. We
can improve on this assumption by using information on the Herfindahl indexes of exporters to
the U.S. in each sector. We shall interpret Herfindahl indexes that are changing by more than a
tolerance as evidence of large changes in it, and exclude these countries from the set I , as will
be discussed in more detail in section 7.

5. Producers and the Pro-Competitive Effect

To develop a simple general equilibrium expression for welfare, suppose that firms
selling to the U.S. each produce a single product and act as Bertrand competitors. The profit
maximization problem for a firm j exporting from country i in period t is,
max
pijt  0

pijt x ij (p t ,E t )  Cij[x ij (p t ,E t )] ,

where x ij (p t , E t ) denotes the demand arising from the translog system, with the price vector pt
and expenditure Et, and Cij [x ij (p t , E t )] is the cost of production. We denote the elasticity
of demand by ijt   ln x ij (p t , E t ) /  ln pijt , which from (9) is:
  ln sijt
ijt  1  
  ln pijt



 (N t  1)
.
  1 
sijt N t


Then the optimal price can be written as the familiar markup over marginal costs:
sijt N t 
 ijt 

 ln C 'ijt  ln 1 
ln p ijt  ln C 'ijt  ln 

,
 ijt  1 


(N
1)
t





where C 'ijt  C 'ij[x ij (p t , E t )] denotes marginal cost.

(17)

18
We do not have the firm-level data needed to measure the above expression directly. But
we can aggregate it by taking a weighed average using the firm shares sijt  sijt / sit within the
exports of country i. Then the geometric average of prices from country i is:
ln pit  

sijt

ln pijt  ln C'it 

j



jJ it

sijt


sit sijt N t 
ln 1 
,
  (N t  1) 

(18)

where ln C'it   j sijt ln C'ijt are the average marginal costs. We are not able to measure (18)
directly in the absence of firm-level information, but data on the Herfindahl indexes for each
exporting country will allow us measure a first-order approximation to (18) around the point
where the firm shares are equal. Recall that the inverse of the Herfindahl can be thought of as the
effective number of equally-sized firms, each of which would then have the share sijt  H it .
Since the first-order approximation to the log function is ln(1  x)  ln(1  a)   x1aa  around x=a,
we apply this formula to (18) around sijt  H it to obtain:

 sit sijt N t  sit Hit N t  

s H N 
s H N 
 
 ( N 1)  ( N t 1)  
 ln C'it  ln 1  it it t  ,
ln p it  ln C'it   sijt ln 1  it it t    t


s H N
jJ it
  (N t  1) 
   (N t  1)   1 it( N it1)t  
t




which is obtained since H it   jJ (sijt )2 and
it

 jJ

it

(19)

sijt  1 . The average country markup

appearing as the final term in (19) is the markup for a firm with the average share sijt  sit Hit . In
other words, we are ignoring the variation in firm sizes within countries when we compute the
“average” markup for each country in (19). In the absence of having such firm-level information
for all countries exporting to the United States, however, we believe that this average markup is
the best that we can do.20,21

20

In order to assess the importance of limitation of this approach, we simulated firm-level data to compare the true
markup in (18) with the approximation in (19). We begin by assuming that γ=0.19 (which is our median estimate)
and that the underlying firm sales distribution follows Zipf’s Law, i.e. we used a Pareto distribution with a shape
parameter of 1 and a minimum value of 10. Then we assumed that there were 500 firms in each sector and that every

19
To obtain an expression for welfare, suppose that labor is the only factor of production,
with wage wt. We make the key assumption that profits of firms are zero under monopolistic
competition, so that welfare of the representative consumer is Wt  w t / e(p t ), or the real wage.
The change in the real wage is  ln Wt   ln w t   ln e  p t  . We evaluate the cost-of-living
index from (15), where the first term on the right is the conventional Törnqvist index defined
over the average log-prices for each country. Those averages are in turn approximated as in (19).
Combining these results, we have:
Proposition 2

The change in welfare of the representative consumer with translog preferences is:


 ln W   ln w t   ln e  p t     ln w t   12 ( sit 1  sit ) ln C'it   Pt  Vt ,


i I

where:


s H N 
Pt    12 ( sit  sit 1 ) ln 1  it it t  .
i I
  (N t  1) 

(20)

(21)

The approximation in (20) depends on the first-order approximation to prices in (19), and
also assumes that the change in the taste parameters it for i  I is small, as was assumed in
Proposition 1. The term in brackets on the right in (20) is the change in wages relative to a
Törnqvist index of marginal costs, for both domestic and foreign-produced goods. Its role in
firm in each sector except the first firm had a sales share drawn from this Pareto distribution. If we impose that the
sector must have the actual Herfindahl index in the data, and the sales of all but the first firm are drawn from the
Pareto distribution, then the Herfindahl index implicitly defines the sales of the first firm. We then used this
simulated firm-level data to construct the true markup equation, i.e. the second term on the right of (18). We then
calculated the percentage difference of the approximation, the last term on the right of (19) from the actual simulated
values as: diff = [(actual – approx)/ (actual value)], where Jensen’s inequality guarantees that diff < 0. When we
applied this method using the Herfindahl indexes for each sector and country selling to the U.S., we found that the
median difference was -0.005 percent and the mean difference was -0.28 percent, indicating the first-order
approximation holds quite closely.
21
It is possible that (19) overstates the average markup if the Herfindahl index of exporters is computed by
bundling products within a single shipment, making firms appear bigger than they really are. We used the PIERS
data, described in Appendix A, to check for the prevalence of trading companies, i.e. those whose names including
“trading”, “wholesale”, “import” or “export”, “group”, or abbreviations of these terms. There were about 8,000 such
firms, and they accounted for 5 percent of exports to the U.S. in 1992 and 7.5 percent in 2005.

20
welfare is similar to the real earnings of home factors in term of imported goods – or the “single
factoral terms of trade” introduced by Viner (1937) – except that in (20) we have stripped out
firm markups. Viner introduced this concept because it is highly relevant to the welfare gains
from trade, and we agree. For example, this term captures the positive effect of import
competition on firm selection and welfare, through forcing the exit of less-efficient firms and
lowering average costs. That effect is the focus of ACR (2012) and ACDR (2012), but we do not
attempt to measure it here.22
We focus on the remaining terms in welfare. The pro-competitive effect Pt in (21) once
again depends on the change in Hitsit, and from Table 1, that typical market share of a firm was
on average falling over both sample periods. This decline provides the intuition for why we
should expect to see a welfare gain from reduced markups as measured by Pt. A final
approximation is needed to measure the pro-competitive effect, and that concerns the number of
available product Nt which appears in (21). We shall consider two methods of making this
approximation, the choice of which does not matter for the results.
One approach is to measure Nt by the inverse of the overall Herfindahl shown in (8),
which would equal the number of synthetic, equally-sized firms in each industry. That approach
is a lower-bound to the number of products, however, since firms might not be equally-sized and
they might sell more than one product each. A second approach is to treat the term Nt/(Nt – 1)
appearing in (21) as close enough to unity to be ignored. This approach follows from a standard
assumption in monopolistic competition models that firms ignore the impact of their prices on
the overall price index. In the demand equation (9), the average log-prices ln p t acts like a price
22

This term would be considerably more complex once we allow for multiple factors of production and realistic
input-output linkages in the economy. For example, Feenstra et al (2013) argue that a portion of the productivity
increase in the United States after the mid-1990’s is due to improvements in the terms of trade, especially for hightechnology goods. Measuring the full impact of trade on U.S. productivity is beyond the scope of this paper.

21
index for the market. If the firm does not consider the impact of its own price on this price index,
then the elasticity of demand is,
ijt  1 

 lnsijt
 ln pijt

ln p t

  
 1   .
 sijt 
 

Comparing this result with (17), we see that the two elasticities are the same if and only if
Nt is sufficiently large so that Nt/(Nt – 1)1. We will experiment with both approaches when
measuring Nt in order to obtain the pro-competitive effect.
Proposition 2 is our final expression for the change in welfare, and depends on the procompetitive effect Pt and the variety effect Vt. Of course, these terms can differ across sectors, so
we need to sum the welfare gains across all of the manufacturing sectors in our sample. We do
this by adding an industry superscript k to Pt and Vt, then multiplying the welfare gain in each
industry by the appropriate translog weight, and summing across all sectors,







 ln WtPV   1 s kt 1  s kt Ptk  Vtk ,
k

2

(22)

where skt is the share of sector k in U.S. absorption in period t.23 Since the consumption of
merchandise only accounts for about 19 percent of U.S. absorption, a drop in the price of
manufactured goods translates into about a one-fifth as large gain in aggregate welfare. That is,
we multiplied all our welfare calculations from (22) by 0.19 to present them as relative to the
entire U.S. economy. We omit the sector k notation in the next section, though our estimation is
done separately over each sector.

23

While we had the appropriate shares of each sector within manufacturing for 1992 and 2005, we used data from
the benchmark input-output tables to obtain the aggregate share of merchandise apparent consumption in total U.S.
final demand. We computed this by using the 2002 use table from the benchmark input-output table before
redefinitions. We set apparent consumption of merchandise equal to agricultural, mining, and manufacturing value
added less exports plus imports. Total U.S. absorption was set equal to U.S. final goods demand.

22
6. Estimation

Our next task is to address how to estimate the translog parameter  , which is obtained
from the share equation (11). The important property of this share equation is that the parameter
 does not depend on the set of goods available, which only influences the time-effect t. We can
expect that the prices appearing in (11) are endogenous, as in a conventional supply and demand
system. For the CES case, Feenstra (1994) showed how this endogeneity could be overcome by
specifying the supply equation and assuming that the demand and supply errors are uncorrelated:
that moment condition was used to estimate the model parameters.24 We will follow the same
procedure in the translog case, as described next.
We use the first-order approximation to obtain the weighted average of prices in (19),
which in practice are measured by the unit-value of imports from each source country and
industry, and the price index within each industry for the United States. We further specify that
the weighted average of marginal costs from each exporting country take on the iso-elastic form:
s E
ln C'it  i0   ln  it t
 pit


  it ,


where the term (s it E t / p it ) reflects the total quantity exported from country i, and it is an error
term. Combining the above equation with (19), we obtain a modified pricing equation:

H s N 
(1  )ln pit  i0   lnsit   ln E t  ln 1  it it t   it .
  (N t  1) 

(23)

We see that the translog parameter  appears in both the share equation (11) and the
pricing equation (23): larger  means that the goods are stronger substitutes and the markups are
correspondingly smaller. It is also evident that the shares and prices are endogenously
24

Identification of the model parameters from this moment condition depended on having heteroskedasticity in
second-moments of the data, so this is an example of “identification through heteroskedasticity,” as discussed more
generally by Rigobon (2003).

23
determined: shocks to either supply it or demand it will both be correlated with shares sit and
prices pit. To control for this endogeneity we will estimate these equations simultaneously using
a similar methodology to that proposed in the CES case by Feenstra (1994) and extended by
Broda and Weinstein (2006).
The first step in our estimation is to difference (11) and (23) with respect to country k and
with respect to time, thereby eliminating the terms i + t and the overall average prices ln p t
appearing in the share equations and eliminating total expenditure ln E t . We also divide the share
equation by  and the pricing equation by (1  ) , and then express each equation in terms of its
error term:
[  (H it sit )   (H kt s kt )]
(  it   kt )

 (  ln pit   ln p kt ) ,



(  ln sit   ln s kt )
( it   kt )
 (  ln pit   ln p kt ) 
(1  )
(1  )



 H kt s kt N t  
1 
H it sit N t 
  ln 1 
   ln 1 
.
(1  ) 
  (N t  1) 
  (N t  1)  

We multiply these two equations together, and average the resulting equation over time, to obtain
the estimating equation:
Yi 

1


1
1
X1i 
X 2i    X3i 
Z1i (  ) 
Z2i (  )  ui ,
(1  )
(1  )
(1  )
 (1  )


where the over-bar indicates that we are averaging that variable over time, and:
Yit  (  ln pit   ln p kt )2 ,

X1it  (  lnsit   lns kt )(  ln pit   ln p kt ) ,
X 2it  (  lnsit   lns kt )[(H itsit )  (H kt s kt )] ,

(24)

24
X3it  (  ln pit   ln p kt )[(H itsit )  (H kt s kt )] ,


H s N 
H s N  

Z1it (  )    ln 1  it it t    ln 1  it kt t   (  ln pit   ln p kt ) ,
  (N t  1) 
  (N t  1)  




H s N 
H s N  

Z2it (  )    ln 1  it it t    ln 1  it kt t   ( H it sit  H kt s kt ) .
  (N t  1) 
 (N t  1)  


and,

u it 

( it   kt )( it   kt )
.
 (1  )

We shall assume that the error terms in demand and the pricing equation are uncorrelated,
which means that the error term in (24) becomes small, u i  0 in probability limit as T   .
That error term is therefore uncorrelated with any of the right-hand side variables as T   , and
we can exploit those moment conditions by simply running OLS on (24). Feenstra (1994) shows
that procedure will give us consistent estimates of  and  in a slightly simpler system, provided
that the right-hand side variables in (24) are not perfectly collinear as T   . As in the CES
case of Feenstra (1994), that condition will be assured if there is some heteroskedasticity in the
error terms across countries i, so that the right-hand side variables in (24) are not perfectly
collinear. More efficient estimates can be obtained by running weighted least squares on (24).
Before proceeding with the estimation, we need to address a number of data problems.
First, while in principle we could estimate  at the 10-digit level, our estimates would not be
precise because often there are few countries exporting in a given 10-digit HS product. In order
to make sure that we have enough data to obtain precise estimates, we assume that the ’s at the
10-digit level within an HS-4-digit sector are the same, and therefore pool the HS-10-digit goods
within each 4-digit sector.25

25

This approach means that a sector typically had 94 varieties – defined as a distinct (country,10-digit good) pair –
when we estimate  for an HS-4 sector.

25
A second complication arises because we have U.S. shipments data at the NAICS 6-digit
level but we need to compute shares at the HS-10 digit level. Thus, we must allocate NAICS 6digit production data to each HS 10-digit sector. In order to do this, we assume that the share of
U.S. production in each HS 10-digit is the same as that of the U.S. in the NAICS 6-digit sector
that contains it, as discussed in Appendix A.
A third complication arises because we use unit values of import prices from each source
country rather than the geometric mean price, which introduces measurement error, especially
for import flows that are very small. Broda and Weinstein (2006) propose a weighting scheme
based on the quantity of imports at the HS-10 level. Unfortunately, we cannot implement
precisely that scheme because the U.S. quantity indexes were defined at the NAICS 6-digit level
and not at the HS-10 digit level. We therefore implement the Broda and Weinstein weighting
scheme using the value of shipments instead of the quantity of shipments, since shipment values
are likely to be highly correlated with shipment quantities across countries.
Finally, as in Broda and Weinstein (2006), we also face the problem that only 86 percent
of our estimates of  had the right sign if we estimate them without constraints. If  is less than
zero, then this implies that markups are negative, and there is no equilibrium. Since we want to
rule this out and because V is very sensitive to small values of , we impose   0.05. To achieve
this, we use a grid search procedure over  and  to minimize the sum of squared errors in (24).
In this procedure we set an initial value for  of 0.05 and increased it by 5 percent over the range
[.05, 110].26 Similarly, we set an initial  of -5 and increased it by 0.1 over the range [-5, 15].

26

In order to speed up the grid searches, in most specifications we increased the interval by 5 percent until 7.8 and
then jumped to 109.9. We did this because we almost never found gammas between 7.8 and 109.9. Moreover,
making this change did not qualitatively affect the results because all high gammas imply very small markups and
variety effects.

26
7. Estimation Results

The coefficients γ k for each sector k are obtained by estimating equation (24). Because
we ultimately estimate over one thousand γ k ’s , it is not possible to display all of them here. We
display the sample statistics for γ k and 1/ γ k in Table 3. The median  is 0.19 and the average is
12. The large average k is driven by the fact that their distribution is not symmetric and k can
take on very large values if goods are relatively homogeneous. It is difficult to have strong priors
for what a reasonable value of k should be. One possible benchmark is the implied markup. We
can compute the markup for each industry by using equation (19). Based on this calculation the
median estimated markup in our data is 0.30 (i.e. a 30% markup over marginal costs) in 2005.
By comparison, Domowitz, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) estimate markups across U.S.
manufacturing and obtain an average markup of 0.37, which is a bit higher than ours but not
dramatically different especially given the large differences in data and estimating procedures.
The markups in each sector depend on the value of the firm’s market share as well. We
can get some sense of the reasonableness of our estimates by looking at the most important
sectors in U.S. absorption. In Table 4, we report the share of U.S. absorption from the ten largest
sectors (with names not beginning with “other”), where we define the share to be the average
share of absorption in 1992 and 2005. In the first column we report our estimate of the γ k ’s .
Based on this measure, we find the three sectors where the products are most heterogeneous and
firms are likely to have the most market power are Aircraft and Spacecraft, Televisions, Video
Cameras, and Receivers, and Private Motor Vehicles. In contrast, the most homogeneous sectors
where firms are likely to have the least market power are Crude Petroleum, Natural Gas, and
Cigarettes and Cigars. This pattern seems broadly sensible.

27
We next compute the variety and pro-competitive effects for each sector, and aggregate
these across sectors as in (22). The key decision that must be made in measuring both these
effects is the set of countries i  I , which we interpret as having small changes in the set of
products and firms within each country (literally, in Proposition 1 we assume that the taste
parameter for countries i  I does not change at all). As mentioned earlier, in the CES case
Broda and Weinstein (2006) used the set of countries supplying to the U.S. at both the beginning
and end of the sample to compute the change in product variety between these dates. We can do
better here because we also have information on the Herfindahl indexes of exporters and U.S.
firms. We will suppose that if the Herfindahl index changes by more than some tolerance, that is
evidence that the set of firms has changed sufficiently to exclude that country from the set of
countries I . For convenience, we refer to this set as “common” countries, that are supplying in
the first and last periods and are judged to have little change in their exporting firms. In our
baseline results reported in Table 5, we choose 30 percent as the tolerance for the change in the
Herfindahl index for each sector and country, and then will indicate how our results change for
other tolerances.
Table 5 reports our welfare results. Because we had to drop the change between 1997 and
1998, we computed the aggregate welfare change between 1992 and 2005 as the sum of the gains
from 1992-7, the gain from 1998-2005, and the geometric average annual gain over the two
periods. Using the full sample our baseline Herfindahl cutoff of 30 percent we find that the
aggregate welfare gain over the time period was 0.86 percent.
The magnitude of this number is perhaps easiest to understand relative to Broda and
Weinstein’s (2006) estimates for the period 1990 to 2001. Those authors used a CES aggregator
and obtained a gain to consumers of 0.8 percent over the 1990-2001 period. This result is almost

28
exactly the same as what we obtain in the translog. However, they estimated the gain over a
different and shorter sample period (eleven years vs. 13). If we multiply our estimates by 11/13,
we find that implied aggregate gain due to varieties over the 11-year period in the translog case
is 0.73. These results suggest that the translog functional form yields similar, but slightly smaller,
variety gains as the CES.
One major advantage of the translog setup is that it allows us to examine the sources of
these welfare gains. In particular, the translog specification indicates that markup declines, Pt,
account for about half of the welfare gains – of the 0.86 percentage point welfare gain, 0.42
percent is due to markup declines. The fact that the gain due to new variety in the translog setup
is approximately one-half of the gain obtained by using a CES formula is theoretically welljustified when there is only one new good,27 and we are finding that the result applies here even
with many new goods.
We can go further towards understanding the difference between the CES and translog by
using equation (15) to decompose the total variety gains, Vt, into two components: the first term
in the formula, V1t, measures the impact of new varieties on welfare irrespective of crowding,
and the second term, V2t, provides the impact of crowding, i.e. the fact that consumers care less
about varieties as more become available. The results in Table 5 indicate that crowding of the
product space is an important offset of the variety gains: without it, the welfare gain due to
import varieties would have been as large as what we obtain for the total welfare gains, including
from reductions in markups. In other words, it is the crowding effect that makes the translog gain
from variety less than the CES gains. But the reduced gains from variety are fully compensated
by the extra gains due to reduced markups.

27

Feenstra and Shiells (1994, Corollary 2) argue that with a single new good, and with the translog demand
elasticity equal to the CES elasticity, the translog gain would be one-half as much as the CES gain.

29
We should check that the pro-competitive effect does not depend on our measurement of
the total number of each goods in each sector, Nt in (21). So far we have used the inverse of the
overall Herfindahl index in each sector to infer Nt. An alternative approach is to treat Nt as
infinity so that Nt/(Nt – 1) = 1. We refer to this second case by Winf and Pinf in the final columns
of Table 5, and find that it reduces the pro-competitive effect Pt only slightly.
We can think of four other possible issues with the reliability of our estimates.28 First, we
should compute standard errors because of imprecision in the estimation of k. Second, our
results might be sensitive to our choice of Herfindahl cutoff. Third, our estimates might be
heavily influenced by outliers of particular sectors. Finally, since the automobile sector is the
largest sector and had some idiosyncratic factors, discussed below, we decided to also rerun our
estimates without this sector. We deal with each of these concerns in turn.
In order to deal with the imprecision of our k estimates, we bootstrapped each of the
over one thousand k’s and k’s and then used these bootstrapped parameter values to compute
the distribution of Ptk , Vtk , and total welfare  ln WtPV . This is computationally intensive, but
ultimately we were able to compute 100 estimates of each k and generate 5-95 percentile
confidence bands.29 The narrowness of these bands, reported in Table 5, indicates that our point
estimates for the markup and variety effects are estimated with reasonable precision.
Second, we experimented with other cutoffs for the change in the Herfindahl indexes.
The choice of what threshold to use in the definition of the “common” countries i  I involves a
tradeoff between two opposing forces. Classifying even the small movements in the Herfindahl

28

A fifth issue, discussed in Appendix C, is whether the number of years in our sample (thirteen) is enough to avoid
the small-sample bias in our estimator noted by Soderbery (2010) in the CES case. That issue is taken up in
Appendix C, where we find that thirteen years is (just) enough to avoid significant bias.
29
It took 10 days on an 8-processor SPARCstation.

30
index as evidence of firm entry and exit will reduce the number of countries included in the
common set I , thereby eliminating some sectors, which makes our welfare calculations very
sensitive to Herfindahl and share movements in fewer remaining countries and sectors. On the
other hand choosing a very wide band of allowable Herfindahl movements means that our
estimates of welfare gains will be based on more countries and sectors, but we run the risk of
erroneously missing some of the variety gains. As noted in equation (16) of Proposition 1, even if
there is no change in the set of countries we can still use changing Herfindahls to infer gains or
losses from variety, but that assumes that there is no change in the average taste parameters for
countries. By leaving countries out of the common set I , we do not need that assumption and
are more accurately imputing welfare gains/losses due to the entry/exit of firms and products
from those countries. We therefore considered a number of cutoff values for the Herfindahl
indexes: movements of plus or minus 20, 30 (as already reported) and 40 percent.
We obtain very similar welfare gains if we use a 40 percent cutoff, but the welfare gain
is much smaller with the 20 percent cutoff, because that estimate is excluding many more
countries from the common set.30 As a final robustness check for understanding the role played
by the Herfindahl cutoff, we decided to examine the impact of completely shutting down this
channel. In order to do this calculation, we set all the Herfindahl ratios equal to their 1992 values
and only consider the welfare impacts coming from the entry and exit of countries selling to the
U.S. The results from this calculation are presented in the “Constant HI” row of Table 5. Overall
30

To get some intuition for whether these cutoff values are sensible, we can consider how much of the data we
move from the common set of countries I to the excluded countries i  I . We will split our estimation into two
sub-periods (1992-1997 and 1998-2005) because of the change in industry definitions. If we follow the prior CES
literature and assume that variety change is only measured when country import flows start or end, we find that on
average 95 percent of the value of varieties – defined as a country/HS-10 digit good pair – available in the starting
year are available in the last year in each period. If we reclassify countries in which the Herfindahl moved by more
than 40 percent as no longer common, we find that on average only 77 percent of varieties available in the first
time period were available in the second period. Similarly, the share of commonly available varieties falls to 71
percent, 52 percent, and 30 percent as we move to 30 percent, 20 percent, and 10 percent cutoffs, respectively.

31
we obtain a welfare gain of 0.79 percent of GDP, which is quite similar to our baseline results,
but focusing on this number misses some important differences. In particular, by assuming that
there is no U.S. exit in response to new imported varieties, we obtain a very large pure variety
effect as measured by V1t, but the absence of exit also implies an offsetting crowding of the
product space as measured by V2t. Thus, on net, there is almost no variety gain, and virtually all
of the welfare gain comes from decline in market power arising from the drop in the demand
elasticities.
A third concern arises from the possible role played by outliers. In order to ensure that
our results were robust to outliers, we dropped the sectors in the top 5th percentile of welfare
gains and those in the lowest 5th percentile. In order to prevent the welfare gains from falling
simply because we were summing across fewer sectors, we reweighted each sector’s share in
(22) so that the shares continued to sum to one. Overall, dropping the top and bottom 5th
percentiles slightly lowered our aggregate welfare gain: taking the change in welfare from 0.86
percent of GDP to 0.64 percent. This indicates that outliers are not driving our results.
A fourth concern relates to the importance of the automobile sector. Automobiles is the
largest sector in manufacturing, and although the point estimate for k in this sector was not an
outlier, the sector does exert a particularly large impact on the overall welfare gains. Between
1992 and 2005, there was enormous entry into this sector as Japanese car makers set up new
plants (see Blonigen and Soderbery, 2010). This entry had two important impacts. First, the U.S.
Herfindahl index declined sharply from 0.35 to 0.21, reflecting the large increase in the number
of makers operating in the U.S. Second, the transplant of Japanese car makers to the U.S. was
associated with a very large increase in U.S. automobile production: real output of autos made in
the U.S. grew by 41 percent between 1992 and 1998, which contributed to a substantial increase

32
in the share of U.S. consumption made domestically. That increase in the share and falling
Herfindahl contribute to a large welfare gain from variety, Vtk , from (15).
There are reasons to believe, however, that our welfare formula cannot accurately deal
with the transplant of Japanese varieties to the United States: we have ignored multi-product
firms, for example, and in the same way have assumed that the k estimate for autos applies
equally well to products across firms as to products within firms. That assumption clearly
contradicts the theoretical literature on multi-product firms, which makes a strong distinction
between consumer substitution of products within and between firms (see Allanson and
Montagna, 2005, and Bernard, et al, 2011). For this reason we also computed the welfare gains
after dropping the passenger vehicle sector. This gives the result shown in the “Excluding Auto
Sector” row of Table 5, where we assume that the gains from variety in the automobile sector
were same as in all other sectors. The welfare estimate of 0.49 is somewhat smaller than our
baseline estimate, but not significantly different.
Finally, in the last two rows of the table, we can see the welfare gains in each of our subperiods. Most of total welfare gain Wt appears to have accrued in the first sub-period, between
1992 and 1997. The reason for this finding is that in the second sub-period, from 1998 to 2005,
there is substantial crowding in product space: the component V2t subtracts a full 0.71 percent
from any welfare gains, thereby canceling out the contributions of V1t and the pro-competitive
effect Pt in that period. Thus, while the markup gains were quite similar in both periods, the
gains from variety collapse in the later period because of crowding in product space. This finding
suggests that the gains from varieties may be declining as globalization progresses.

33
8. Conclusions

Using general additively separable preferences, Krugman (1979) demonstrated the
reduction in markups that accompanies trade liberalization under monopolistic competition. That
reduction in markups is not just a consumer gain, but is also a social gain: the reduction in
markups in a zero-profit equilibrium indicates that the wedge between a firm’s marginal and
average cost is reduced, so that output is expanding and there are greater economies of scale. So
the competition between firms from different countries is an important channel by which
international trade leads to social gains.
Despite this insight, such a channel has received only limited attention in the empirical
trade literature. We have argued that the reason for this gap in the literature is the common
assumption of CES preferences, which leads to constant markups. So instead we must look to
alternative preferences, and here we have adopted translog preferences. We have derived quite
general formulas for the variety gains from new products with these preferences, and also the
pro-competitive effect of new entry on reducing markups.
The estimated declines in market share of incumbent firms in the wake of the tremendous
amount of entry of foreign countries into U.S. markets, as well as more exporters within those
countries, drives our measure of the welfare gains. This entry has been offset to some degree by
crowding of the product space as measured by declining Herfindahl indexes. Nevertheless, we
find that the exit from the U.S. market has been less than the new entry, in the sense that the
demand for the typical incumbent firm’s output fell, so that the per-firm share of surviving U.S.
firms fell in many sectors. That feature of the data drives our estimates of the fall in markups,
which is the pro-competitive effect of globalization. In our benchmark results, we find that the

34
variety gain from globalization for the U.S. in the translog case is one-half of that found by
Broda and Weinstein (2006) in the CES case, but that the total welfare gain is the same size.
As noted in the Introduction, we have not attempted to measure an important source of
welfare gain that can operate in our model: the efficiency gains that come from the self-selection
of more efficient firms into exporting. That source of gains is the focus of ACDR (2012), but by
construction in their model, the variety and pro-competitive effects do not operate when the
distribution of firm productivity is Pareto with unbounded support: in that case, variety in each
country and the distribution of markups are not affected by reductions in trade costs. If instead
the distribution is Pareto with a bounded support, so that productivity does not exceed some
maximum value, then the product variety and pro-competitive effects operate once again, along
with the self-section of more efficient firms into exporting (Feenstra, 2014). We have not
attempted to measure this latter effect, and that is an important area for further research.

35
Appendix A: Data

The dataset used for this project contains quantity, value, and price information
aggregated at the HS-10 digit level, as well as HS-4 digit level Herfindahl Indexes, for the U.S.
and all countries exporting to the U.S. for every year from 1992 to 2005.
One challenge in piecing together this dataset was calculating the amount of U.S.
absorption produced in the U.S. We begin with the identity that the U.S. supply of U.S.
absorption is equal to the difference between U.S. production and exports. We obtained data on
industry-level production from the Bureau of Economic Analysis at www.bea.gov and export
data from http://www.internationaldata.org/. Unfortunately, the BEA production data are
classified according to the SIC system for years 1992 to 1997 and according to the NAICS
system for years 1998 to 2005, while the trade data is at the HS-10 digit level. Addressing this
complication required a two-step process: the first step was to adjust the BEA production data so
that the data are on the NAICS level for all years within the sample. The second step was to use
our import/export data (containing both NAICS and HS-10 digit codes) and our newly created
NAICS level production data to infer domestically produced absorption at the HS-10 digit level,
as described below.
It is not easy to concord SIC and NAICS categories because there is not always a one-toone mapping between the two. To deal with this issue, we first used a NAICS-SIC concordance
from the BEA to convert the SIC data to the NAICS level. The absence of a one-to-one mapping
meant that sometimes we would observe large jumps in a NAICS category derived from SIC
data from 1997 relative to 1998. In order to deal with this problem, we used a “bridging
dataset”, from the U.S. Department of Commerce, containing SIC level values for both 1997 and
1998. This enabled us to construct a ratio between the actual NAICS output levels and the

36
NAICS levels that we constructed from the SIC data for 1998. We then multiplied all of NAICS
data that was constructed from the SIC data by this ratio. If a SIC sector did not match any
NAICS sector we dropped the observations prior to 1998 in the estimation. We also dropped all
changes between 1997 and 1998 in the regressions where we estimated , so that concordance
problems would not affect our estimates.
After our BEA data was brought to the NAICS level, we use it, along with our import and
export data, to calculate HS-10 digit level U.S. domestic supply. We begin with the identity that
U.S. supply for the domestic market at the NAICS level – denoted by k – equals U.S. production
at the NAICS level less U.S. exports: Supply kt  Pr oduction kt  Exports kt . Using the NAICS
import data, we can compute the share of U.S. supply in apparent consumption according to the
following formula: Share kt  Supply kt / (Supply kt  Imports kt ). By assuming that the U.S. share of
a NAICS code is equal to that of the U.S. share in a corresponding HS-10 code, we calculate
supply at the HS-10 digit level using the following formula:
Share kt  Share HS10
and Share HS10

t
t

 Supply

HS10
t

Supply HS10
t
 Imports HS10
Supply HS10
t
t

Share kt

Imports HS10
.
t
k
1  Sharet 

We next needed to merge in data for Herfindahl indexes for domestic firms and exporters
to the U.S. For land shipments from Canada, we purchased Herfindahl indexes at the 4-digit
Harmonized system (HS) level, for 1996 and 2005, from Statistics Canada. These Canadian
Herfindahl indexes were constructed from firm-level export data to the U.S.
For land shipments from Mexico, the Herfindahl indexes were constructed using data
sourced from the Encuesta Industrial Anual (Annual Industrial Survey) of the Instituto Nacional

37
de Estadistica y Geografia. This data contains firm-level exports for 205 CMAP94 categories for

1993 and 2003. We also obtained the export Herfindahl for 232 categories at the HS-4 level.
These categories cover the most important Mexican export sectors.
For all other major exporters to the U.S., we computed these Herfindahls for sea
shipments from PIERS (www.piers.com), for 1992 and 2005. PIERS collects data from the bill
of lading for every container that enters a U.S. port. The median country exports about 80
percent of its goods by sea. Thus for the typical country in our sample, the sea data covers a large
fraction of their exports. Although purchasing the disaggregated data is prohibitively expensive,
we were able to obtain information on shipments to the U.S. for the 50,000 largest exporters to
the U.S., for 1992 and 2005. For each exporter and year, we obtained the estimated value,
quantity and country of origin of the top five HS-4 digit sectors in which the firm was active. We
also obtained this data for the top ten HS-4 digit sectors for the largest 250 firms in each year.
Let i  I t denote the countries exporting to the U.S. each period and j  J it denote their
k
, and we let
firms.31 The total import share from country i in sector k is sitk   jJ sijt
it

k
sikjt  sijt
/ sitk denote firms’ shares within the exports of country i. Then with the Herfindahl index

H itk   jJ (sikjt )2 , the sum of squared firm shares from country i is:
it

 (sijtk )2   (sikjt )2 (sitk )2  H itk (sitk )2 .

jJ it

(A1)

jJ it

Thus, the sum of squared shares can be measured by using the Herfindahl indexes and overall
shares (squared) from those countries. If we further summed over all countries i, we would
obtain what we will call the overall Herfindahl index (in each sector):

  (sijtk )2    (sikjt )2 (sitk )2   H itk (sitk )2 .

iI t jJ it

31

iI t jJ it

These sets depend on the sector k, but we omit that notation for simplicity.

iI t

(A2)

38
The PIERS data has a number of limitations relative to other firm level data sets. The first
is relatively minor: we do not have the universe of exporters but only the largest ones. This turns
out not to be a serious problem because the aggregate value of these exporters is typically within
5 percent of total sea shipments. Thus, smaller exporters are unlikely to have a qualitatively
important impact on our results. A second potential problem is that PIERS sometimes lists
trading companies as exporters. Sometimes these trading companies may actually be exporters,
however this does not appear to be a big problem in our data since companies that have the
words “trading,” “exports,” “Imports” or variants of these words in their name (such as
“exporting”) only accounted for 5 percent of exports in 1992 and 7.5 percent of exports in 2005.
Thus, we think that the vast majority of exporters in our sample are actual exporters.32
A larger problem is that the PIERS data only comprises sea shipments and thus we have
no information in these data on land and air shipments. This means that we have to adjust our
Herfindahl indexes to take into account land and air shipments. The Herfindahl of country i’s
exports in sector k can be written as
2

H itk





H itkSea

2

 VitkSea 
VitkSea 
kNon  Sea 
 kTotal   H it
 1  kTotal  ,
Vit
 Vit




(A3)



where VitkSea VitkTotal denotes the value of sea (total) shipments and HitkNon Sea is the Herfindahl
for non-sea exporters, which is defined analogously as the sea Herfindahl. We do not have a
measure of HitkNon Sea , but theory does place bounds on the size of the Herfindahl since the true
index must be contained in the following set, obtained with HitkNon Sea = 1 or 0:
2
2

kSea  2 
 VitkSea 
 VitkSea  
V
kSea
kSea
it
 H it 
, H it  Total    1  kTotal   .
 V Total 
V
 
 

Vit
it


 it
 
 


32

It’s not clear whether we should delete these companies or not because many of them , such as “Kerala Cashew
Exports” may serve as the exporters of firms that do not export independently.

39
For most sectors the share of sea shipments in total shipments is quite high, so these bounds are
quite tight. In the analysis we assume that H itkSea  H itkNon Sea , but our results do not change
qualitatively if we assume that HitkNon Sea = 0.33
For the U.S. Herfindahls, we rely on data from the Census of Manufactures at the NAICS
6-digit level. Unfortunately, this is more aggregate than the 4-digit HS level at which we have
the foreign export Herfindahl indexes. Accordingly, we need to convert the U.S. Herfindahl
indexes from the NAICS 6-digit level to the HS 4-digit level. Abusing our above country
notation, let i  I k denote a 4-digit sector i within the NAICS code k. Then the Herfindahl for 4digit sector i is H itk   jJ (sijt )2 , where sijt is the share of firm j  J i in sector i. We see that the
i

overall Herfindahl in NAICS code k is:

 H itk sitk 

iI k

2



  (sijt )2 (sitk )2   (skjt )2  H kt ,

iI k jJ i

(A4)

jJ k

where sitk is the share of 4-digit HS sector i within NAICS sector k, and s kjt  sijt sitk is the share of
product j within the NAICS sector, j  J k . In words, the inner-product of the Herfindahl firm
indexes and the squared sector shares, on the left of (A4) is exactly the right way to aggregate
these indexes to obtain an overall Herfindahl for the good k in question, on the right of (A4).
One of the problems that we faced is that we know H kt but not H itk . A solution can be obtained
by assuming that H itk is equal across all 4-digit sectors i  k , in which case we solve for H itk as:
H itk  H kt /

33

 (sitk )2 .

(A5)

iI k

One can see this from a simple example. Our median sea Herfindahl is 0.6 and our median share of sea shipments
is 0.8. This means that the true Herfindahl ranges from .38 to .42 and our estimate would be 0.41. Nevertheless, we
are implicitly assuming that goods shipped by air and goods shipped by sea are not the same. We justify this
assumption because it costs substantially more to ship goods by air, and thus the mode of shipment is likely to
differentiate the goods in some important ways.

40
In other words, the 4-digit HS Herfindahl is estimated by dividing the 6-digit NAICS Herfindahl
by the corresponding Herfindahl index of 4-digit HS shares within the 6-digit sector. This simple
solution assumes that the 4-digit HS Herfindahl indexes are constant within a sector, but is the
best that we can do in the absence of additional data.

Appendix B:
Proof of (5):

Substituting (4') into (2) and using (3) we obtain:34

N

 s
 
ln e t  0   i  i it  ln p(t)  
 
 2
i 1



2N

 N

N


i 1 j1


N

 s

  i  it  ln p(t) 

i 1 

2


 i  sit
   j  s jt
 ln p(t) 
   ln p(t)   






1 N
1
 0   i  i  sit   ln p(t) 
2
 i 1


N

  i  sit 

2

i 1




N
ln p(t)
2





2


N

 s


 ln p(t)   i it  ln p( t) 
2


i 1 


1 N
1
2
 0    i   ln p(t) 
2  i 1
2
 0 


N

1
1
(i )2  ln p(t) 

2  i 1
2


N

 sit 
i 1

N

2




N
ln p(t)
2





2




N
ln p(t)
2





2

 (sit )2 .
i 1

Proof of (16):

The only expression in Propositions 1 or 2 that is not already derived in the text is (16).
To obtain this result, substitute the shares from (9) into the definition of Vt in (15). Note that any
difference (x t y t ) can be expressed as (x t y t )  12 (x t 1  x t )y t  12 (y t 1  y t )x t . Using (9)
and this result, we can simplify Vt when i  I  I t 1  I t as:
34

We thank Sam Kortum for this derivation.

41





1
1
Vt    1 sit 1   1   s jt 1   sit   1   s jt    (H it sit )  1    H itsit2 
2 
2 


N 
N  j I  
i I
j I


 iI t


  1  (sit 1  sit )[ 12 (H it 1  H it )sit  12 (sit 1  sit )H it ]  1  (s jt 1  s jt ) (H it sit )
2
2 N
i I

j I

i I



 1    H it sit2   1  [ 21 (H it 1  H it )sit2  12 (sit2 1  sit2 )H it ]
 2
2 
i I
 i I



  1  (s jt 1  s jt )   (H it sit )  1    H it sit2   1  sit 1sit H it .
 2
2 
2 N j I
i I
i I
 i I


Thus, for I  I t 1  I t we are left with only the last term, as shown in (16).

Appendix C: Monte Carlo Simulation

One concern with our methodology stems from the fact that we rely on asymptotic
properties that arise as the number of observations approaches infinity, but we are working with
a sample of only thirteen years. In this Appendix, we use a Monte Carlo simulation to determine
whether this is a problem. Our approach is quite similar to that used in Soderbery (2010).
We begin by reproducing the estimating equation (24), but without averaging over time:

Yit 

1


1
1
X1it 
X2it    X3it 
Z1it (  ) 
Z2it (  )  uit . (C1)
(1  )
(1  )
(1  )
(1  )


If we average equation (C1) over time we obtain the estimating equation used in the paper:

Yi 

1
1
1


Z2i (  )  u i . (C2)
Z1i (  ) 
X1i 
X 2i    X3i 
(1  )
(1  )
(1  )
 (1  )


Our next task was to generate a synthetic dataset to use in our simulations that matched
the moments in actual data. We decided that in this synthetic data, we would work with a sector
whose estimated γ equals the median estimated γ. Since HS sector 2902 (Styrene) had the median
γ, we decided to base our exercise using the data and parameter from this sector and then see

42
how sensitive they were to estimation problems. We therefore conducted our simulation using a

 equal to 1.52, which is the same as the estimated  in this sector. We also took the values of
Hit, sit, Hkt, skt and Nt terms from the actual data for this sector. We then set the error term equal
to zero in equation (C1) and solved for Δlnpit – Δlnpkt so that equation (C1) fit exactly.
Once we had generated data that fit the model exactly, we needed to also generate a
series of errors to test how efficient our estimation procedure was. In order to do this we first had
to match the variance of the error terms that we actually observed. To obtain the variance
estimates, we generated the residuals of equation (C1) after imposing our chosen parameter
values and using the actual, rather than synthetic data. The sample variance of the residuals for
each country-HS-10 sector provided the variance estimate for each country-HS-10 sector.
We then added an error term (uit) to each simulated country-HS-10 sector observation
whose variance was drawn from a normal distribution with zero mean and a variance equal to the
one we obtained for that country-HS-10 sector. In principle, this would let us also solve for the
underlying demand and supply shocks, but it turns out that we only need to know their product in
order to do the simulation.
With the simulated data constructed, the observations were then averaged across time
within country-HS-10 sectors in order to transform observations for equation (C2). We then
estimated the parameters of the model using the same technique as in the paper. This provided
the first estimate (and iteration of the Monte Carlo). For each subsequent iteration, we discarded
the previous error terms (uit) and drew new error terms from the normal distribution to add to
each observation. We then estimated the parameters of the model again. This process was
repeated for each sample of a given time period for a total of 200 iterations.

43
The simulation results for samples that were less than thirteen years were based on using
the actual Hit, sit, Hkt, skt and Nt values for each sector from the corresponding years in the data. .
For each additional year above thirteen, we independently re-sampled one set of values of Hit, sit,
Hkt, skt and Nt from the actual data. This re-sampled data was then appended to the actual data
from 1992-2005, an error term was added, and the estimation proceeded as outlined above.

Simulation results

The simulation results for the structural parameter γ are presented in Figure C1. The
median estimated gamma is shown, along with the 10th and 90th percentile gammas. The results
show a rapid convergence to the correct value of gamma beginning after approximately 12 years
and almost complete convergence within 24 years. These results are similar to the results in
Soderbery (2010).
The simulation can also be used to predict the percent of gammas estimated to be
negative by the unconstrained WLS. The estimation used data for 14 years, from 1992-2005.
However, because the change from 1997 to 1998 was dropped, the actual estimation used the
equivalent of 13 years of data. In the simulation, 2.2% of the γ estimates were negative. By
contrast 14% of the estimates of γ in the paper were actually negative. The higher percentage of
estimated γ’s relative to simulated γ’s may reflect the fact that we simulated estimation assuming
the true γ equaled the median gamma. If we had simulated the data using a smaller γ (and indeed
half of all γ’s are less than the median), we would have obtained more negative gamma
estimates. Thus, the fact that our simulation produces few negative γ estimates when we
constrain γ to be the median, seems basically in line with what our estimation procedure
produces.

44

Figure C1: Estimated Gamma from Monte Carlo Simulation

45
References

Allanson, Paul and Catia Montagna, 2005, “Multiproduct Firms and Market Structure: An
Explorative Application to The Product Life Cycle” International Journal of Industrial
Organization 23, 587-597.
Arkolakis, Konstantinos, Arnaud Costinot and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, 2012, “New Trade
Models, Same Old Gains? American Economic Review, 102(1), 94-130.
Arkolakis, Konstantinos, Arnaud Costinot, David Donaldson and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, 2012,
“The Elusive Pro-Competitive Effect of Trade,” March 16, available at (2/7/13):
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~ka265/research/ACDR/ACDRdraft.pdf ; and later draft of
June 18, 2012.
Badinger, Harald, 2007a, “Has the EU’s Single Market Programme Fostered Competition?
Testing for a Decrease in Markup Ratios in EU Industries,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics, 69 (4): 497-519
Badinger, Harald, 2007b, “Market size, Trade, Competition and Productivity: Evidence from
OECD Manufacturing Industries. Applied Economics, 39 (11): 2143 - 2157.
Badinger, Harald, 2008. “Trade Policy and Productivity,” European Economic Review, 52, 867891.
Behrens Kristian and Yasusada Murata, 2007, “General Equilibrium Models of Monopolistic
Competition: A New Approach,” Journal of Economic Theory, 13, 776-787.
Behrens, Kristian, Giordano Mion, Yasusada Murata, Jens Südekum, 2008, “Trade, Wages, and
Productivity,” Institute for the Study of Labor, September.
Bergin, Paul and Robert C. Feenstra, 2009, “Pass-through of Exchange Rates and Competition
Between Fixers and Floaters,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41(s1), 35-70.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey, H., 1989, ‘The Generalized Gravity Equation, Monopolistic Competition,
and the Factor-Proportions Theory in International Trade,’ The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 71(1), February, 143-153.
Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen and Samuel Kortum, 2003, “Plants and
Productivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268-1290.
Bernard, Andrew, Stephen Redding and Peter K. Schott, 2011, “Multi-Product Firms and Trade
Liberalization.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3), 1271-1318.
Berry, Steven T., 1994, “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” Rand
Journal of Economics, 25, 242-246.
Bilbiie, Florin, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz, 2012, “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety,
and Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 304-345.
Blonigen, Bruce A., Benjamin H. Liebman, and Wesley W. Wilson, 2007, “Trade Policy and
Market Power: The Case of the U.S. Steel Industry, NBER working paper no. 13761.
Blonigen, Bruce A. and Soderbery, Anson, 2010, “Measuring the Benefits of Product Variety
with an Accurate Variety Set,” Journal of International Economics, 2(82), 168-180.

46
Bottasso, Anna and Alessandro Sembenelli, 2001, “Market Power, Productivity and the EU
Single Market Program: Evidence from a panel of Italian firms,” European Economic
Review, 45, 167-186.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., 1989, “Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power,” in Richard
Schmalensee and Robert Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 2.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1011-57.
Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, 2006, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 121(2), 541-585.
Christensen, Laurits R., Dale W. Jorgenson and Lawrence J. Lau, 1975, “Transcendental
Logarithmic Utility Functions”, American Economic Review 65, 367-383.
Diewert, W. E., 1976, “Exact and Superlative Index Numbers,” Journal of Econometrics, 4, 115145.
De Blas, Beatriz and Katheryn Niles Russ, 2012, “Understanding Markups in the Open
Economy,” Universidad Autonoma de Madrid and University of California, Davis.
De Loecker, Jan, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, 2012, “Prices,
Markups and Trade Reform,” NBER working paper no. 17925.
Domowitz, Ian, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 1988. “Market Structure and Cyclical
Fluctuations in U.S. Manufacturing,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 70(1),
February, 55-66.
Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan and Daniel Yi Xu, 2012, “Competition, Markups, and the
Gains from International Trade,” NBER working paper no. 18041.
Feenstra, Robert C., 1994, “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
Prices,” American Economic Review, 84(1), March, 157-177.
Feenstra, Robert C., 2014,“Restoring the Product Variety and Pro-competitive Gains from Trade
with Heterogeneous Firms,” NBER Working Paper 19833, 2014.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Clinton Shiells , 1997, “Bias in U.S. Import Prices and Demand,” in
Timothy Bresnahan and Robert Gordon, eds. New Products: History, Methodology and
Applications, NBER and Univ. of Chicago Press, 1997, 249-276.
Feenstra, Robert C., Benjamin Mandel, Marshall B. Reinsdorf and Matthew J. Slaughter, 2013,
“Effects of Terms of Trade Gains and Tariff Changes on the Measurement of U.S.
Productivity Growth,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5(1), 59–93.
Harrison, Ann E., 1994, “Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade reform: Theory and
Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, February, 36(1/2), 53-73.
Head, Keith C. and John Ries, 1999, “Rationalization Effects of Tariff Reductions,” Journal of
International Economics, 47(2), April, 295-320.
Head, Keith C. and John Ries, 2001, “Increasing Returns Versus National Product
Differentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade,” American
Economic Review, 91(4), September, 858-876.

47
Kim, Euysung, 2000, “Trade liberalization and Productivity Growth in Korean Manufacturing
Industries: Price Protection, Market Power, and Scale Efficiency,” Journal of
Development Economics, 62, 55-83.
Krishna, Pravin and Devashish Mitra, 1998, “Trade liberalization, Market discipline and
Productivity Growth: New Evidence from India,” Journal of International Economics,
56, 447-462.
Konings, Jozef, Patrick Van Cayseele, and Frederic Warzynski, 2005, “The Effects of
Privatization and Competitive Pressure on Firms’ Price-Cost Margins: Micro Evidence
from Emerging Economies,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87, 124-134.
Konings, Jozef and Hylke Vandenbussche, 2005, “Antidumping protection and markups of
domestic firms,” Journal of International Economics, 65, 151-165.
Krugman, Paul K., 1979, “Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International
Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 9, 469-479.
Levinsohn, James, 1993, “Testing the Imports-As-Market-Discipline Hypothesis,” Journal of
International Economics, August, 35(1/2), 1-22.
Melitz, Marc J., 2003, “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6),1695-1725.
Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano, 2008. “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,”
Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 295-316.
Rigobon, Roberto, 2003. “Identification Through Heteroskedasticity,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 85(4), July, 777-792.
Rodriguez-Lopez, Antonio, 2011, “Prices and Exchange Rates: A Theory of Disconnect,”
Review of Economic Studies, 78(3), July, 1135-1177.
Simonovska, Ina, 2010, “Income Differences and Prices of Tradables,” NBER working paper no.
16233.
Soderbery, Anson, 2010, “Investigating the Asymptotic Properties of Elasticity of Substitution
Estimates,” Economics Letters, 2(190), 57-62.
Trefler, Daniel, 2004, “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,”
American Economic Review, 94(4), September, 870-895.
Tybout, James, R., Jaime de Melo, and Vittorio Corbo, 1991, “The Effects of Trade Reform on
Scale and Technical Efficiency: New Evidence from Chile,” Journal of International
Economics, 31(3/4), 231-250.
Tybout, James R. and M. Daniel Westbrook, 1995, “Trade Liberalization and Dimensions of
Efficiency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries,” Journal of International
Economics, 39(1/2), 53-78.
Viner, Jacob, 1937, Studies in the Theory of International Trade. New York: Harper and
Brothers Publishers.
Yilmazkuday, Hakan, 2012, “Markups versus Trade Costs,” Florida International University.

48

Table 1
Share of U.S. Total Absorption in 1992 or 1998

Country
United States
Total Imports
Including:
Canada
Japan
Mexico
Germany
China

1992

1997

Share
0.801
0.199

Share
0.745
0.255

Diff
-0.056
0.056

0.038
0.036
0.012
0.010
0.010

0.052
0.035
0.024
0.012
0.017

0.014
0.000
0.012
0.002
0.007

Country
United States
Total Imports
Including:
Canada
Japan
Mexico
China
Germany

1998

2005

Share
0.781
0.219

Share
0.692
0.308

Diff
-0.089
0.089

0.043
0.030
0.022
0.017
0.012

0.056
0.025
0.031
0.041
0.015

0.013
-0.004
0.009
0.024
0.004

49

Table 2
Herfindahl index in 1992 or 1998
Herfindahl Index

Weighted Average HitSit

Country
United States
Canada
Japan
Mexico
Germany
China
Weighted
Ave.

1992
0.147
0.245
0.310
0.393
0.358
0.366

1997
0.155
0.252
0.313
0.407
0.357
0.293

Diff
0.008
0.007
0.003
0.014
-0.002
-0.073

1992
0.111
0.011
0.009
0.004
0.003
0.001

1997
0.111
0.013
0.010
0.009
0.004
0.002

Diff
-0.001
0.003
0.001
0.005
0.001
0.001

0.160

0.170

0.010

0.078

0.069

-0.009

Country
United States
Canada
Japan
Mexico
China
Germany
Weighted
Ave.

1998
0.183
0.249
0.318
0.419
0.280
0.332

2005
0.189
0.242
0.331
0.403
0.188
0.335

Diff
0.006
-0.008
0.013
-0.016
-0.092
0.002

1998
0.139
0.011
0.008
0.008
0.002
0.003

2005
0.129
0.015
0.008
0.010
0.003
0.005

Diff
-0.010
0.003
-0.001
0.002
0.001
0.001

0.190

0.191

0.001

0.090

0.071

-0.019

Notes:
The Herfindahl Index is the weighted average of the country's Herfindahl Index, where the weights
correspond to the share of each HS-4 sector in U.S. apparent consumption. “Share” sit is defined to be the
country's share of U.S. apparent consumption. The “Weighted Average Hitsit” is the weighted average of
the Herfindahl Index in sector i in year t multiplied by that country's share of U.S. apparent consumption;
the weights are the same as before. The last row reports a weighted average across all countries using
each country's share of U.S. apparent consumption as weights. Thus, the number shown in the last row
and column of each panel is i Hit(sit)2 , averaged across sectors.

50

Table 3
Distribution of  Estimates
Statistic
Mean
Median

Value Standard Deviation
11.90
1.75
0.19
0.01

Distribution of 1/ Estimates
Statistic
Mean
Median

Value Standard Deviation
8.06
0.32
5.27
0.34

Table 4
Gamma Values From Sectors with High Shares of Domestic Absorption
Hs4
Passenger motor vehicles
Parts and accessories for non-passenger motor vehicles
Crude petroleum
Automatic data processing machines
Non-military aircrafts
Cartons, boxes, cases, bags and other packing containers
Cell phones
Cigarettes
Plastics
Natural Gas


0.14
0.39
0.76
0.18
0.06
0.25
0.07
1.41
0.05
1.11

Average Share of
Total Absorption
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

51
Table 5
Markup and Variety Welfare Gains as a Percent of GDP
Baseline Results (All Sectors, 1992–2005, Herfindahl Range = ± 30%)
Hefindahl Range
W
P
V
± 30%
5-95% Confidence Interval
Robustness
± 20%
± 40%
Constant HI
± 30% (Trimming Top/Bottom 5%)
± 30% (Excluding Auto Sector)
± 30% (1992–1997)
± 30% (1998–2005)
Note: W = P + V, Winf = Pinf +V, V = V1 +V2

V1

0.86

0.42

0.44

0.92

(0.37, 1.22)

(0.28, 0.66)

(0.05, 0.65)

(0.24, 1.72)

0.27
0.78
0.79
0.64
0.49
0.82
0.01

0.25
0.40
0.66
0.41
0.23
0.17
0.24

0.02
0.38
0.13
0.23
0.26
0.65
-0.22

0.68
0.87
1.67
1.02
0.51
0.40
0.49

V2

Winf

-0.48

0.83

(-1.24, -0.01) (0.34, 1.19)

-0.66
-0.49
-1.54
-0.79
-0.25
0.25
-0.71

0.24
0.74
0.81
0.62
0.46
0.80
0.00

Pinf
0.39
(0.25, 0.63)

0.22
0.37
0.68
0.39
0.20
0.15
0.22

52
Figure 1

