NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHICH PARTS OF GLOBALIZATION MATTER FOR CATCH-UP GROWTH?
Paul M. Romer
Working Paper 15755
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15755

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

I would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Brandon Fuller, Tim Kane, and Dani Rodrik
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Paul M. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Which Parts of Globalization Matter for Catch-up Growth?
Paul M. Romer
NBER Working Paper No. 15755
February 2010
JEL No. F1,I1,O1,O33
ABSTRACT
Economists devote too much attention to international flows of goods and services and not enough
to international flows of ideas. Traditional trade flows are an imperfect substitute for flows of the underlying
ideas. The simplest textbook trade model shows that a welfare-enhancing move toward freer flows
of ideas should be associated with a reduction in conventional trade. The large quantitative effect from
the flow of ideas is evident in the second half of the 20th century as the life expectancies in poor and
rich countries began to converge. Another example comes from China, where authorities dramatically
reduced accident rates by adopting rules of civil aviation that were developed in the United States.
All economists, including trade economists, would be better equipped to talk about international flows
of technologies and rules if they adopted a consistent vocabulary based on the concepts of nonrivalry
and excludability. An analysis of the interaction between rules and technologies may help explain
important puzzles such as why private firms have successfully diffused some technologies (mobile
telephony) but not others (safe municipal water.)

Paul M. Romer
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
paul.romer@stanford.edu

I. Flows of Ideas
In his Ely Lecture, Stanley Fischer split globalization into noneconomic and economic
interactions that extend across borders. “Economic globalization, the ongoing process of greater
economic interdependence among nations, is reflected in the increasing amount of cross-border
trade in goods and services, the increasing volume of financial flows, and the increasing flows of
labor.” Charles Jones and I have recently argued that we can take the analysis one step deeper
(Jones and Romer, 2010.) Globalization is driven by the gains from reuse of ideas. Flows of
ideas are the part of globalization that matters for poverty reduction and catch-up growth, yet
most economists still shy from talking about them because they have trouble finding the right
words.

II. Evidence on Health and Globalization
Angus Deaton is not shy. “The life expectancy of the vast majority of mankind, whether
they life in rich or poor countries, depends on ideas, techniques, and therapies developed
elsewhere...” (Deaton, 2004.) Moreover, as he and others have observed, the gain from reuse of
these ideas is too large to ignore.
In a comparison across countries, Bourguignon and Morrison (2002) show that for most
of the twentieth century, poor countries were catching up with rich countries in terms of life
expectancy even as they fell farther behind in per capita income. They use a simple method to
value increases in life expectancy and add this to conventional income per capita. Worldwide
inequality in conventionally measured income grew throughout the 20th century but inequality in
their life-expectancy-inclusive measure of full income peaked soon after World War II.

3

Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) provide more detailed and conservative estimates of
the value of reductions in mortality and come to similar conclusions. Between 1960 and 2000,
the countries with the poorest half of world population started at an average income per capita of
about $900 (in 2000 international dollars). In the next 40 years, average income per capita
increased by $2200 dollars. Life expectancy increased from 41 to 64 years, which they equate to
an increase in the flow of income of about $1500 by the end of the period. Their ending measure
of full income is $4600 instead of $3100, higher by almost half again. Magnitudes this large
matter for their own sake. They are comparable to the estimates of the direct benefits from trade
in goods and services. They also have important implications about the role of policy in stifling
or encouraging these gains.
Prior to reading these papers, my implicit model of development allowed for the usual
gap between the world stock of technologies T* and the stock T in a poor country. A country
specific factor R (for rules) influenced the rate at which ideas from the rest of the world entered
the local economy. With good rules, T could catch-up with T* very quickly. With bad rules, T
might not grow at all. As a result, variation in R can explain the wide variation in the rate of
growth that we see for poor countries. This kind of model is a reasonable first cut at the data. It
tells us that we should be clear about why rules, and the incentives they create, can influence the
growth in T* at the technological frontier and growth in T as it catches up with T*. But the health
data shows that this one-dimensional model misses important interactions. There are different
types of technologies T that have different interactions with rules. Rules may let the technologies
that reduce mortality flow into a poor country even as they keep out other technologies that can
lift income per capita.

4

To capture the potential benefits from globalization, we need a better understanding the
differences between these types of ideas and how they interact with various local systems of
rules. In our pursuit of this understanding, the models that we use to argue for ever more trade in
goods and services do more harm than good.

III. Textbook Trade Theory
The standard textbook treatment of comparative advantage and the gains from trade
relies on a single factor, labor, and two representative outputs, such as meat and potatoes.
Suppose, however, that we call the two outputs lower blood pressure and lower cholesterol. In
the rich country, one worker can produce pills that generate 10 units of either output. In the poor
country, which uses labor to produce older generation pharmaceuticals that are less effective, one
worker can produce 5 units of lower blood pressure or 3 units of lower cholesterol.
As usual, we can use this set up to show how trade in pills can raise worldwide health
compared to autarky, but if we framed it this way, it would spoil the whole show. Trade in pills
is an obvious sign of inefficiency. The efficient form of trade would have the workers in the poor
country making pills that use the same formulas as the workers in the rich country. If the rules in
these two countries give workers in the poor country access to the formulas for the pills at no
charge, we would have large gains from globalization and no conventional trade in goods or
services.
Just to make sure that I am not cited by the thought police, this does not show that trade
restrictions are good. Nor does it show that intellectual property rights are bad (or good). It does
show that we need a richer vocabulary, one that can allow for the possibility that such ideas as
the formula for a pharmaceutical can also flow across a border. If flows of conventional goods

5

and services are the only things we see and describe, we will miss the deeper forces and
sometimes get the sign wrong. More conventional trade can be a sign of something wrong:
inefficiently low cross-border flows of ideas.

IV. Examples and Phrase Book
A persistent problem in the discussion about ideas and impediments that limit flows of
ideas is ambiguity about whether reuse is actually inefficient because it is so costly or is efficient
but prevented by bad rules. Here’s a typical exchange. Argument: “Poor countries should be
using the knowledge that exists in the rest of the world.” Counterargument: “The knowledge is
already available to them but they don’t know how to use it.” Clear language and
microfoundations based on specific examples are the best way to resolve these ambiguities.
The chemical formula for a therapeutic compound that reduces cholesterol or blood
pressure is a real example of a specific idea. The formula for oral rehydration therapy (ORT) is
an idea that played a very important role in increasing life expectancy in poor countries.
Estimates suggest that ORT saves between 3 and 5 millions of lives each year. It is also a useful
counter example to the claim that we cannot track flows of ideas. You can now go the World
Development Indicators Database and get data on the fraction of children with diarrhea who are
treated according to its therapies. Coverage is sparse, but will surely get better.
In the discussion that follows, it will be useful to have other contrasting types of ideas.
The first pair comes from utilities. The ideas required to deliver mobile telephony pose an
interesting contrast with the ideas behind municipal systems that deliver chlorinated water.
Another pair is from transportation. The first idea is congestion pricing for roads, the second a

6

rule requiring that pilots and air traffic controllers use a very specific set of English phrases to
communicate with each other.
The motivation for this last rule is obvious. Pilots and controllers use an agreed upon
phrasebook because doing so avoids the ambiguities that arise in unstructured conversations.
When a pilot “declares an emergency” to a controller with precisely those words, both sides, and
all other pilots on the same frequency, know exactly what the legal and procedural implications
are.
Economists could benefit from the same kind of structure in their conversations about
ideas. It is an inefficient use of mental energy to have economists using vague terms or, worse
still, a phrase like public good that means different things to different people. There is a simple
and well-established vocabulary for structuring the discussion of the ideas and we should stick to
it.
The most important concept, developed by people working in public finance, is the
dichotomy between rival and nonrival goods. By now, surely every economist can repeat the
definition. But lest you forget, there’s a simple test that covers the important cases. If you can
explain it on the phone, present it in a lecture, describe it on paper, or send it over the Internet, it
is nonrival. The formula for a new pharmaceutical is a nonrival good. The formula for ORT is
also a nonrival good.
The second, and logically independent concept is that of excludability. The laws in rich
countries allow for patents that make the formula for a new chemical entity partially excludable.
For a limited period of time, some uses of the formula are not permitted without the permission
of the owner. Some workers make outdated pills, not because it is impossible to make the new

7

pills in their country, but because the rules do not let them. The formula for ORT is both nonrival
and nonexcludable. No one has the legal right to exclude others from following its instructions.
The concepts of rivalry and excludability (and their opposites) are all we need to describe
ideas. Associated terms like spillovers, externalities, and even public good, mean different things
to different economists and are best avoided.
Human capital is a term that is used elastically, but it is too good to give up. Here, microfoundations point the way to unambiguous usage. Human capital is made of meat. Meat is
excludable. Meat is rival. As others have noted 1, it is a puzzle how meat produces ideas that are
written in books, described in lectures, and send over the internet, but it is not one that we need
to dwell on here.
Reasonable people can differ about how important nonrival goods are in practice. This is
neither a semantic or philosophical question. We can resolve this disagreement by looking at
evidence such as avoided deaths from diarrhea and measures of the spread of new treatment
protocols. (Or we can just have Angus Deaton do this for us.) If there are nonrival goods, there
are gains from sharing them globally.
Reasonable people can also differ about the optimal degree of excludability to assign to
any particular type of nonrival good. For the purposes at hand, all that matters is that existing
legal protections, combined with secrecy, make many nonrival goods at least partially
excludable, so the incentives faced by people with the ability to exclude others will influence the
spread of ideas.

1

See http://www.terrybisson.com/page6/page6.html for the pioneering exploration of this puzzle.
8

V. Technologies and Rules
The ideas behind congestion pricing and air traffic communication differ from the ideas
behind pharmaceuticals and ORT. To recognize this difference, it helps to partition ideas into
technologies and rules.
Technologies are ideas about how to rearrange inanimate objects. The chemical structure
of a compound, and the instructions about the chemical reactions needed to make it, are
technologies. So are the instructions for rehydrating someone with diarrhea. A technology is
something that would be valuable to a Robinson Crusoe who lived alone.
Rules specify how people interact with other people. The phrase book for aviation
specifies the rules of communication between pilots and controllers. Congestion pricing systems
specify rules that determine who drives on the road.
A bit of formalism can suggest how these concepts interact. Write output Y as a function

(1)

Y= A(T(T*,R),R) F(.).

The function A(.) captures the factors that determine productivity. The function F(.) is a
conventional production function, homogeneous of degree 1 in the standard rival inputs, such as
physical capital, skilled labor, and unskilled labor.
The notation for productivity suggests that it depends on local stocks of technological
ideas T and local rules R, A(T,R). With different rules, different technologies will maximize
productivity. With different technologies, different rules will be efficient.
The local stock of ideas depends, in turn, on the stock of technologies in the rest of the
world and on the local rules T(T*,R). Because the foreign technologies T* are nonrival, it is

9

possible for T to equal T*. However, because components of T* have some degree of
excludability, the technologies that are actually available for local production will depend on the
incentives created by the local rules R.

VI. Interactions Between Rules and Technologies
With these examples and this vocabulary, we can now go beyond the simple claim in the
beginning, that catch-up growth is driven by the introduction of pre-existing nonrival ideas into a
poor country.
The most obvious and immediate point is that the rules R are themselves nonrival ideas
that can be copied from abroad. The example of the aviation phrase book is drawn from recent
developments in China. 2 In the 1990s, after a period of rapid expansion, Chinese airlines were
arguably the most dangerous in the world. After a crash in 1994, Boeing began offering free
training courses to controllers and airline personnel. With the help of Boeing and later the FAA,
the Chinese civil aviation authority entirely rewrote its rulebook.
For rules as for technologies, incentives matter. The offer of assistance from the FAA
was welcomed in part because Chinese authorities knew that the FAA might disqualify Chinese
airlines from landing in the US and might pressure US carriers not to affiliate with Chinese
partners that have substandard safety records. A deadline created by the 2008 Olympics added
urgency to the Chinese efforts.
The incentive for Boeing (and later Airbus) to assist in changing the rules in China is
clear. Both manufacturers had investments in specific technologies T* that were complementary

2

Pasztor, Andy. “Flight Plan: How China Turned Around A Dismal Air-Safety Record; Foreign
Help Combined With Willful Regulator; FAA Chief's Hairy Ride.” Wall Street Journal (Eastern
Edition). New York, NY: October 10, 2007. A1.
10

with the formal rules R* adopted by the FAA and its European counterparts. With different rules
in China, the social and private value of these technologies would have been lower. Given the
technologies, the manufacturers and the FAA had an incentive to change the rules R in China so
that R=R*.
Because of their efforts, the accident rate in China is down by a factor of 10 and is now
among the lowest in the world. Nevertheless, misunderstandings still cause avoidable close calls
and authorities in China and the US continue to push for more rigid adherence to the phrase book
for radio communication.
Incentives influence changes in rules just as they influence changes in technology. For
many rules, a key difference compared to technologies is that large fractions of the population
have to agree to a rule change. A few early adopters could buy and use fax machines or modems,
but if some pilots and controllers try a new language, there will be strong restoring forces that
resist the change. With more people involved and more consensus required, change comes more
slowly.
Congestion pricing is a notable case of new rules that have successfully been tried in
some locations but which have generally not been copied despite the large social gains that they
offer. But just as some legal rules on property rights are more likely to lead to the
implementation of new technologies, some political rules may be more likely to lead to Pareto
improvement in other the rules. For example, the citizens of Stockholm adopted a road
congestion plan by agreeing in advance to try the proposed system for seven months, going back
to the status quo ante, and then having a referendum on whether to bring the system back. (Bjorn
Harsman and John Quigley, 2009.)

11

The two-step process followed in Sweden, with a trial period followed by a decision
about whether to continue, may have broad applicability, but the details clearly matter.
Something very close to this was used in Argentina to change the delivery system for water. An
extensive privatization implemented by the Menem government was associated with extensions
of service and reductions in infant mortality (Sebastian Galiani, Paul Gertler, and Ernesto
Schargrodsky, 2005)). Nevertheless, a subsequent government was able to mobilize widespread
public support for renationalization (Rafael Di Tella, Sebastian Galiani, and Ernesto
Schargrodsky, 2008.)
This failure does not seem to be a fluke. Private firms have not been particularly
successful at introducing modern water technologies to poor countries where they could clearly
save lives. These technologies, T*, which developed in a context with effective rules R* for
regulating private monopolies, were badly matched to rule systems R that did not have the same
capacity for regulation. The cost of introducing the appropriate rule systems may also be too
expensive to justify an investment in a change of rules by a water company comparable to the
kind of investment undertaken by Boeing in changing the rules of civil aviation.
The remarkable and surprising worldwide spread of mobile telephony is a striking
contrast. Private, for-profit firms have been very effective as a mechanism for extending the
delivery of telephony services. This success does require shipments of handsets and radio
transmitters across international boundaries, but these flows of physical goods are incidental to
the much more important ideas about how to set up and operate phone systems that foreign firms
and local entrepreneurs have now taken to virtually every country in the world. In this case, the
technology that developed in rich countries allowed some element of competition in delivery. In
countries where the rules for local utility regulation were not well enough developed to let

12

privatization be politically viable for land-line telephony or municipal water, the potential for
competition offered by the technologies of mobile telephony may have been the key to spread of
the technology by private firms. In this case, T*(R*) fortuitously turned out to be well matched to
the local rules R.
Finally, in the very poorest countries, the successes in public health that rely on rules that
look like the ones we use in science or open source software development offer another sharp
contrast to the failure of most market-based methods. There clearly are some ideas that can enter
from the rest of the world and raise the quality of life even in cases where the local systems of
rules are farthest away from the ones we take for granted in the modern market-based systems.
Without changing the basic working assumption that modern systems based on markets and the
rule of law are the desired end state, we may want to ask whether there are more opportunities to
spread truly life changing ideas like ORT using provisional mechanisms that may be better tuned
to the local rules. Even in the poorest countries, there have been real successes along side of the
familiar failures. Perhaps there we can learn something by studying the successes.

VII. Two Types of Errors
How we think is influenced by what we teach, and what we teach about the gains from
globalization may do more harm than good. It encourages two types of errors. It suggests that
technologies cannot be copied and that rules are easy to copy. In each case, it would be more
accurate to say that incentives matter. Rules matter because they change both the incentives for
flows of technologies and the productivity of technologies that are available locally.
Stable systems of rules are hard to change, even when the environment changes and they
are no longer optimal, because it is costly to reach consensus and coordinate a change.

13

Innovations in meta-rules, the rules for changing rules, would be particularly valuable if they
made it easier for groups of people to transition from an existing set of rules to better ones that
that have been shown to work elsewhere.

14

References
Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2005. “The Quantity and Quality of
Life and the Evolution of World Inequality.” American Economic Review, 95(1): 277-291.
Bourguignon, François, and Christian Morrisson. 2002. “Inequality Among World Citizens:
1820-1992.” American Economic Review, 92(4): 727-744.
Deaton, Angus. 2004. “Health in an Age of Globalization.” In Brookings Trade Forum: 2004,
ed. Carol Graham and Susan M. Collins, 83-130. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Fischer, Stanley. 2003. “Globalization and Its Challenges.” American Economic Review, 93(2):
1-30.
Galiani, Sebastian, Ernesto Schargrodsky, and Rafael Di Tella. 2008. “Reality Versus
Propaganda in the Formation of Beliefs About Privatization.” NBER Working Paper w14483.
Harsman, Bjorn and John M. Quigley. 2009. “Political and Public Acceptability of Congestion
Pricing: Ideology and Self-Interest.” Institute of Business and Economic Research Working
Paper W09-005.
Jones, Charles I., and Paul M. Romer. 2010. “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions,
Population, and Human Capital.” American Economics Journal: Macroeconomics. 2(1): 224245.

15

