                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE RETURN OF THE WAGE PHILLIPS CURVE

                                                Jordi Galí

                                         Working Paper 15758
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15758


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2010




I have benefited from comments during presentations at the CREI Macro Lunch, the Reserve Bank
of Australia, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, U. Rovira i Virgili, NBER Summer Institute, Kiel EES
Workshop, New York Fed, Columbia, NYU and Oxford University. Tomaz Cajner and Lien Laureys
provided excellent research assistance. I am grateful to the European Research Council, the Ministerio
de Ciencia e Innovación, the Barcelona GSE Research Network and the Government of Catalonia
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 15758
February 2010
JEL No. E31,E32

                                             ABSTRACT

The standard New Keynesian model with staggered wage setting is shown to imply a simple dynamic
relation between wage inflation and unemployment. Under some assumptions, that relation takes a
form similar to that found in empirical applications–starting with the original Phillips (1958) curve–and
may thus be viewed as providing some theoretical foundations to the latter. The structural wage equation
derived here is shown to account reasonably well for the comovement of wage inflation and the unemployment
rate in the U.S. economy, even under the strong assumption of a constant natural rate of unemployment.


Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
1         Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the emergence of a new popular framework
for monetary policy analysis, the so called New Keynesian (NK) model. The
new framework combines some of the ingredients of Real Business Cycle
theory (e.g. dynamic optimization, general equilibrium) with others that
have a distinctive Keynesian ‡avor (e.g. monopolistic competition, nominal
rigidities).
        Many important properties of the NK model hinge on the speci…cation
of its wage-setting block. While basic versions of that model, intended for
classroom exposition, assume fully ‡exible wages and perfect competition in
labor markets, the larger, more realistic versions (including those developed
in-house at di¤erent central banks and policy institutions) typically assume
staggered nominal wage setting which, following the lead of Erceg, Hender-
son and Levin (2000), are modeled in a way symmetric to price setting.1
The degree of nominal wage rigidities and other features of wage setting play
an important role in determining the response of the economy to monetary
and other shocks. Furthermore, the coexistence of price and wage rigidi-
ties has important implications for the optimal design of monetary policy.2
Yet, and despite the central role of the wage-setting block in the NK model,
the amount of work aimed at assessing its empirical relevance has been sur-
    1
     See, e.g., Smets and Wouters (2003,2008) and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans
(2005). For a descriptions of versions of those models developed at policy institutions,
see Christo¤el, Coenen, and Warne (2008), Edge, Kiley and Laforte (2007), and Erceg,
Guerrieri and Gust (2006), among others.
   2
     See Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000), Woodford (2003, chapter 6) or Galí (2008,
chapter 6) for a detailed discussion of the policy implications of the coexistence of nominal
wage and price stickiness.



                                             1
prisingly scant.3 This is in stark contrast with the recent but already large
empirical literature on price in‡ation dynamics and …rms’pricing patterns,
which has been motivated to a large extent by the desire to evaluate the
price-setting block of the NK model.4
       The present paper seeks to …ll part of that gap, by providing evidence on
the NK model’s ability to account for the observed patterns of wage in‡ation
in the U.S. economy. In order to do so, I reformulate the standard version
of the NK wage equation in terms of a (suitably de…ned) unemployment
rate. The main advantage of that reformulation is the observability of the
associated driving force (the unemployment rate), which contrasts with the
inherent unobservability of the wage markup or the output gap, which are the
driving forces in standard formulations of the NK wage in‡ation equation.
       The staggered wage setting model à la Calvo (1983) embedded in stan-
dard versions of the New Keynesian framework is shown to imply a simple
dynamic relation between wage in‡ation and the unemployment rate, which
I refer to as the New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve. Under certain assump-
tions, that relation takes the same form as the original equation of Phillips
(1958). Furthermore, in the presence of wage indexation to past in‡ation
–an assumption often made in extensions of the basic model– the resulting
wage dynamics are consistent with a speci…cation often used in applied work.
The analysis developed here can thus be seen as providing some theoretical
   3
    A recent exception is Sbordone (2006).
   4
    See, e.g. Galí and Gertler (1999), Galí, Gertler and López-Salido (2001), Sbordone
(2002) and Eichenbaum and Fisher (2007) for examples of papers using aggregate data.
Micro evidence on price-setting patterns and its implications for aggregate models can be
found in Bils and Klenow (2004), Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), and Mackowiak and
Smets (2008), among others.



                                           2
foundations for those speci…cations, as well as a structural interpretation to
its coe¢ cients.
    In the second part of the paper I turn to the empirical evidence, and show
how the New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve accounts reasonably well for
the behavior of wage in‡ation in the U.S. economy, even under the strong
assumption of a constant natural rate of unemployment. In particular, the
model can account for the strong negative correlation between wage in‡ation
and the unemployment rate observed since the mid-1980s. On the other
hand, the lack of a signi…cant correlation between the same variables for the
postwar period as a whole can be explained as a consequence of the large
‡uctuations in price in‡ation in and around the 1970s, in combination with
wage indexation to past CPI in‡ation.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
the basic model of staggered nominal wage setting. Section 3 introduces
the measure of unemployment latent in that model, and reformulates the
wage in‡ation equation in terms of that variable. Section 4 provides an
empirical assessment of the model’s implied relation between wage in‡ation
and unemployment using postwar U.S. data. Section 5 concludes.


2     Staggered Wage Setting and Wage In‡a-
      tion Dynamics
This section introduces a variant of the staggered wage setting model orig-
inally developed in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000; henceforth, EHL).
That model (and extensions thereof) constitutes one of the key building
blocks of the monetary DSGE frameworks that have become part of the

                                      3
toolkit for policy analysis in both academic and policy circles. The variant
presented here assumes that labor is indivisible, with all variations in hired
labor input taking place at the extensive margin (i.e. in the form of variations
in employment). The assumption of indivisible labor leads to a de…nition of
unemployment consistent with its empirical counterpart.
    The model assumes a (large) representative household with a continuum
of members represented by the unit square and indexed by a pair (i; j) 2
[0; 1]      [0; 1]. The …rst dimension, indexed by i 2 [0; 1], represents the type
of labor service in which a given household member is specialized. The
second dimension, indexed by j 2 [0; 1], determines his disutility from work.
                                     '
The latter is given by          tj       if he is employed and zero otherwise, where
'        0 determines the elasticity of the marginal disutility of work, and                 t   >0
is an exogenous preference shifter. Furthermore, utility is logarithmic in
consumption and there is full risk sharing among household members, as in
Merz (1995).
    The household period utility corresponds to the integral of its members’
utilities, and is thus given by
                                                           Z    1   Z    Nt (i)
                 U (Ct ; fNt (i)g;   t)       log Ct   t                          j ' djdi
                                                           Z0 1      0
                                                                    Nt (i)1+'
                                           = log Ct    t                      di
                                                            0        1+'

where Ct denotes household consumption, and Nt (i) 2 [0; 1] is the fraction of
members specialized in type i labor who are employed in period t. Below I
discuss the robustness of the main …ndings to a generalization of the previous
utility function that is consistent with (empirically more plausible) smaller
wealth e¤ects on labor supply.

                                                4
   The relevant decision unit is the household. The latter seeks to maximize
                              X
                              1
                                     t
                         E0              U (Ct ; fNt (i)g;    t)
                              t=0

subject to a sequence of budget constraints
                                      Z 1
                Pt Ct + Qt Bt Bt 1 +      Wt (i)Nt (i) di +             t              (1)
                                                 0

where Pt is the price of the consumption bundle, Wt (i) is the nominal wage
for labor of type i, Bt represents purchases of a nominally riskless one-period
bond (at a price Qt ), and     t    is a lump-sum component of income (which
may include, among other items, dividends from ownership of …rms). The
above sequence of period budget constraints is supplemented with a solvency
condition which prevents the household from engaging in Ponzi schemes.
   As in EHL, and following the formalism of Calvo (1983), workers supply-
ing a labor service of a given type (or a union representing them) get to reset
their (nominal) wage with probability 1              w   each period. That probability is
independent of the time elapsed since they last reset their wage, in addition
to being independent across labor types. Thus, a fraction of workers              w   keep
their wage unchanged in any given period, making that parameter a natural
index of nominal wage rigidities. Once the wage has been set, the quantity of
workers employed is determined unilaterally by …rms, with households will-
ingly meeting that demand (to the extent that the wage remains above the
disutility of work for the marginal worker), by sending its specialized workers
with the lowest work disutility.
   When reoptimizing their wage in period t, workers choose a wage Wt in
order to maximize household utility (as opposed to their individual utility),
subject to a sequence of isoelastic demand schedules for their labor type,

                                             5
and the usual sequence of household ‡ow budget constraints.5 The …rst
order condition associated with that problem can be written as:

                      X
                      1
                                           Nt+kjt           Wt
                                   k
                            (   w ) Et                                 Mw M RSt+kjt       =0
                      k=0
                                           Ct+k             Pt+k
where Nt+kjt denotes the quantity demanded in period t + k of a labor type
                                                                                               '
whose wage is being reset in period t, M RSt+kjt                                     t+k Ct+k Nt+kjt   is the
relevant marginal rate of substitution between consumption and employment
in period t + k, and Mw                       w
                                                  w
                                                      1
                                                           is the desired (or ‡exible wage) markup,
with          w   denoting the (constant) wage elasticity of demand for the services of
each labor type.
            Log-linearizing the above optimality condition around a perfect foresight
zero in‡ation steady state, and using lower case letters to denote the logs of
the corresponding variable, we obtain the approximate wage setting rule
                                                       X
                                                       1
                                w                                      k
                      wt =          + (1       w)               (   w ) Et   mrst+kjt + pt+k             (2)
                                                          k=0

                  w
where                  log Mw . Note that in the absence of nominal wage rigidities
                                                   w
(   w       = 0) we have wt = wt =                        + mrst + pt , implying a constant markup
    w
            of the wage wt over the price-adjusted marginal rate of substitution,
mrst + pt . When nominal wage rigidities are present, new wages are set
                                                       w
instead as a constant markup                               over a weighted average of current and
expected future price-adjusted marginal rates of substitution.
            Letting mrst        ct +' nt +     t   denote the economy’s average (log) marginal
        5
    Details of the derivation of the optimal wage setting condition can be found in EHL
(2000).




                                                                6
rate of substitution, where           t       log     t,    we can write

                     mrst+kjt = mrst+k + '(nt+kjt                                    nt+k )                (3)

                                      = mrst+k                     w '(wt        wt+k )

      Furthermore, log-linearizing the expression for aggregate wage index around
a zero in‡ation steady state we obtain

                                  wt =        w wt 1   + (1             w )wt                              (4)

      As in EHL (2000), we can combine equations (2) through (4) and derive
the baseline wage in‡ation equation

                              w                 w                     w          w
                              t   = Et f        t+1 g              w( t              )                     (5)

          w                                                        w
where     t    wt    wt   1   is wage in‡ation,                    t        wt        pt      mrst denotes the
                                                 (1        w )(1       w)
(average) wage markup, and                w           w (1+ w ')
                                                                            > 0. In words, wage in‡ation
depends positively on expected one period ahead wage in‡ation and nega-
tively on the deviation of the average wage markup from its desired value.6
Equivalently, and solving (5) forward, we have
                                              X
                                              1
                          w                            k            w            w
                          t       =       w                Et f(    t+k              )g                    (6)
                                              k=0

i.e. wage in‡ation is proportional to the discounted sum of expected devia-
tions of current and future average wage markups from their desired levels.
Intuitively, if average wage markups are below (above) their desired level,
workers that have a chance to reset their wage will tend to adjust it upward
(downward), thus generating positive (negative) wage in‡ation.
  6
    Note that the previous equation is the wage analog to the price in‡ation equation
resulting from a model with staggered price setting à la Calvo. See Galí and Gertler
(1999) and Sbordone (2002) for a derivation and empirical assessment.

                                                       7
   Estimated versions of the model above found in the literature generally
allow for automatic indexation to price in‡ation of the wages that are not
reoptimized in any given period. Here I assume the following indexation rule:

                                                              p                        p
                        wt+kjt = wt+k         1jt   +         t+k 1   + (1         )       +g                      (7)

for k = 1; 2; 3; :::where wt+kjt is the period t + k (log) wage for workers who
                                                                                                       p
last re-optimized their wage in period t (with wtjt                                        wt ),       t   is the price
                                                                             p
in‡ation variable to which wages are indexed,                                    denotes steady state price
in‡ation, and g is the rate of growth of productivity (and real wages) in
the steady state. In that case the following wage in‡ation equation can be
derived:
                    w       p                             w            p              w            w
                    t       t 1     =       + Et f        t+1          tg          w( t                )           (8)
                                        p
where          (1        )((1       )       + g).
                                                                                           p           p
   While in existing applications it is often assumed                                      t           t     pt   pt   1

(e.g. Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007)), it is important to note that the model
allows for in‡ation measures other than the one-period lagged in‡ation as an
indexing variable. In particular, some of the estimates below use the moving
           p                    p       p               p         p
average    t        (1=4)(      t   +   t 1   +         t 2   +   t 3)   as a "smoother" alternative
indexing variable.




                                                          8
3         Wage In‡ation and Unemployment: A New
          Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve
Next I introduce unemployment explicitly in the model above.7 Consider
household member (i; j), specialized in type i labor and with disutility of
                '
work       tj       . Using household welfare as a criterion, and taking as given current
labor market conditions (as summarized by the prevailing wage for his labor
type), he will …nd it optimal to participate in the labor market in period t if
and only if
                                          Wt (i)
                                                         t Ct   j'
                                           Pt
i.e. whenever the real wage prevailing in his trade is above his disutility from
working, expressed in terms of consumption using the household’s marginal
valuation of the latter.
        Thus, the marginal supplier of type i labor (employed or unemployed),
which I denote by Lt (i), is implicitly given by

                                       Wt (i)                        '
                                              =        t Ct Lt (i)
                                        Pt

        Taking logs and integrating over i we obtain

                                     wt    p t = ct + ' l t +            t           (9)

                      R1
where lt        lt (i)di can be interpreted as the model’s implied aggregate
                       0
                               R1
participation rate, and wt       0
                                   wt (i)di is the average wage, both expressed
in logs.
    7
    The general approach builds on Galí (1996). Other recent applications to the New
Keynesian model can be found in Blanchard and Galí (2007) and, more closely related
(although developed independently), Casares (2009).



                                                   9
     I de…ne the unemployment rate ut as

                                         ut       lt        nt                             (10)

which, for rates of unemployment of the magnitude observed in the postwar
U.S. economy, is a close (and algebraically convenient) approximation to the
more conventional measure (Lt             Nt )=Lt .
     Combining (9) and (10) with the expression for the average wage markup
 w
 t     (wt   pt )   (ct + 'nt + t ) used above yields the following simple linear
relation between the wage markup and the unemployment rate

                                              w
                                              t   = ' ut                                   (11)

     Let us de…ne the natural rate of unemployment, unt , as the rate of un-
employment that would prevail in the absence of nominal wage rigidities. It
follows from the assumption of a constant desired wage markup that unt is
constant and given by
                                                        w
                                          un =                                             (12)
                                                        '
     Finally, combining (5), (11), and (12) we obtain the following New Key-
nesian Wage Phillips curve (NKWPC, for short):

                            w             w
                            t   = Et f    t+1 g             w'   (ut   un )                (13)

     Note that the simple linear relation between the wage markup and unem-
ployment derived in this section holds irrespective of the details of the wage
setting process. In particular, it also holds in the presence of wage indexation
as described in equation (7). In that case we can derive the implied wage
Phillips curve by combining equations (8) and (11) to obtain:

               w                p                 w              p
               t    =   +       t 1   + Et f      t+1            tg    w'     (ut   un )   (14)

                                                  10
which I refer to henceforth as the augmented NKWPC.


3.1       Relation to the original wage Phillips curve

In his seminal paper, Phillips (1958) uncovered the existence of a strong in-
verse empirical relation between wage in‡ation and the unemployment rate
in the U.K. over the period 1861-1957. His analysis was subsequently repli-
cated using U.S. data by Samuelson and Solow (1960), who showed that a
similar empirical relation had been prevalent in the U.S., with the exception
of the New Deal period and the early years of the …rst World War. Much of
subsequent empirical work turned its focus instead to the relation between
price in‡ation and unemployment, usually in the context of a discussion of
NAIRU and its changes (e.g. Gordon (1997) and Staiger, Stock and Watson
(1997)).8
       Note that, like the original Phillips (1958) curve, the NKWPC establishes
a relationship between wage in‡ation and the unemployment rate. But two
key di¤erences with respect to Phillips’original curve (and some of its sub-
sequent amendments) are worth emphasizing.
       Firstly, (13) is a microfounded structural relation between wage in‡a-
tion and unemployment, with coe¢ cients that are functions of parameters
that have a structural interpretation, and which are independent of the pol-
icy regime.9 In particular, the steepness of the slope of the implied wage
   8
      Gordon (1997) claims that the shift in focus towards price in‡ation has been "deliber-
ate." In his words, "...[t]he earlier …xation on wages was a mistake. The relation of prices
to wages has changed over time...The Fed’s goal is to control in‡ation, not wage growth,
and models with separate wage growth and price markup equations do not perform as well
as the [price in‡ation] equation...in which wages are only implicit...."
    9
      Needless to say this is only true to the extent that one is willing to take the assumptions
of the Calvo formalism literally, including the exogeneity of parameter w .


                                               11
in‡ation-unemployment curve (given expected wage in‡ation) is decreasing
in the degree of wage rigidity       w   (which is inversely related to          w ).   In the
limit, as    w   approaches zero (the case of full wage ‡exibility), the curve be-
                                                  w
comes vertical. Also, the slope of the (              ; u) relation is decreasing in the size
of the Frisch labor supply elasticity (which corresponds to the inverse of ').
That structural nature of (13) stands in contrast with the purely empirical
basis of Phillips (1958) original curve, whose only theoretical underpinning
was the plausibility of the principle that "when demand for labour is high
and there are very few unemployed we should expect employers to bid wage
rates up quite rapidly...".10
       Secondly, note that (13) implies that wage in‡ation is a forward looking
variable, which is inversely related to current unemployment but also to its
expected future path. This feature, which re‡ects the forward looking nature
of wage setting, is immediately seen by solving (13) forward to obtain
                                       X
                                       1
                          w                  k
                          t   =   w'              Et f(ut+k      un )g                    (15)
                                       k=0

which contrasts with the static, contemporaneous nature of the original
Phillips curve, in which expectations play no role.

       Next I brie‡y discuss two extensions of the previous framework. The …rst
one allows for changes over time in desired markups, whereas the second
introduces a speci…cation of preferences that allows for limited short run
wealth e¤ects on labor supply.
  10
    Phillips (1958) also emphasized the likely existence of nonlinearities due to workers’
reluctance "to o¤er their services at less than the prevailing rates when the demand for
labour is low and unemployment is high, so that wage rates fall only very slowly." In the
analysis of the present paper, as in standard versions of the New Keynesian model, the
possible existence of such asymmetries is ignored.

                                             12
3.2           An Extension with Time-Varying Desired Wage
              Markups

Estimated, medium-scale versions of the New Keynesian model often allow
                                                                                 w
for a time-varying, exogenous desired wage markup, f                             t g   (see, e.g. Smets
and Wouters (2003, 2007)). In that case, the wage in‡ation equation (shown
in its version without indexation, for simplicity) is given by

                                 w               w             w           w
                                 t   = Et f      t+1 g      w( t           t )                    (16)

while the corresponding NKWPC now takes the form

                                w                w
                                t    = Et f      t+1 g      w '(ut     unt )
                      w
where unt            '
                      t
                          denotes the (now time-varying) natural rate of unemploy-
ment. Variations in the latter variable, resulting from changes in desired
wage markups, may thus potentially shift the relation between wage in‡a-
tion and the unemployment rate.11
          Note that we can also write

                                    w               w
                                    t   = Et f      t+1 g    w 'ut   + vt                         (17)

               w
vt           w t    The previous speci…cation can be compared against one often
used in the literature which relies on (16) combined with the de…nition of
     11
          Equivalently, we can write
                                     w              w
                                     t   =   Et f   t+1 g   w'   ut + vt
          w
vt      w t . In contrast with the representation of the wage equation found in Smets
and Wouters (2003, 2007), the error term in the wage in‡ation formulation proposed here
captures exclusively "wage markup shocks," and not preference shocks (even though the
latter have been allowed for in the model above). This feature should in principle allow
one to overcome the basic identi…cation problem raised by Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan
(2008) in their critique of current New Keynesian models.

                                                     13
the average wage markup, and which takes the form

                w            w
                t   = Et f   t+1 g   w (wt   pt   ct       'nt ) + vt0

                                                w
where now the error term is given by vt0      w t      +   w t,   i.e. it is in‡uenced
by both wage markup shocks and preference shocks. That property contrasts
with (17), whose error term captures exclusively wage markup shocks, but
not preference shocks (even though the latter have been allowed for in the
model). This feature should in principle allow one to overcome the identi…ca-
tion problem raised by Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2008) in their critique
of current New Keynesian models. That potential advantage of the present
formulation is discussed in detail in Galí, Smets and Wouters (2010), who
re-estimate the Smets and Wouters (2007) model using an unemployment-
based wage equation, and re-assess some of the …ndings therein in light of
the new estimates.

3.3    Robustness to a Speci…cation of Preferences with
       Limited Short-Run Wealth E¤ects

The assumptions on preferences made above, while analytically convenient,
have implications on labor supply that are rather implausible from an em-
pirical viewpoint. In particular, the strong wealth e¤ects implied by the
logarithmic speci…cation, while seemingly needed in order to remain consis-
tent with balanced growth, are likely to be counterfactual. This becomes
clear by looking at the labor participation equation (9), which implies that
the wage-consumption ratio (wt pt ct ) should be positively correlated to la-
bor participation, at least conditional on shocks other than preference shocks
being the source of ‡uctuations. In postwar U.S. data, and possibly due to

                                      14
the wage rigidities of the kind emphasized in the present paper, wt                            pt    ct is
clearly countercyclical, while participation is procyclical (albeit moderately
so). Thus, and unless one is willing to attribute a dominant weight to pref-
erence shocks as a source of cyclical ‡uctuations in wages, consumption and
participation, equation (9) provides an unsatisfactory account of ‡uctuations
in the labor force.12
       Here I consider a simple extension of the preferences assumed above that
can in principle overcome that problem, by allowing for arbitrarily small
short-run wealth e¤ects while remaining consistent with a balanced growth
path. Thus, individual utility from consumption is now assumed to be given
by      t   log Ct (i; j), where       t   is a preference shifter taken as exogenously given
by each household, but determined by the ratio of aggregate consumption C t
to a measure of its trend level. More precisely, I assume                            t   = C t =Zt where
                  1 #
Zt = Zt# 1 C t          , for all t. Aggregation of individual utilities thus yields the
following period utility for the household
                                                                    Z   1
                                                                            Nt (i)1+'
                    U (Ct ; fNt (i)g;        t)    t log Ct     t                     di
                                                                    0        1+'

       The derivation of the wage in‡ation equation (5) (or (8), in the pres-
ence of indexation) carries over to this case, with the relevant marginal
rate of substitution in the optimal wage setting problem now being given
                                                '
by M RSt+kjt             (   t+k =   t+k )Ct+k Nt+kjt .   Note, however, that in a symmetric
equilibrium Ct = C t for all t, which allows us to write the equilibrium (log)
marginal rate of substitution as mrst = zt + 'nt +                             t,   where zt        log Zt
  12
    The previous observation is closely related to other implausible predictions of macro
models that rely on similar preferences, including the negative impact on activity of higher
anticipated productivity, as emphasized by the recent literature on "news shocks."


                                                    15
evolves over time according to zt = #zt                      1   + (1         #)ct . The equations for the
average wage markup and participation are now respectively given by

                             w
                             t     (wt           pt )        (zt + 'nt + t )

                                 wt          pt = zt + ' lt +                 t


which can be combined to yield the same simple proportional relation be-
                                                                                                     w
tween the wage markup and the unemployment rate as above, i.e.                                       t   = 'ut .
Note that the previous speci…cation is still consistent with a balanced growth
path since, in the long run, zt will grow at the same rate as consumption.
In the short run, however, the impact of changes in consumption on the
marginal rate of substitution may be rendered arbitrarily small by increasing
parameter #, thus yielding a more plausible labor supply model. Yet, and
most importantly for the purposes of the present paper, the speci…cation of
the NKWPC in (13) (or (14)) remains una¤ected.13

3.4     A Reduced Form Representation for the NKWPC

Next I derive a simple reduced form representation of the NKWPC, thus
setting the stage for the empirical analysis below. Consider the case of an
exogenous, stationary AR(2) process for the unemployment rate. As dis-
cussed below, this process turns out to provide a good approximation to the
  13
    An identical robustness result can be shown to obtain under a period utility function
of the sort assumed by Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) with a similar motivation, namely
                                                                          Z   1                  1
                                             1                                    Nt (i)1+'
              U (Ct ; fNt (i)g; Zt ) =                  Ct       t   Zt                     di
                                         1                                0        1+'
                   1 #
where Zt = Zt# 1 C t . The non-separability of the previous speci…cation for household
utility, however, prevents one from interpreting it as the aggregation of the utilities of
individual household members.

                                                        16
behavior of U.S. unemployment in the postwar period. Formally,

                                        bt =
                                        u            bt 1
                                                    1u        +            bt 2
                                                                          2u           + "t                          (18)

      bt
where u     ut          un and f"t g is white noise. Combining (18) with (14) yields
the wage in‡ation equation

                                    w                   p
                                    t   =       +       t 1   +            bt
                                                                          0u       +      bt 1
                                                                                         1u                          (19)

where
                                                                          w'
                                            0
                                                        1         (       1   +         2)

                                                                  w'               2
                                            1
                                                        1         (       1   +         2)
or, equivalently,
                                    w           0           p
                                    t   =           +       t 1               bt
                                                                              u          1    bt
                                                                                              u                      (20)

where           (   0   +    1 ).

   Estimates of the unemployment process (18) using postwar U.S. data
unambiguously point to the following properties:                                               1   > 1 ,   1 <   2   < 0
and 0 <     1   +       1   < 1, the latter being a requirement for stationarity If
those inequalities hold then we have                                  0    < 0,          1    > 0, and     > 0. Thus,
under the previous assumptions and conditional on the relevant lagged price
in‡ation measure used for indexation purposes, wage in‡ation should respond
negatively to both the level and the …rst di¤erence of the unemployment
rate, with the size of that response being a well de…ned function of structural
parameters, including those characterizing the process for the unemployment
rate.
   Interestingly, a speci…cation like (20) has often been proposed and used
in empirical applications, albeit without any strong theoretical justi…cation

                                                             17
(e.g. Blanchard and Katz (1999)), as well as in mainstream undergraduate
textbooks (though the latter typically omit lagged unemployment). In fact,
in his seminal paper Phillips (1958) himself argued that it was plausible that
wage in‡ation would depend negatively on both the level and the change of
the unemployment rate, since both captured important dimensions of the
degree of tightness or excess demand in labor markets, and tried to uncover
their joint in‡uence on the unemployment rate.
       The following section revisits and updates estimates of equations (19) and
(20) and reinterprets them through the lens of the New Keynesian model
developed above.


4        Empirical Evidence
The present section provides an empirical assessment of the NKWPC devel-
oped above. More speci…cally, I want to evaluate to what extent a version of
the NKWPC with a constant natural rate can account for the joint behavior
of unemployment and wage in‡ation in the U.S. economy.
       First, I use simple statistics and graphical tools to seek evidence of a prima
facie negative relationship between wage in‡ation and unemployment of the
sort predicted by the theory. Secondly, I compare the observed behavior
of wage in‡ation with that predicted by an estimated version of the model
above, conditional on the unemployment rate.14
       The empirical analysis relies on quarterly postwar U.S. data drawn from
the Haver database. I use the civilian unemployment rate as my measure of
  14
    The observability of the unemployment rate, may be viewed as an advantage of the
present framework relative to Sbordone (2006), who focuses instead on a parameterized
version of (5).


                                          18
unemployment. All measures of price in‡ation are constructed using the con-
sumer price index. There are two main alternative sources for average wage
data that one may use to construct measures of wage in‡ation: the earnings
data for production and nonsupervisory workers from the Establishment Sur-
vey (starting in 1964Q1), and the compensation data from the "Productivity
and Costs" publication of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (available from
1948Q1 onwards). Aside from their time span, the main di¤erence between
the two is that "compensation" is a more encompassing measure of the cost
to the employer, and as such it includes employer contributions to employee-
bene…t plans or irregular bonuses, whereas "earnings" is restricted to wage
income proper (including premium pay for overtime). Unfortunately, and
as noted by several authors, the discrepancy between their implied in‡ation
measures is far from negligible.15 This is made clear by Figure 1, which plots
wage in‡ation based on both measures. Note that in this and subsequent
…gures –though not in the formal econometric work below–wage in‡ation is
measured as the centered four-quarter di¤erence of the log nominal wage ex-
pressed in percent terms (i.e., 100*(wt+2           wt 2 )), in order to smooth the
high volatility associated with quarter-to-quarter log-di¤erences.
      Three features stand out in Figure 1. First, the two measures display
very similar medium-run patterns, both picking up during the Great In‡a-
tion episode, dropping during the Volcker disin‡ation, and ‡uctuating around
a low and stable mean during the Great Moderation years. This is re‡ected
in their high contemporaneous correlation (0:82). Secondly, their mean val-
ues in the common sample period are noticeably di¤erent: 4:44 percent for
 15
      See, e.g. Abraham, Spletzer and Stewart (1999).



                                           19
the earnings-based measure, 5:36 percent for the compensation-based one.
Finally, and perhaps more strikingly, the compensation-based measure ap-
pears far more volatile than the earnings-based measure, especially over the
past two decades. A possible explanation for the di¤erence in volatility lies in
the inclusion of the payo¤s from the exercise of employee stock options in the
compensation measure. As argued by Mehran and Tracy (2001), the impact
of changes in that (increasingly important) component of compensation on
wage in‡ation is substantial, even if it only accounts for a small fraction of
overall compensation.
   Interestingly, and those di¤erences notwithstanding, both sources are
used in empirical macro applications, often with little or no discussion regard-
ing the choice. While the compensation-based measure has an advantage in
its longer span, its sizable high frequency variations render it somewhat sus-
picious, and suggest the presence of substantial measurement error. Thus, in
the empirical analysis below I will use the earnings-based wage in‡ation as a
baseline measure, but will check and discuss the robustness of the main …nd-
ings to the use of the alternative, compensation-based, wage in‡ation mea-
sure. Perhaps surprisingly, given the seemingly large di¤erences observed in
Figure 1, none of the key qualitative …ndings in the empirical analysis below
hinge on the choice of wage in‡ation measure.

4.1    A Quick Glance at the Data

The New Keynesian Wage Phillips curve derived in section 3 implies an
inverse relation between wage in‡ation and the unemployment rate, albeit
not a simple or contemporaneous one, especially in the presence of indexation.


                                      20
As a …rst pass in the empirical assessment of the model it seems natural to
check whether the raw data hint at any such an inverse relation.
   Figure 2 displays two scatterplots of wage in‡ation and the unemploy-
ment rate for the U.S. economy, using both measures of wage in‡ation. The
scatterplots reveal the absence of a stable negative relation between the two
variables. Similar graphs, though typically focusing on price in‡ation, have
often been used to demonstrate "the empirical failure of the Phillips curve."
That visual impression is con…rmed by the correlation between the two series,
which is as low as 0:02 and    0:01, respectively.
   Figure 3 displays the evolution of unemployment and wage in‡ation over
time, using the earnings-based measure of the latter. While no stable relation
seems evident at a …rst glance, a more careful examination points to a strong
inverse relation starting sometime around the mid-1980s and prevailing up to
the end of the sample. That inverse relation is con…rmed by the scatterplots
of Figure 4, which are now restricted to the post-1984 period, i.e. the so-called
Great Moderation era. For the restricted sample period the correlations are
 0:76 and    0:27, respectively.
   Figure 5 adds a temporal dimension to the Phillips curve scatterplots ini-
tially shown in Figure 2, now restricted to the earnings-based wage in‡ation
It suggests that the paths of U.S. wage in‡ation and unemployment have
completed a full circle, returning in recent years to the same downward locus
that characterized the 1960s. The evidence thus points to the presence of
a stable negative relation between wage in‡ation and unemployment during
periods of relatively low and stable price in‡ation. That relation is broken
during transitions from low to high in‡ation (early 70s), or from high to low


                                       21
in‡ation (the early 80s), leading to an overall lack of correlation, as suggested
by Figure 2.
       Thus, it seems clear from the previous quick glance at the data that
any model that implies a simple inverse relation between wage in‡ation and
unemployment will be at odds with the behavior of those two variables during
the long 1970-1985 episode. Yet, one cannot rule out that extensions of such
a model which allow for indexation to price in‡ation may be consistent with
the evidence. I explore that hypothesis in the next subsection, using the
augmented version of the New Keynesian Wage Phillips curve.
       Why has the re-emergence of a stable negative relation between wage in-
‡ation and unemployment over the past two decades gone unnoticed among
academic economists? A possible explanation lies in the focus on price in‡a-
tion and away from wage in‡ation in much of the empirical research of recent
years, combined with a lack of a signi…cant empirical relation between price
in‡ation and unemployment. The correlation between those two series over
the post-1984 period is low and insigni…cant ( 0:13), and its negative value
is due exclusively to the most recent observations: if I end the sample period
in 2007Q4 the correlation becomes even smaller and with the wrong sign
(0:08). Of course, the theory developed above has nothing to say, by itself,
about the relation between price in‡ation and the unemployment rate, since
that relation is likely to be in‡uenced by factors other than wage setting,
including features of price setting and the evolution of labor productivity,
among others.16
       Next I turn to a more formal empirical assessment of the New Keynesian
  16
    See, e.g. Blanchard and Galí (2009) and Thomas (2009) for an analysis of the relation
between price in‡ation and unemployment in a model with labor market frictions.


                                           22
Wage Phillips curve.

4.2    Estimates of the Reduced Form New Keynesian
       Wage Phillips Curve

In the present subsection I report estimates of the reduced form wage equa-
tion (19). The focus on (19) is motivated by the good …t of an AR(2) process
for the unemployment rate. Using data starting in 1948Q1 I estimate the
following model

                ut = 0:22       + 1:66     ut   1       0:70      ut   2   + "t
                       (0:08)     (0:08)                (0:08)

with any further lags of the unemployment rate not being signi…cant. Thus,
and as discussed above, under that simple univariate process, the wage in‡a-
tion equation should have a negative coe¢ cient on the current unemployment
rate and a positive one on its lag, in addition to a positive coe¢ cient on lagged
price in‡ation in the presence of indexation. Furthermore, the model (19)
implies the cross-equation restriction      1   =   0      2,    which can be easily tested
conditional on a value for , which I set to 0:99.
   Table 1 reports OLS estimates of several speci…cations of the wage in-
‡ation equation, each of which can be seen as a restricted version of (19).
The wage in‡ation data is based on the earnings series, and the sample pe-
riod starts in 1964Q1. The …rst three columns report estimates including
only the current value of the unemployment rate, augmented in the case of
columns (2) and (3) with lagged quarter-to-quarter price in‡ation (column
(2)) and year-on-year price in‡ation (column (3)), with the latter expressed
as a quarterly rate to facilitate comparison of coe¢ cients. Note that when
price in‡ation is not controlled for, the coe¢ cient on unemployment is very

                                           23
close to zero and statistically insigni…cant. When lagged in‡ation is added as
a regressor its coe¢ cient is highly signi…cant, while the coe¢ cient on unem-
ployment increases in absolute value and becomes signi…cant (though only at
the 10 percent level when quarter-to-quarter in‡ation is used as a regressor).
Columns (5) and (6) include the lagged unemployment rate, and are thus
consistent with the speci…cation implied by the model. In both cases the co-
e¢ cients on the unemployment rates have the sign predicted by the theory,
though they are only signi…cant when year-on-year price in‡ation is used as
the indexing variable. Also, as shown in the row labeled p                  value, the cross-
equation restriction speci…ed above cannot be rejected when both equations
are estimated jointly. The …nal two rows report the implied estimates of
the Calvo wage rigidity parameter            w,   conditional on calibrated values for '
and    w,   since the three parameters are not separately identi…ed. Note that
' is the inverse Frisch labor supply elasticity, a controversial parameter. I
consider two alternative calibrations, ' = 1 and ' = 5, which span the range
of values often assumed in the literature. Given ', I use (12) to set                  w   to a
value consistent with a natural rate of unemployment of 5 percent, which is
roughly the average unemployment rate over the sample period considered.17
The point estimates range from 0:62 to 0:89, suggesting substantial wage
rigidities, with those associated with the ' = 5 calibration implying average
durations that may be viewed as implausibly long (though the non-negligible
size of the standard errors allow for more plausible underlying degrees of
wage rigidity).
      A more detailed analysis of the …t of the estimated wage equations re-
 17
     Note that w = (1    expf 'un g)   1
                                           . This implies setting   w   = 20:5 when ' = 1, and
w   = 4:52 when ' = 5.


                                              24
ported in columns (5) and (6), suggests a poor …t during the recent recession.
The reason is simple: the rapid increase in the unemployment rate and the
very low levels of price in‡ation (which became de‡ation for some quarters),
lead the …tted wage equation to predict substantial nominal wage de‡ation.
While actual wage in‡ation was brought down by the recession, it has always
remained positive. The presence of downward nominal wage rigidities, which
are ignored in the standard wage setting model developed above, could in
principle account for that poor …t. Motivated by that observation, columns
(7) and (8) in Table 1 report estimates of the wage equation using data up to
2007Q4, thus avoiding any distortion resulting from the use of recent data.
Note that for both speci…cations, the coe¢ cients on current and lagged un-
employment increase substantially and now become highly signi…cant even
when quarter-to-quarter price in‡ation is used as a regressor. Figure 6 dis-
plays actual and …tted wage in‡ation, using the estimates shown in column
(8). While the estimated model misses much of the high frequency variations,
it appears to capture well most movements at medium-term frequencies, with
the exception of the spikes in 1971-72 and 1976-77. The correlation between
the two series is 0:83.
   Table 2 reports estimates of wage in‡ation equations using the measure
based on compensation, and with the sample period starting in 1948Q1. Most
of the …ndings in Table 1 appear to be robust to the use of the alternative
wage in‡ation measure, which is indeed surprising given the large discrepan-
cies between the two in‡ation measures. Note however that the exclusion of
post-2007 data does not have much of an impact now, possibly because of
its reduced weight in the longer sample period. In particular, the coe¢ cients


                                     25
on unemployment and its lagged value in column (5) are now signi…cant, in
addition of having the right pattern of signs and relative magnitude.

4.3    A Measure of Fundamental Wage In‡ation in the
       Spirit of Campbell-Shiller

The previous subsection reported estimates of a reduced form wage in‡a-
tion equation implied by the NKWPC, under the assumption that the un-
employment rate follows an exogenous AR(2) process. While the previous
assumption provides a fairly good approximation to the dynamics of unem-
ployment in the postwar period and leads to a reduced form speci…cation
which makes contact with that used in Phillips (1958) and in subsequent
applied work, one may legitimately wonder whether the favorable empiri-
cal assessment of the NKWPC hinges on that assumption. Relaxing that
assumption has an additional justi…cation: simple Granger-causality tests
reject the null of no-Granger causality from wage and price in‡ation to un-
employment. Thus, in particular, the four lags of (earnings-based) wage
in‡ation and price in‡ation are signi…cant at the one percent level in a re-
gression of the unemployment rate on its own four lags and the lags of the
two in‡ation measures over the 1964Q1-2009Q3 sample period. An analogous
test using the compensation-based measure of wage in‡ation and extended
over the sample period 1948Q1-2009Q3 only rejects the null of no-Granger
causality at the 7 percent signi…cance level.
   Motivated by the previous observation, and in the spirit of Campbell
and Shiller’s (1987) proposed assessment of present value relations, I start
by de…ning the following measure of "fundamental" or "model-based" wage



                                      26
in‡ation:


                                           p
                                                             X
                                                             1
                      ew
                       t (    )            t 1       w'
                                                                      k
                                                                          Efut+k j zt g
                                                             k=0

where vector            [ ;       w;   ;   w ; ']   collects the exogenous parameters of the
                                       w         p                        w          p
model and where zt = [ut ;             t         t 1 ; :::; ut q ;        t q        t 1 q]   for some …nite q.
Under the null hypothesis that model (19) is correct, it is easy to check that
ew
 t ( ) =
            w
            t ,   for all t. In other words, given the structure of the conditioning
variable zt the use of a limited information set is not restrictive under the
null.
   Next I estimate ew
                    t ( ) and plot it against actual wage in‡ation, to eval-

uate the extent to which the simple model developed here can explain ob-
served ‡uctuations in that variable. I assume that the joint dynamics of
unemployment and wage in‡ation are well captured by the …rst order vector
autoregressive model
                                           zt = A zt         1   + "t

where Ef"t j zt 1 g = 0 for all t. Thus, and letting ei denote the ith unit
vector in R2q , we have Efut+k j zt g = e01 Ak zt , implying


                                             p
                       ew
                        t ( ) =              t 1        w'       e01 (I         A)   1
                                                                                         zt               (21)

   I exploit the previous result to construct a time series for fundamental
in‡ation ew
          t ( ) using a minimum distance estimator. Since not all structural

parameters in        are separately identi…ed, I calibrate three of them ( ;                             w ; ')

and estimate the remaining two ( ;                    w ),   which de…ne the degree of rigidities
and indexation. As above, I set                     = 0:99 and report results for both ' = 1


                                                      27
and ' = 5, with      w   set to imply a natural unemployment rate of 5 percent in
each case. I estimate the two remaining parameters, w and , by minimizing
PT      w
  t=0 ( t   ew      2
              t ( )) subject to (21), over all possible values ( w ; ) 2 [0; 1]

[0; 1], and given the calibrated values for ( ;      w ; ')   and the OLS estimate
for matrix A (with q = 4). As in the empirical analysis above I use lagged
quarterly and annual in‡ation as an indexing variable, and both earnings-
based and compensation-based measures of wage in‡ation.
       Table 3 reports the main results for the exercise.18 The estimates of ,
the degree of indexation, are always highly signi…cant and lie between 0:52
and 0:83, depending on the speci…cation, values which are slightly higher
than those obtained in the previous subsection. The point estimates for the
Calvo parameter      w    are also highly signi…cant in all cases. Under the ' = 1
assumption they lie between 0:52 and 0:65, implying an average duration
between two and three quarters. When ' = 5 is assumed, the estimates are
substantially higher (between 0:75 and 0:82), but still within the range of
plausibility, given the evidence uncovered by micro studies.19 Interestingly,
my estimates for         and   w   are very close to those obtained by Smets and
Wouters (2007) using a very di¤erent approach (and one that does not use
information on the unemployment rate, among other di¤erences): 0:58 and
0:7, respectively.
       The "multivariate" model analyzed here implies some restrictions that
can be subject to formal testing. In particular, note that if the model holds
  18
     Standard errors are obtained by drawing from the empirical distribution of A, and
re-estimating w and for each draw.
  19
     See, e.g., Taylor (1999).




                                           28
exactly, we must have
                            e02 +   w'   e01 = e02 A

   Unfortunately the previous set of restrictions is rejected at very low sig-
ni…cance levels for our sample and baseline calibration. This may not be
surprising, given the simplicity of the model. But, following Campbell and
Shiller (1987), I seek a more informal evaluation of the model by comparing
actual and fundamental wage in‡ation. The last row of Table 3 displays
the correlation between the four-quarter centered moving averages of both
variables: the correlations are positive and high (above 0:75) in all cases,
suggesting a good …t of the model. This is also illustrated in Figure 7, which
displays actual (earnings-based) wage in‡ation and fundamental wage in‡a-
tion, where the latter is based on the estimates using annual price in‡ation
as an indexing variable and ' = 1. While the …t is far from perfect, it is
clear that the model-based series captures pretty well the bulk of the low and
medium frequency ‡uctuations in actual wage in‡ation (with the exception of
some episodes, including the 2008-09 recession). The fact that such a good …t
is obtained using a model for wage in‡ation that assumes a constant natural
rate of unemployment makes that …nding perhaps even more surprising.
   Given the large ‡uctuations in price in‡ation over the sample period
considered and the well known positive correlation between price and wage
in‡ation, one may wonder to what extent the high correlation between ac-
tual and fundamental in‡ation is largely a consequence of indexation to past
price in‡ation. In order to address that question I construct a measure of the
"cyclical" component of fundamental in‡ation, by subtracting from the latter
                                              p
the in‡ation indexation component,            t 1.   The cyclical component is thus


                                         29
driven exclusively by current and anticipated future unemployment rates.
Figure 8 displays the cyclical component of fundamental in‡ation thus con-
structed, together with actual wage in‡ation. It is clear from that evidence
that while the cyclical component did not have a dominant role in accounting
for the ‡uctuations in wage in‡ation in the Great In‡ation era, one can still
detect several episodes in which it shapes the shorter-term ‡uctuations in ob-
served wage in‡ation, including the 1968-69 hump and the 1974-75 trough.
It is not until the advent of the Great Moderation period and the associated
stability in price in‡ation that the cyclical component of fundamental wage
in‡ation emerges as a central factor behind ‡uctuations in wage in‡ation, as
Figure 8 makes clear.


5     Concluding comments
In his seminal 1958 paper, A.W. Phillips uncovered a tight inverse relation
between unemployment and wage in‡ation in the U.K.. That relation was
largely abandoned on both theoretical and empirical grounds. From a the-
oretical viewpoint, it was not clear why the rate of change of the nominal
wage (as opposed to the level of the real wage) should be related to unem-
ployment. From an empirical viewpoint, economists’attention shifted to the
relation between price in‡ation and unemployment, but hopes of establishing
a stable relationship between those variables faded with the stag‡ation of the
1970s.
    The present paper has made two main contributions. First, it provides
some theoretical foundations to a Phillips-like relation between wage in‡ation
and unemployment. It does so not by developing a new model but, instead, by


                                     30
showing that such a relation underlies a standard New Keynesian framework
with staggered wage setting, even though versions of the latter found in
the literature do not explicitly incorporate or even discuss unemployment.
Secondly, the implied wage equation is shown to account reasonably well for
the comovement of wage in‡ation and the unemployment rate in the U.S.
economy, even under the strong assumption of a constant natural rate of
unemployment. In particular, that equation can explain the strong negative
comovement between wage in‡ation and unemployment observed during the
past two decades of price stability.
   It is far from the objective of the present paper to claim that the stag-
gered wage setting model of Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) provides
an accurate description of U.S. labor markets. It is clear that some of its
underlying assumptions,–most noticeably, the unilateral setting of the wage
by a monopoly union–are at odds with arrangements prevailing in most sec-
tors. Yet, as a matter of fact, the EHL structure underlies most of the
medium-scale DSGE models that have been developed in recent years, by
both academics and institutions. Identifying and testing further predictions
coming out of those models would seem a worthy undertaking and a source of
guidance in any e¤ort to improve the frameworks available for policy analysis.
This is, if nothing else, the spirit of the present paper.




                                       31
   References

   Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Impor-
tance of Sticky Prices,”Journal of Political Economy, vol 112 (5), 947-985.
   Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz (1999): "Wage Dynamics: Recon-
ciling Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 2,
pp. 69-74
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2007): “Real Wage Rigidities and
the New Keynesian Model,”Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, supple-
ment to volume 39, no. 1, 35-66.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2010): "Labor Markets and Mone-
tary Policy: A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment," American Eco-
nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
   Calvo, Guillermo (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Frame-
work,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
   Casares, Mikel (2009): "Unemployment as Excess Supply of Labor: Im-
plications for Wage and Price In‡ation," Universidad Pública de Navarra,
mimeo.
   Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller (1987): "Cointegration and
Tests of Present Value Models," Journal of Political Economy 95 (5), 1062-
1088.
   Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2009): "New
Keynesian Models: Not Yet Useful for Policy Analysis," American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1), 242-266.
   Christo¤el, Kai, Günter Coenen, and Anders Warne (2008): "The New
Area-Wide Model of the Euro Area: A Micro-Founded Open-Economy Model


                                    32
for Forecasting and Policy Analysis,"
   Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley and Jean-Philippe Laforte (2007):
"Documentation of the Research and Statistics Division’s Estimated DSGE
Model of the U.S. Economy: 2006 Version," Finance and Economics Discus-
sion Series 2007-53, Federal Reserve Board, Washington D.C.
   Eichenbaum, Martin, and Jonas D.M. Fisher (2007): "Estimating the
frequency of re-optimization in Calvo-style models," Journal of Monetary
Economics 54 (7), 2032-2047.
   Erceg, Christopher J., Luca Guerrieri, Christopher Gust (2006): “SIGMA:
A New Open Economy Model for Policy Analysis,”International Journal of
Central Banking, vol. 2 (1), 1-50.
   Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000):
“Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,”Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics vol. 46, no. 2, 281-314.
   Galí, Jordi (1996): "Unemployment in Dynamic General Equilibrium
Economies," European Economic Review 40, 839-845.
   Galí, Jordi and Mark Gertler (1999): “In‡ation Dynamics: A Structural
Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44, no. 2,
195-222.
   Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, David López-Salido (2001): “European In‡a-
tion Dynamics,”European Economic Review vol. 45, no. 7, 1237-1270.
   Galí, Jordi (2008): Monetary Policy, In‡ation and the Business Cycle:
An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University
Press.
   Galí, Jordi, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters (2010): "Unemployment


                                     33
in an Estimated New Keynesian Model," mimeo.
   Gordon, Robert J. (1997): "The Time-Varying NAIRU and its Implica-
tions for Economic Policy," Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(1), 11-32.
   Jaimovich, Nir and Segio Rebelo (2009): "Can News about the Future
Drive the Business Cycle?," American Economics Review 99 (4), 1097-1118.
   Mackowiak, Bartosz and Frank Smets (2008): "On the Implications of
Micro Price Data for Macro Models," unpublished manuscript.
   Mehran, Hamid and Joseph Tracy (2001): "The E¤ects of Employee Stock
Options on the Evolution of Compensation in the 1990s," FRBNY Economic
Policy Review, 17-33.
   Merz, Monika (1995): “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business
Cycle”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 269-300.
   Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2008): "Five Facts about Prices: A
Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
CXXIII, issue 4, 1415-1464.
   Phillips, A.W. (1958): "The Relation between Unemployment and the
Rate of Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957,"
Economica 25, 283-299.
   Samuelson, Paul a. and Robert M. Solow (1960): "Analytical Aspects of
Anti-In‡ation Policy," American Economic Review 50 (2), 177-194.
   Sbordone, Argia (2002): “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: Testing Models of
Pricing Behavior,”Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 45, no. 2, 265-292.
   Sbordone, Argia (2006): "U.S. Wage and Price Dynamics: A Limited
Information Approach," International Journal of Central Banking vol. 2
(3), p. 155-191.


                                    34
   Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Sto-
chastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the Euro-
pean Economic Association, vol 1, no. 5, 1123-1175.
   Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US
Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,”American Economic Review,
vol 97, no. 3, 586-606.
   Staiger, Douglas, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997): "The
NAIRU, Unemployment and Monetary Policy," Journal of Economic Per-
spectives 11 (1), 33-49.
   Taylor, John B. (1999): “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeco-
nomics,”in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics,
chapter 15, 1341-1397, Elsevier, New York.
   Thomas, Carlos (2008a): "Search and Matching Frictions and Optimal
Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (5), 936-956.
   Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices. Foundations of a Theory
of Monetary Policy, Princeton university Press (Princeton, NJ).




                                    35
          Table 1. Estimated Wage In‡ation Equations: Earnings-based
                   (1)    (2)     (3)      (5)     (6)      (7)      (8)

ut                0:001     0:030     0:079      0:177     0:377     0:334     0:552
                 (0:019)   (0:017)   (0:015)    (0:114)   (0:083)   (0:095)   (0:076)


ut   1                                          0:153     0:304     0:294     0:453
                                                (0:112)   (0:078)   (0:095)   (0:073)


    t 1                    0:415               0:427                0:503
                           (0:043)             (0:052)              (0:036)

    (4)
    t 1                              0:565                0:611               0:687
                                     (0:038)              (0:041)             (0:038)


p     value                                     0:71       0:52      0:67      0:06

 w    (' = 1)                                  0:788      0:629     0:755     0:607
                                               (0:083)    (0:059)   (0:061)   (0:063)


 w    (' = 5)                                  0:896      0:805     0:879     0:792
                                               (0:044)    (0:036)   (0:033)   (0:039)
          Table 2. Estimated Wage In‡ation Equations: Compensation-based
                    (1)     (2)     (3)      (5)       (6)    (7)       (8)

ut                 0:015     0:046     0:087     0:227     0:387     0:241     0:397
                  (0:028)   (0:024)   (0:028)   (0:099)   (0:125)   (0:091)   (0:101)


ut   1                                          0:189     0:310     0:189     0:301
                                                (0:096)   (0:116)   (0:090)   (0:098)


    t 1                     0:500               0:505               0:522
                            (0:046)             (0:046)             (0:046)

    (4)
    t 1                               0:578               0:610               0:642
                                      (0:058)             (0:060)             (0:052)


p     value                                      0:57      0:79      0:54      0:66

 w    (' = 1)                                   0:709     0:637     0:675     0:569
                                                (0:086)   (0:059)   (0:069)   (0:057)


 w    (' = 5)                                   0:853     0:780     0:833     0:767
                                                (0:049)   (0:043)   (0:040)   (0:037)
Table 3. Estimated Parameters using Minimum Distance Estimator
                  Earnings                 Compensation
                                              (4)                                         (4)
                        t 1                   t 1                   t 1                   t 1
              '=1 '=5 '=1 '=5 '=1 '=5 '=1                                                   '=5

              0:52        0:52      0:83        0:81      0:58        0:59      0:80        0:79
              (0:013)     (0:017)   (0:130)     (0:110)   (0:020)     (0:030)   (0:170)     (0:107)


w             0:65        0:82      0:52        0:74      0:64        0:81      0:54        0:75
              (0:013)     (0:008)   (0:080)     (0:020)   (0:035)     (0:020)   (0:060)     (0:002)


(ew
  t ;
        w
        t )   0:82        0:82      0:91        0:91      0:77        0:78      0:77        0:76
Figure
  g    1. Two Measures of Wage
                            g Inflation
Figure 2.
       2 Wage Inflation and Unemployment
Figure 3.
       3 Wage Inflation and Unemployment over Time
Figure 4.
       4 Wage Inflation and Unemployment during the Great Moderation
      Figure 5. The Wage Phillips Curve over Time




           Early 70s                    Late 70s




Late 60s




                                            Early 80s
             Great
             Moderation
Figure 6. Actual vs. Fitted Wage Inflation 1964Q1‐2007Q4
Figure 7. Actual vs. Fundamental Wage Inflation
Figure 8.
       8 Wage Inflation and its Cyclical Component
