                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               WHAT DETERMINES EUROPEAN REAL EXCHANGE RATES?

                                            Martin Berka
                                         Michael B. Devereux

                                         Working Paper 15753
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15753


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2010




We thank Paul Konijn of Eurostat for the provision of the data and patient responses to numerous questions.
We also thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and HKUST for comments.
Devereux thanks SSHRC, the Royal Bank, and the Bank of Canada for financial support. Part of the
paper was written when the second author was visiting the RBA, and the HKIMR, and their hospitality
is much appreciated. Finally, the views in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not represent
the views of the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Martin Berka and Michael B. Devereux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Determines European Real Exchange Rates?
Martin Berka and Michael B. Devereux
NBER Working Paper No. 15753
February 2010
JEL No. F31,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

We study a newly constructed panel data set of relative prices of a large number of consumer goods
among 31 European countries. We find that there is a substantial and non-diminishing deviation from
PPP at all levels of aggregation, even among eurozone members. However, real exchange rates are
very closely tied to relative GDP per capita within Europe, both across countries and over time. This
relationship is highly robust at all levels of aggregation. We construct a simple two-sector endowment
economy model of real exchange rate determination. Simulating the model using the historical relative
GDP per capita for each country, we find that for most (but not all) countries there is a very close fit
between the actual and simulated real exchange rate.


Martin Berka
Massey University
Department of Economics and Finance
Private Bag 102 904, NSMC
Auckland, New Zealand
m.berka@massey.ac.nz

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
CANADA V6T 1Z1
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
1     Introduction
One of the principal objectives of international macroeconomics is the under-
standing of international relative prices. Empirical observations over many
countries and time periods show very large variations in cross-country rel-
ative prices of goods, both when measured for similar goods at the micro
level, and for good bundles at a more aggregated level. Early open economy
models used to assume that free international trade would equalize relative
prices, so that PPP held in the small and the large. But it is now universally
recognized that there are persistent deviations from equality of prices across
countries both for individual goods and at the aggregate level. Equivalently,
real exchange rates measured at the level of goods, or in terms of aggregate
price indices, display large and persistent departures from PPP.
    Despite consensus on the broad facts, there is little agreement on the
explanation of these departures from PPP. Many competing theories have
been put forward, highlighting nominal price rigidities, trade costs, non-
traded goods, compositional eﬀects, aggregation bias, and other features, as
well as combinations of these elements1 . One of the diﬃculties in providing
a good account of the source of relative price movements across countries
is the absence of a large panel of detailed comparable data on goods prices
at the disaggregated level. Another, related problem is that most disaggre-
gated time series price data used in international studies are in the form of
indices, rather than price levels. This rules out the possibility of comparing
prices across countries at a moment in time, instead allowing only studies of
the movement in cross-country relative prices over time. What is necessary
therefore, is to obtain a representative panel involving observations of price
levels on a large number of similar goods across a large number of countries
over time.
    This paper employs a newly constructed data set of European price levels
to conduct such a study. The data are comprised of relative prices for a large
number of categories of consumer goods across 31 European countries over a
13 year period. This includes the high income countries of Western Europe,
including the eurozone countries, both before and after the inception of the
Euro, as well as the ﬂoating exchange rate countries. In addition, for a
slightly shorter sample period, the data includes the emerging countries of
   1
     Recent contributions include Engel (1999), Imbs et al (2005), Burstein et al. (2003),
Crucini, Telmer and Zachariadis (2005), Carvalho and Nechio (2008), Drodz and Nosal
(2008), among many others.


                                            2
Eastern and Southern Europe.
    From these data we can construct measures of real exchange rates at both
disaggregated and aggregate levels. We ﬁnd that there are large and persis-
tent deviations from absolute PPP among all European countries. These
deviations hold for all categories of goods, but are much more pronounced
among goods categorized as non-tradable than for tradable goods. The
deviations have not been eliminated by membership of the single currency
area. Even among eurozone members, there are persistent departures from
PPP that show no obvious signs of erosion within the sample. For emerg-
ing Eastern Europe countries, the conclusions are somewhat nuanced. For
these countries, the deviations from PPP are much larger, but there is much
greater evidence of convergence in price levels towards the European average,
while still, at least in the sample, remaining quite far away from PPP.
    While the data show very persistent departures from PPP, this does not
mean that such divergences in real exchange rates cannot be rationalized. In
fact, we ﬁnd that real exchange rates are very closely tied to relative GDP
per capita, both in comparisons across countries, and in movement over time,
at all levels of aggregation2 . The data show that some countries displayed
declining relative GDP per capita over time, combined with persistent de-
preciation in their real exchange rate - in particular this applied to the ‘Old-
Europe’ countries; France, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Austria,
while other countries displayed substantial appreciation combined with in-
creasing relative GDP per capita - notably Ireland, UK, some Scandinavian
countries, as well as many countries of emerging Eastern Europe.
    Relative GDP per capita is an important determinant of the real exchange
rate not just in the aggregate, but also at the level of individual goods.
Almost 50 percent of the variation in individual product based real exchange
rates - i.e. real exchange rates at the most disaggregated level, measured
across goods, time and countries, is explained by relative GDP per capita
diﬀerences across countries and movements over time. Quantitatively we
ﬁnd that, roughly speaking, a one percent increase in the relative GDP per
capita for a given country towards the European average leads to a 0.35 to
0.40 percent appreciation of the real exchange rate to the European average.
When broken down into non-tradable and tradable goods separately, the real
appreciation coeﬃcient becomes 0.5 percent and 0.2 percent, respectively.
   2
    A similar ﬁnding is reported in Crucini et al. (2005), looking at cross country variations
in prices for a smaller sample of European countries.


                                              3
    This implies that for all categories of goods, movements in relative GDP
per capita are associated with less than proportionate movements in real
exchange rates. We ﬁnd a striking pattern in the relationship between relative
GDP per capita and real exchange rates for a number of countries. For
countries such as Ireland, where relative GDP per capita moved from being
below the EU average to being above the EU average over the sample, the
deviation of relative GDP from the EU average switched from being below the
real exchange rate deviation (relative to the EU average) at the beginning of
the sample to being above the real exchange rate deviation at the end of the
sample. In this sense, movements through through the rankings of relative
GDP per capita among European countries are matched by movements in
real exchange rate rankings.
    An interesting question concerns the relationship between nominal and
real exchange rate ﬂexibility. Not surprisingly, ﬂoating exchange rate coun-
tries exhibit greater time variation in real exchange rates. Nonetheless, it
is striking how much real exchange rate movement has taken place among
eurozone members or between the euro area and euro-pegging Eastern Eu-
ropean countries. Generally, we ﬁnd little evidence that membership of the
euro area has stymied adjustments in real exchange rates. Moreover, when
we look at disaggregated real exchange rates, we ﬁnd that there is much less
diﬀerence in volatility between eurozone members and ﬂoating exchange rate
countries.
    Having explored the characteristics of real exchange rates in the data, we
go on to develop a highly stylized model of real exchange rate determination.
We deliberately employ a ‘minimalist’ model of the real exchange rate based
on a two-sector endowment economy with traded and non-traded goods. As
in the classic Balassa-Samuelson model, real exchange rates in the model
are driven by growth diﬀerences across countries, and growth that is biased
towards tradable goods sectors. Countries with real GDP growth above the
average will exhibit real appreciation. For each country, we simulate the
model by choosing a path for GDP that matches the historical sample. We
ﬁnd that the simulated real exchange rate from the model very closely tracks
the sample real exchange rate, in levels and rates of change, for most countries
in the dataset. Thus, for most European countries, relative per capita GDP
can well account for the level and time path of real exchange rates.
    The following section presents a short literature survey. Section 3 dis-
cusses the data in detail. Section 4 describes the properties of real exchange
rates, both at the aggregate level and the disaggregated level. Section 5 dis-

                                       4
cusses the relationship between real exchange rates and relative GDP, and
between real exchange rates and nominal exchange rate volatility. Section 6
shows that a simple structural model based on relative GDP, distance, and
euro membership can account for a large part of the variation in real ex-
change rates both at the aggregate and disaggregated level. Finally, section
6 discusses the extent to which the empirical ﬁndings are consistent with a
simple general equilibrium model of exchange rate determination.


2    Literature Review
There has been a large literature discussing the properties of real exchange
rates and relative price comparisons across countries, using both aggregate
and disaggregated data. Engel and Rogers (1996) study movements in price
indices across Canadian and US cities, and ﬁnd that both distance and border
matter for relative price variability. Engel and Rogers (2001) use European
data, and separate the border into two factors; a) ”real barriers” eﬀect caused
by barriers to market integration and b) a ”sticky consumer price-volatile
exchange rate” factor. They ﬁnd the second factor to be empirically more
important. Similar to our ﬁndings below, Engel and Rogers (2004) ﬁnd no
evidence for prices in Europe to converge after euro’s introduction in 1999.
    Crucini, et al. (2005) present a study quite similar to that of our paper,
using a more disaggregated data set on European prices, for four separate
sample years for up to 13 EU countries. They argue that PPP holds quite
well in these data, especially when adjusting for GDP per capita. Our paper
diﬀers from theirs in that we have a panel covering up to thirteen years, we
focus on a more aggregated sample of consumer products (see the discussion
below for the diﬀerences in aggregation levels), and we examine a much larger
set of countries, including both EU countries and non-EU countries, emerging
economies in Eastern Europe, ﬂoating and ﬁxed exchange rate countries, and
pre-and post Eurozone countries. We ﬁnd less compelling evidence for PPP
in our study. In addition, our study extrapolates from the results to the
implications for general equilibrium modelling of real exchange rates.
    Faber and Stokman (2009) also study price level convergence in Europe
using HICP data for the EU15 countries, but over a longer time period
than we study. They construct price levels from HICP data by mapping
the indices from the HICP into absolute price levels from surveys at various
intervals. They show that the EU15 countries exhibited substantial absolute


                                      5
price convergence from 1980 onwards, but not much convergence after the
late 1990’s. Their study diﬀers from ours in a number of ways. They focus on
a smaller group of countries. In addition, they employ quite a diﬀerent data
at a diﬀerent level of aggregation than ours. Their data is based on a small
bundle of HICP categories at a relatively high level of aggregation. Most
importantly, because our data begins in the mid 1990’s, we cannot study
that type of long run price convergence that they ﬁnd. In a short section
below however, we do follow the Faber and Stokman strategy of linking HICP
indices to our data on price levels. This allows us a check on our main results
by giving us the ability to study relative prices at higher frequencies than
those of the main data-set.
    Crucini and Telmer (2007) using EIU data on city prices ﬁnd that cross-
sectional variance in long-run absolute deviations from LOP is large relative
to time-series variance and time series variance in changes in LOP deviations
is dominated by idiosyncratic variation, rather than country-speciﬁc variation
(such as would be driven by nominal exchange rate movements). Our ﬁndings
are consistent with their paper in the sense that, when we focus on the
volatility of real exchange rates at the disaggregated level, we ﬁnd much
less diﬀerence in the average volatility between Eurozone countries (or euro-
pegging countries) and ﬂoating exchange rate countries that the equivalent
volatility at the level of the aggregate real exchange rate.
    Finally, our paper is related the literature documenting a relationship be-
tween price levels and GDP per capita (sometimes called the ‘Penn’ eﬀect,
after Summers and Heston (1991)). This has led to large number of pa-
pers exploring the ‘Balassa-Samuelson’ mechanism (e.g. Asea and Mendoza
1994), which can rationalize this relationship. An alternative explanation is
explored by Bergstrand (1991). He argues that a ‘demand-side’ explanation,
due to the property that the income elasticity of demand for services exceeds
unity, plays an important role in explaining the relationship. Our paper pro-
vides a further documentation of the nature of this relationship for European
countries. We argue that the relationship holds almost in the same way both
across countries and over time. Furthermore, we explore the extent to which
these ﬁndings are consistent with a simple general equilibrium model based
loosely on a Balassa-Samuelson type mechanism.




                                      6
3       Data-Description
3.1     Annual Price Level Indices
We use a dataset on European price levels for a large number of European
countries over the 1995-2007 period. The data are annual Price Level In-
dices, or PLI’s, constructed by Eurostat as part of the Eurostat-OECD PPP
Programme. They give the price of the good heading at a given time and
for a given country, relative to the price in the reference country. The level
of aggregation of the PLI is at the ‘Basic Heading’. Basic Headings are con-
structed as unweighted averages of product level observations in each coun-
try. Basic Headings are then aggregated using expenditure weights to form
HICP categories used at a higher level of aggregation. For our purposes, for
the full sample 1995-2007, PLI’s are available for 146 consumer expenditure
headings on goods and services, 36 government expenditure headings, and 32
headings for expenditures on gross ﬁxed capital formation. In this paper, we
focus on consumer PLI’s. The 1995-2007 sample extends across 18 western
European countries. The countries are: Belgium, Germany, Greece, Spain,
France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Fin-
land, Denmark, Sweden, UK, Iceland, Norway, and Switzerland. In addition,
for 1999-2007, we have an identical sample for 13 additional countries, mostly
Eastern European3 . PLI’s are derived from Basic Heading-level PPP’s, and
are measured relative to the 15 members of the EU area4 . The PPP for any
country and good is just the ratio of the good price for that country to the
average price of that good for the EU15. For the euro area countries (after
the euro, 1999), the PLI is just equal to the PPP (multiplied by 100). For
non-euro are members, the PLI for the country-good is obtained by dividing
the PPP by the exchange rate, relative to the euro, so as to obtain the price
in the same units. In each year, the EU15 price for each good is scaled to
100, so prices above 100 for a country-good in any year represents a price
above the EU15 average price. Thus, for each country-good-year, the PLI
gives us a measure of the good-level real exchange rate against the EU15.
Denote the individual PLI for good i, country j, time t as pi,j,t . Thus, from
    3
    The countries are Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Bulgaria, Romania, and Turkey.
  4
    That is, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Lux-
embourg, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Portugal, Finland, and the United Kingdom.



                                          7
our deﬁnition, we have that:
                                                          Pi,j,t
                           pi,j,t = P P Pi,j,t /Sj,t =          ∗
                                                                   ,
                                                         Sj,t Pi,t
where Sj,t is the exchange rate of country j against the EU15, Pi,j,t is price
                               ∗
of good i for country j, and Pi,t is the price of good i for the EU15.
    Table 1 gives a list of good categories included in the consumer PLI’s,
while Figure 1 gives some examples of the level and time path of categories
for some countries.

3.2       Monthly HICP price levels
While the PLI’s have the advantage of being expressed in terms of price
levels, they have the drawback of being published only at annual frequencies.
By contrast, the European Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)
for all countries in Europe is reported at a monthly frequency. The HICP
has the converse disadvantage of being an index, rather than a price level,
however. But it is possible to use the PLI‘s and the HICP‘s in combination,
so as to produce a monthly series of price level equivalents5 . We do this by
using Eurostat expenditure weights to aggregate from the Basic Heading PLI
level of prices up to the HICP level6 . Since the BH-PPP PLI’s are in terms of
levels, relative to the EU average, we can then compute a proxy relative price
level for categories in the HICP, and then using the rates of change of the
HICP indices for each category, derive a monthly frequency series in relative
price levels for all countries in the sample. The diﬃculty of aggregating up
from the annual PLI frequency to the monthy HICP frequency is handled
by using a Eurostat provided set of ‘temporal adjustment factors’ which are
used to go from the annual frequency of the PLI’s to the implied PLI for any
month. A matrix of these temporal adjustment factors is available for years
2003-2006.
    In the discussion below, we report some preliminary results for compar-
ative prices using the monthly price series. One drawback of this analysis
is that missing data in the HICP series reduces signiﬁcantly the number of
goods that can be used in a balanced panel of monthly HICP level prices.
A second complicating factor is the extreme seasonality in many of the indi-
vidual HICP series, with seasonal movements for similar products diﬀering
  5
      For a similar methodology, see Faber and Stokman (2009).
  6
      This uses the EKS method of aggregation (see Eurostat Manual).


                                            8
considerably across diﬀerent countries. We resolve this by applying a com-
mon seasonal adjustment algorithm for all countries and all prices.


4     Characteristics of PLI’s
4.1    Mean Comparisons across Countries
We ﬁrst focus on the properties of annual PLI’s. PLI’s can be thought of
as good-level real exchange rates. Average PLI’s then represent a measure
of aggregate real exchange rates. Deﬁne the aggregate real exchange rate for
country j as:
                                    1 ∑
                                       N
                             pj,t =       pi,j,t .                       (1)
                                    N i
where N is the number of goods in the aggregate. In this deﬁnition, aggre-
gate real exchange rates are unweighted. Eurostat does provide expenditure
weights for good categories, but since we wish to focus on deviations from
PPP (or the law of one price) at the micro level, we ﬁnd it more compelling
to report unweighted averages of PLI’s. In the Appendix, it is shown that
the properties of the weighted averages, using expenditure weights, are very
similar to those of the unweighted averages.
    We begin by reporting the characteristics of pj,t for the sample of 18
Western European countries. The top left panel of Figure 2 describes the
path of pj,t for all 12 countries in the eurozone, while the bottom left panel
shows the prices for the group of 6 countries with independent currencies and
ﬂoating exchange rates.
    It is clear that, even within the eurozone, and particularly outside the
eurozone, there is a substantial and continuing departure from PPP in the
aggregated data. Although there is some tendency for price diﬀerentials
across countries to narrow over time (as discussed below), this fall in dis-
persion across countries is very small relative to the departures from overall
PPP.
    If we focus on the eurozone countries in particular, there is admittedly
some evidence of a narrowing of price diﬀerentials in the average over time.
This is shown on the right hand panel of Figure 2, which shows two measures
of the movement in the dispersion of pj,t across countries over time. The ﬁrst
measure is simply the standard deviation:


                                      9
                   v     (                           )2
                   u
                   u1 ∑ 1 ∑              1 ∑∑
             SDt = t           pi,j,t −        pi,j,t .
                     M j   N i          MN j i

where M is the number of countries in the grouping. Since the PLI’s are
measured relative to the EU15 scaled average of 100 however, it is possible
that the standard deviation for a given group of countries is small, but there
is still a signiﬁcant departure of parity with the EU15. Therefore, we deﬁne
an alternative measure of dispersion across countries as

                       M ADt = meanj (ABS(pjt − 100)).

If the sample of countries are evenly dispersed above and below the EU15
average, then the two measures will be very close. But M ADt may be
considerably higher than SDt for a group of countries whose price is far
above or below the EU15 average.
    Over the whole sample period, there was a signiﬁcant reduction in the
dispersion of real exchange rates across countries that later made up the eu-
rozone, using either measure of cross country dispersion. But all of this fall
in relative price dispersion took place before the euro came into eﬀect in 1999.
There has been no change in dispersion between 2000 and 2007.7 Interest-
ingly however, this conclusion depends solely on the presence of one country;
Ireland. Without Ireland, Figure 3 shows that the average dispersion across
the eurozone countries continued to fall slowly even after 1999.
    An inspection of Figure 2 reveals interesting patterns among the eurozone
countries and the nature of the convergence in average price levels. Six
of the high real exchange rate countries at the beginning of the sample -
Germany, France, Belgium, Austria, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands, have
persistently depreciating real exchange rates over the sample. Two countries
with initially low real exchange rates, Ireland and Italy, have substantial
real appreciations over the sample. Ireland went from being below the EU
average in 1995 to being considerably above the average by 2007. On the
other hand, Greece, Spain, and Portugal show little convergence, with real
exchange rates 10-15 percent below the European average for the full sample.
Finally, Finland remains an outlier, remaining 15-20% above the EU average
over the whole sample.
  7
   A similar point, using a diﬀerent data-set, is made in Engel and Rogers (2004), and
Faber and Stokman (2009).


                                         10
    For the non-eurozone countries of Western Europe, there is no evidence
at all of convergence over time in real exchange rates. For almost all of the
sample, these countries have higher prices than the EU average. This leads
to the M ADt measure of dispersion being signiﬁcantly larger than the SDt
measure. Moreover, as to be anticipated, for the freely ﬂoating countries, real
exchange rate year to year variation over the sample is much higher than that
for the eurozone countries.
    Figure 4 illustrates the PLI’s for the additional, Eastern and Southern
European countries for the shorter sample of 1999-2007. The key feature of
these countries is that their real exchange rates are far lower than the EU av-
erage. Since most of these countries had a much lower GDP per capita than
Western Europe, it may not be too surprising to ﬁnd considerably lower
prices. Nevertheless, there was substantial upwards convergence over the
sample. Figure 4 shows the average deviation from PPP relative to the
EU average fell progressively over the sample. This still remains consider-
ably higher than the equivalent measure for the Western European countries
however - on average the Western European countries were about 15 per-
cent away from PPP over the whole sample. For the Eastern and Southern
European countries, the average was over 34 percent.
    How representative are the mean PLI’s of the individual prices at the
disaggregated level? Figure 5 illustrates the deviation from PPP of each
of the 146 consumer goods for three separate years in the sample for both
groups of countries, respectively. It is apparent that the mean PLI’s are quite
representative. For for the central European group of countries (Belgium,
Germany, Netherlands, France and Austria), there is an even distribution
above and below PPP across the goods. For the Scandinavian countries,
most goods are above PPP, while for the southern European countries, most
goods are below PPP. In addition, the time variation seen in the means can
be seen across the range of goods, for Ireland, UK, Iceland, and Switzerland,
for instance.
    Figure 5 also shows that for the Eastern European countries, almost all
goods are substantially below PPP relative to the EU15. For some countries,
the comparison is quite dramatic. For instance, in 2007, Bulgaria had only
6 of the total 146 good categories with prices at or above the EU average.
    Thus, the evidence from Figures 1-5 makes clear that, at both the mean
level and at the level of individual goods, there is substantial and continuing
deviation from equality within European consumer goods prices. Moreover,
average real exchange rate departures from PPP are strongly representative

                                      11
of PPP departures at the individual good level, for most countries. Equiv-
alently, if a country’s average real exchange rate is far above (below) PPP
relative to the EU average, almost all individual real exchange rates are above
(below) PPP.

4.2    Dispersion within countries
We now focus in more detail the nature of price dispersion within countries.
Recall that each individual price is measured relative to the EU average set
equal to 100 in each year. Thus, in each year, the degree of price dispersion
measures the variation across goods in real exchange rates for a country.
The measure of dispersion we focus on is the country-dated coeﬃcient of
variation:                     √ ∑
                                      i (pi,j,t − pj,t )
                                  1   N                 2
                                  N
                       cvj,t =                            .
                                        pj,t
Since Figures 2 and 3 indicate that there are large persistent diﬀerences in
country means, pj,t , the coeﬃcient of variation cvj,t is a more accurate mea-
sure of within-country price dispersion than the simple standard deviation
of prices across goods.
    Figure 6 illustrates the path of cvj,t for the three groups of countries. Price
dispersion is lowest for the eurozone countries, and highest for the Eastern
and Southern European group of countries. Price dispersion tends to fall over
time in each of the three groups, particularly so in the Eastern and Southern
European group. The picture also seems to suggest that price dispersion
is higher for the countries with real exchange rates further away from the
EU average. Figure 7 conﬁrms this. It shows the relationship between the
mean average departure from PPP (over the whole sample) and the mean of
price dispersion. There is a clear positive relationship between the departure
from PPP and the dispersion of within country prices. Countries with PLI’s
further away from the EU average have a higher degree of price dispersion.
    Figure 8 gives an alternative representation of price dispersion. It dis-
plays the kernel densities of the PLI’s for each country, for three separate
years. The densities have narrowed for the central European countries, al-
though, consistent with the evidence above, most of this reduction took place
before 2000. The densities show substantial instability for the ﬂoating rate
countries - particulary Iceland and the UK, which had large movement in the
euro-based nominal exchange rates over the sample. As we see below, nomi-

                                        12
nal and real exchange rates move closely together for these countries, over the
sample. In addition however, even some euro area members (e.g. Ireland and
Italy) showed substantial shifts up over time in their kernel densities. For
the Eastern European countries, the densities are much wider, and also tend
to shift up over time. Note again, that while there is substantial movement
in the densities, there is a large and continued distance between densities for
the highest real exchange rate countries (e.g. Finland, Denmark, and the
lowest real exchange rate countries of Southern and Eastern Europe).
    A ﬁnal perspective on price dispersion can be seen in Figure 9. Here we
show the kernel density over all goods, for the three separate groupings of
countries, for all years. The distribution for the Euro area countries is narrow
and stable over time, compared to that for the ﬂoating countries, which is
wider, further to the right on average, and substantially more volatile across
years. For the Eastern European countries, the distribution is far to the
left of those of the other two groupings, and wider, but tends to shift up
progressively over time. Again, we note that the diﬀerences in the means of
the densities still persist when measured in this way.

4.3    Decomposition into Traded and Non-Traded
We now decompose real exchange rates and price dispersion separately into
tradable and non-tradable goods (see Table 1). A minimal theoretical pre-
sumption is that the departures from PPP in real exchange rates is lower
in traded goods than in non-traded goods. Figure 10 shows the separate
breakdown of the country level PLI’s for traded and non-traded goods for the
eurozone countries. The properties of average traded and non-traded goods
PLI’s, in terms of deviations from the EU average, are similar to the overall
PLI’s. Even for traded goods, there is signiﬁcant and continued departure
from PPP in both directions. Spain and Portugal have real exchange rates for
traded goods equal to 90 percent of the EU average, and show no indications
of convergence. Finland’s real exchange rate in traded goods is persistently
more than 15 percent above the EU average. Again Ireland and Italy go from
being below to being above the average. France, Germany, Belgium, Austria
and the Netherlands display gradual downward convergence as before.
    For the non-traded goods categories we see basically the same features,
except that the magnitude of departures from PPP are substantially greater
for the countries both above and below the EU average. Given that retail
prices of all goods should contain some non-tradable component, this pat-

                                      13
tern of persistent departures from PPP in both tradable and non-tradable
categories is quite consistent with standard theory. This statement is made
more precise in Section 6 below.
    For both categories of goods, there is a signiﬁcant convergence of prices
just prior to the euro, and little convergence thereafter. But the key diﬀerence
is that the average departure from PPP for the eurozone countries is twice
as great for the non-traded goods category as that for traded goods.
    Figure 11 show the same results for the ﬂoating exchange rate countries
of Western Europe. The average departure from PPP is much higher for the
non-traded category, although again, there are signiﬁcant departures from
PPP for the traded category, and the time series properties of real exchange
rates are essentially identical for both traded and non-traded categories. In
terms of convergence in average real exchange rates across countries for these
group of countries, Figures 11 show that in non-traded goods, there is sig-
niﬁcant divergence over time, while in traded goods, there is no convergence
at all over the whole sample path.
    Finally, Figure 12 describes the pattern of movement in tradable and non-
tradable categories for the countries of Eastern and Southern Europe. As for
the other groups of countries, there are large and persistent departures from
PPP in both categories of goods, but those for traded goods are roughly 50
percent less than for non-traded goods.


5     Real Exchange Rate Determinants
5.1    Real Exchange Rates and Relative GDP per capita
If PPP was satisﬁed in the data, we would not need to investigate the de-
terminants of real exchange rates. But the evidence clearly establishes the
presence of wide departures from PPP, even among the eurozone countries,
and even more-so for the non-eurozone Western European countries and the
Eastern European countries. What explains the patterns in real exchange
rates, both over time and among countries? It is well known that in levels,
real exchange rates tend to be positively correlated with per capita income.
This is implied for instance, by the celebrated Balassa-Samuelson framework,
(Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ, 1995), although other theories make similar predictions
(e.g. Neary 1988).
    With this channel in mind, Figure 13 illustrates the relationship between


                                      14
relative GDP per capita and country level average real exchange rates for each
of the countries in the sample. Relative GDP is deﬁned as US dollar GDP
per capita, relative to the EU15 average US dollar GDP per capita8 . Then, if
real exchange rate diﬀerentials were driven primarily by diﬀerences in income
per capita, we should anticipate that countries with GDP per capita equal to
the EU average should have real exchange rates at the EU average (i.e. PPP
should hold when compared to the EU15). Figure 13 shows that this principle
holds fairly accurately for the Western European sample. Belgium, Germany,
France, Austria and the Netherlands all have GDP per capita close to the
EU average, and the same holds for their real exchange rates. For Greece,
Spain and Portugal, real exchange rates and relative GDP’s are considerably
below the EU average, while the Scandinavian countries, both real GDP per
capita and real exchange rates are substantially above the EU average. For
most countries, the deviation of GDP per capita from the EU average exceeds
that of the real exchange rate, in absolute terms. That is, for the relative
poorer countries of Greece, Spain and Portugal, the deviation from PPP is
far less than the deviation of GDP per capita. A similar characteristic is
seen in the opposite direction for Luxembourg, Switzerland, Norway and
the Netherlands; real GDP per capita is proportionally more above the EU
average that are their real exchange rates.
    Likewise, for the Eastern and Southern European countries, real GDP
per capita is far below the EU average, as is the real exchange rate for these
countries, and again, the deviation of the relative price from the EU average
is substantially less than that of GDP per capita.
    Figures 13 suggests that the relationship between GDP per capita and real
exchanges holds both in the cross section and over time. Across countries,
high real exchange rates are associated with higher GDP per capita. But
also within countries, movements in relative GDP per capita tend to be
associated with movements in real exchange rates in the same direction. This
is particularly true for the ﬂoating exchange rate countries; i.e. Sweden, UK,
Iceland, Norway and Switzerland9 . Moreover, both across countries and over
   8
    Since the purpose is to explore the relationship between GDP per capita and real
exchange rates, we use actual GDP per capita rather than PPP adjusted GDP per capita.

   9
    Note, because we are using relative GDP per capita, rather than PPP adjusted GDP,
there is a tendency for movements in GDP to follow relative nominal exchange rates, given
slow movements in GDP deﬂators. Hence it is not surprising to see a high correlation
between relative GDP per capita and real exchange rates for the ﬂoating exchange rate


                                           15
time, there is a less than proportional response of the real exchange rate to
movements in relative GDP. This leads to a particularly striking feature
about the relationship between real exchange rates and relative GDP. For a
country that begins with a GDP per capita below the average, relative GDP
is below the real exchange rate. But as the country catches up and overtakes
the average, the relative GDP line cuts the real exchange rate from below,
and converges to a position where relative GDP is above the real exchange
rate. In Figure 13, Ireland is a key example of this. But the dynamic also
holds in reverse, as seen for Belgium, Germany, Austria, and Denmark, who
experience falling relative GDP and real depreciation over the sample. In
these cases, the relative GDP locus cuts the real exchange rate locus from
above. In Section 5 below, we see that this convergence-related feature of the
link between relative GDP and real exchange rates is predicted by a simple
structural model of the real exchange rate.
    Figure 14 gives a broader illustration of the relationship between relative
GDP and real exchange rates. The ﬁgure presents a scatter plot of real ex-
change rates and GDP per capita over all countries and time periods in the
sample. We see a close association, aside from outliers due to Luxembourg,
which, from Figure 13, has a relative GDP per capita substantially out of
proportion to its real exchange rate. The Figure also supports the observa-
tion made above that, unconditionally, the real exchange rate increases by
less than in proportion to relative GDP. Countries with lower (higher) than
average relative GDP have lower (higher) real exchange rates, but closer to
the EU average than for relative GDP.

5.2     Real and Nominal Exchange Rates
Figure 15 illustrates the relationship between real and nominal exchange
rates. The Euro area countries have zero nominal exchange rate variability
after 1999. It is well known that for most countries and exchange rates, real
exchange rate volatility against a reference currency or basket of currencies is
much higher when the nominal exchange rate ﬂoats against those currencies.
If nominal prices are slow to adjust, then ﬁxed exchange rates may inhibit
real exchange rate adjustment. Figure 15 shows that for the ﬂoaters, an-
nual real and nominal exchange rate variability is much higher than for the
countries. But, as is seen in Figure 15 below, the relationship between the nominal and
real exchange rates for the ﬂoating countries is not perfect.



                                          16
euro area countries, and there is a high correlation between nominal and real
exchange rate variability. But at the same time, many euro area countries
achieved considerable real exchange rate adjustment over the sample with-
out movements in nominal exchange rates. In particular, Germany France,
Austria and to a lesser extent Belgium and the Netherlands experienced sub-
stantial real depreciation even after entry into the euro area, while Ireland,
Italy, Spain and Portugal went through real appreciation without changes in
the nominal exchange rate. The mean annual standard deviation of the real
exchange rate for the ﬂoating countries is 4.24 percent over the sample, while
it is 1.9 percent for the euro area countries. It is thus not apparent that euro
membership inhibited real exchange rate adjustment.
     An even more striking pattern is seen for the Eastern European countries.
The annual real exchange rate volatility for many countries is substantially
greater than nominal volatility, even for the ﬂoating exchange rate countries.
Eﬀectively, much of the real exchange rate movements between Eastern Eu-
ropean countries and the euro area took place via diﬀerential inﬂation rates.
This ‘convergence based’ real exchange rate volatility is conceptually very
diﬀerent from traditional interpretations of the real exchange rate based on
the combination of sticky prices and nominal exchange rate volatility.
     Table 2 further investigates the impact of alternative exchange rate regimes
on real exchange rate adjustment, but at the level of disaggregated prices
rather than the aggregate real exchange rate. We measure the average stan-
dard deviation of real exchange rate changes across all 146 consumer goods
over the full sample, for all countries. The diﬀerence in volatility of these
micro level real exchange rates when comparing the ﬂoaters to the euro area
countries is much less pronounced than in the aggregate real exchange rates.
The average standard deviation across euro area members is 6.7 percent,
while among the ﬂoating rate countries of Western Europe the average volatil-
ity is 8.9 percent. Thus, the proportional diﬀerence in real exchange rate
adjustment among euro area members and ﬂoaters at the disaggregated level
is much less than at the aggregate level.10 In describing disaggregated real
exchange rates, there seems little indication of that the euro inhibited ex-
change rate adjustment. For the Eastern European countries, the average
volatility is also 6.7 percent, the same as that for the eurozone.
 10
      This accords with the results of Crucini and Telmer (2007).




                                            17
5.3     Real Exchange Rates at Monthly Frequency
Figures (16)-(18) describe the equivalent measures for relative prices and
price dispersion at monthly frequencies, for the three groups of countries.
Due to lack of complete coverage of HICP data for the full sample of countries
and months, and the higher level of aggregation for the HICP series, relative
to the BH-PPP data, these data are restricted to 38 good categories of HICP
series, in 25 countries. The Figures show that the general features of the
real exchange rates in the annual series carry over to the monthly data, but
these measures of real exchange rates exhibit substantially more volatility.
One interesting feature of the monthly data is the more distinct tendency
cross country price dispersion to fall in the post 2000 period for the eurozone
countries. Comparing Figure 2 and Figure 16, there is a clear tendency for
monthly cross country price dispersion to fall after 2004.


6      Structural Determinants of Real Exchange
       Rates
We now provide a more careful statistical investigation of the determinants
of real exchange rates. From the ﬁgures above, relative GDP is clearly a key
driver of country-level real exchange rates. But from the theoretical litera-
ture, it is likely that other variables are important for real exchange rates,
both across countries and over time. One obvious factor is the existence of
trade barriers or trade costs. While PPP should hold for pure traded goods
in the absence of any restrictions to international trade, empirical studies
have identiﬁed the existence of signiﬁcant trade costs (Anderson Van Win-
coop, 2004). As an proxy measure for trade costs, we use distance of the
national capital from Frankfurt. To the extent that trade costs are propor-
tional to the shipping distance involved, this should be a roughly accurate
representation of the costs of arbitrage over traded goods11 . A second im-
portant variable is whether the country is a member of the euro area. The
transparency of price comparisons implied by membership of the European
single currency area may impart forces towards price convergence that do
  11
    Of course it must be noted that the PLI’s we are examining are not pure traded goods,
but represent measures of retail level prices paid by consumers, which incorporate local
service content for distribution, marketing, etc. We do not have information on diﬀerences
in marketing and distribution across countries however.


                                           18
not operate for other countries, even if they maintain stable exchange rates
vis a vis the euro. 11 countries entered the euro area at its inception in
1999, followed by 4 more at various dates up to the end of our sample. The
Euro variable introduces a dummy for the year and country for which euro
membership applies.
    Retail prices also include expenditure taxes, notably the VAT, which is
levied in all countries in our sample. VAT rates diﬀer among European coun-
tries, even for countries within the eurozone. Because over the sample period,
VAT rates have been ﬁxed for most countries, the presence of diﬀerential ex-
penditure taxes should be picked up in regressions allowing for ﬁxed eﬀects.
In the numerical simulations of the theoretical model developed in Section 6
below, we incorporate diﬀerential rates of VAT into the analysis. From the
results of that Section, as well as the regression results we see momentarily,
we ﬁnd that diﬀerential rates of VAT can explain at best only a small part
of the real exchange rate variation among European economies.
    Table 3 reports results from an OLS regression of country level real ex-
change rates on RGDP, Distance, and Euro for the full sample. The elasticity
of the real exchange rate to relative GDP is highly signiﬁcant and equal to
0.35. Euro membership is signiﬁcantly negative, while distance has a signif-
icantly positive coeﬃcient. Relative GDP has an inﬂuence on real exchange
rates that is important in both the cross section and over time. When country
ﬁxed eﬀects are included, the coeﬃcient on relative GDP is essentially un-
changed. On average, within countries, a 1 percent increase in relative GDP
per capita is associated with a 0.35 percent increase in the real exchange rate.
Interestingly, the signiﬁcance of the euro dummy (Euro) is eliminated when
including country ﬁxed eﬀects. This is consistent with the pattern in the
ﬁgures above, showing that most of the price convergence among euro mem-
bers took place before entry into the euro system. The coeﬃcient on Distance
increases after the inclusion of country ﬁxed eﬀects12 . Intuitively, without
country ﬁxed eﬀects, Distance is partially proxying for time-invariant real
exchange rate diﬀerences across countries. Thus, the pure eﬀect of Distance
is corrupted by other cross country ﬁxed diﬀerences in prices.
    Table 3 also provides a breakdown of these regressions separately into
tradable and non-tradable goods . For tradables, the coeﬃcient on relative
GDP falls to approximately 0.28, but remains highly signiﬁcant. Euro and
  12
    Since Distance is linearly dependent on the full set of country dummy vectors, when
Distance is included, we drop one country from the ﬁxed eﬀects matrix.


                                          19
Distance are still signiﬁcant in the basic speciﬁcation, but again, Euro loses
signiﬁcance when ﬁxed eﬀects are allowed. In the non-tradables case, the
GDP coeﬃcient is much higher - around 0.55, and again highly signiﬁcant
under all speciﬁcations. In this case, Euro is insigniﬁcant even without the
inclusion of ﬁxed eﬀects.
    Table 4 decomposes the regressions separately for Western Europe and
Eastern Europe. The main message from here is that the relationship be-
tween GDP and the real exchange rate is stronger for Western European
countries, although still, in all cases, the coeﬃcient is highly signiﬁcant, both
for all goods and for tradable and non-tradable goods separately.
    In the aggregate then, the relationship between real exchange rates and
real GDP per capita is very close. But real exchange rates in the aggre-
gate mask considerable heterogeneity among diﬀerent consumer categories of
goods. How much variability at the disaggregated level can be explained
by relative GDP per capita? Table 5 reports the results of a regression
using all the individual PLI’s across all countries and dates. The coeﬃcient
on RGDP is very signiﬁcant, and even higher than before. With or without
ﬁxed eﬀects, the elasticity is about 0.4. The striking feature of this regression
however is that even at this disaggregated level, the R2 is 0.5. Thus, even
at level of disaggregated individual prices, relative GDP, Euro, and Distance
can explain 50 percent of the price variability across countries and over time.


7     A Simple General Equilibrium Model
The key feature of the European data is the strong cross-country and time-
series relationship between real exchange rates and relative GDP. In gen-
eral, countries with relative GDP above (below) the EU average have higher
(lower) real exchange rates than the EU average, with the deviation in the
real exchange rate from the EU average being 35-40 percent of the deviation
in relative GDP, on average. Moreover, an increase in relative GDP from
below to above the EU average leads to a real exchange rate appreciation
from below to above the EU average, with a ‘crossing’ point for the relative
GDP and real exchange rate locus. The opposite mechanism holds for most
countries that have had relative GDP falling from above to below the EU
average.
    Is this relationship consistent with a theoretical model of real exchange
rate determination? We now construct a rudimentary structural model of


                                       20
the real exchange rate to ask this question. To be consistent with the data,
the model should be capable of reproducing the relationship between relative
GDP per capita and the real exchange rate, in both cross country and time
series dimensions.
    We take a two country endowment economy model. Denote the coun-
tries as ‘Home’ and ‘Rest of World’, with the Home country consumption
aggregate deﬁned as
                         (                                       ) 1−θ
                                                                    θ
                             1    1− 1               1    1− 1
                    C= γ     θ   CT θ    + (1 − γ)   θ   CN θ            ,

where CT and CN represent respectively, the composite consumption of trad-
able and non-tradable goods. The elasticity of substitution between tradable
and non-tradable goods is θ. Tradable consumption in turn is decomposed
into consumption of home goods (exportable), and foreign goods (importa-
bles), as follows:
                     ( 1 1                          ) λ
                               1− 1          1  1− 1 1−λ
                 CT = µ λ ω λ CX λ + (1 − ω) λ CM λ      ,
where ω represents the relative size of the home country, in both population
terms, and in the measure of total tradable goods produced in the world
economy, and λ is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign
tradables. In addition, µ ≥ 1 is a home bias parameter, indicating a prefer-
ence for home goods in tradable consumption, above and beyond the share
of such goods in world tradables.
    These consumption aggregates imply the following price index deﬁnitions:
                         (                     ) 1
                      P = γPT1−θ + (1 − γ)PN1−θ 1−θ ,

                        (                     ) 1
                    PT = µωPX1−λ + (1 − ω)PM
                                           1−λ 1−λ
                                                   ,
where PT and PN represent tradable and non-tradable price levels, and PX
and PM are retail prices of home exportables and foreign importables. The
analogue of the real exchange rate variable pj,t above is deﬁned as the price
of the home good, relative to the rest of the world. Thus we deﬁne the real
exchange rate as:
                                          P
                                RER = ∗
                                          P


                                           21
where an asterisk indicates the ‘Rest of World’ price level. Since we are focus-
ing purely on a ﬂexible price model, we may ignore the presence of nominal
exchange rates. In addition, given that we are primarily interested in ac-
counting for relative prices, and not quantities, we abstract from endogenous
labour supply and capital accumulation. The output of non-tradable and
tradable goods are assumed to evolve exogenously.
    The evidence presented above indicated that relative prices move in pro-
portion to relative GDP for all categories of goods, both tradable and non-
tradable. In order to account for this, we allow for a diﬀerence between
wholesale and retail prices. Retail goods in the tradable sector are produced
using a combination of raw wholesale goods and non-tradable goods as in-
puts. This captures the presence of a marketing or distribution sector. There
is strong evidence for the role of distribution costs in retail pricing of tradable
goods (e.g. Corsetti et al. 2008, and references therein). Here, we assume
that the production of consumption retail goods in sectors X and M are
produced according to:
                            (                                     ) 1−ϕ
                                                                      1
                                   (1−ϕ1 )
                   CX =         κ1 IX        + (1 − κ1 )IXN
                                                         1−ϕ1         1


                            (                                     ) 1−ϕ
                                                                      1
                                    (1−ϕ )
                  CM =          κ2 IM 2      + (1 −        1−ϕ2
                                                      κ2 )IM N
                                                                      2




where IX (IM ), represents the direct use of wholesale tradable goods in pro-
ducing retail consumables for X and M , respectively, and IXN (IM N ) repre-
sents the use of non-tradable distribution services.
    The model is closed with the addition of a home country budget con-
straint, and goods market clearing conditions. The home budget constraint
is given by:
                           P C = PX YX + PN YN ,                          (2)
where YX (YN ) indicates output of good X (N ), and it is assumed that
there is no intertemporal borrowing or lending across countries. This is a
simplifying assumption, but it unlikely to have ﬁrst order implications for
the evolution of the real exchange rate, at least over the sample period in
question for European exchange rates.




                                             22
   Goods market clearing conditions are given as:
                                                     ∗
                           ωYX    =   ωIX + (1 − ω)IX  ,                   (3)
                                                     ∗
                     (1 − ω)YM    =   ωIM + (1 − ω)IM ,
                            YN    =   CN + IXN + IM N ,
                            YN∗   =   CN∗ + IXN
                                             ∗     ∗
                                                + IM N.

    We use the model to look at the relationship between diﬀerent real ex-
change rate measures, as deﬁned above, and relative GDP. In the model
without investment or government spending, relative GDP is just deﬁned as
relative real consumption, or
                          C    PX YX + PN YN P ∗
                             =  ∗
                                                  .                        (4)
                          C∗   PM YM∗ + PN∗ YN∗ P
The relationship between the real exchange rate and relative GDP will ob-
viously depend on the calibration of the model, as well as the assumptions
about the drivers of GDP growth. Our approach here is to choose the path
of endowments YX , YN , YM∗ , and YN∗ to exactly replicate the relative GDP
per capita position for each country over the historical sample path. Given
the calibration, and simulating the two country equilibrium model, this will
imply a path of the real exchange rate for each country. For each country,
we can then compare the simulated path for the real exchange rate with that
of the historical sample path, for each country.
    For our calibration, we take a very standard set of parameter values.
As regards sectoral shares, we set γ = 0.7 so that the non-tradable goods
sector would represent thirty percent of consumption in a steady state with
PN = PT = 1. Assume that the home country is relatively small as a part
of the European economy, so that ω = 0.1. For now, we abstract away
from home bias in preferences, so that µ = 1 is assumed. We assume that
distribution services make up approximately 30 percent of the value-added
in the consumption of retail tradable goods, so that κ1 = κ2 = 0.7. This,
in combination with γ = 0.7, implies that in total, non-traded goods would
make up 50 percent of total production in a steady state with PN = PT = 1.
    As regards elasticities, we use the standard assumption of a low elasticity
between tradable and non-tradable goods, in both ﬁnal consumption and in
distribution services. We follow Mendoza (1995), and use an elasticity of
0.65. Thus, we set λ = ϕ1 = ϕ2 = 0.65. Finally, the elasticity of substi-
tution between home and foreign goods is an important parameter. If this

                                      23
elasticity is too low, then economic growth will lead to a large terms of trade
deterioration and a real exchange rate depreciation, even if growth is quite
concentrated in the traded goods sector. The recent literature has empha-
sized a distinction between short run and long run elasticities of substitution
(e.g. Ruhl 2008). For annual data, the international business cycle literature
has typically used elasticities lower than the long run estimates. We follow
this lead, and set θ = 2. This is lower than estimates of 5 or 6 found in long
run trade estimates, but in the range of the estimates used in the macro lit-
erature. In fact, the results are not particularly sensitive to diﬀerent values
of θ in the range of 2 to 5.
     We wish to examine the implications of diﬀerential levels and growth rates
of relative GDP on real exchange rates. Given all other parameters in the
model, the real exchange rate will depend on cross-country diﬀerences in the
relative supply of exportables to non-tradables within a country. Even if the
home country’s GDP per capita was lower than that of the rest of the world,
this would not necessarily imply a lower real exchange rate unless it also im-
plied that the ratio of tradable goods to non-tradable goods, at the wholesale
level, was also less than that in the rest of the world. Likewise, growth over
time in relative GDP per capita will be associated with real appreciation
only if the growth rate of tradable goods exceeds that of non-tradable goods.
Although our model does not include endogenous labour supply or capital
accumulation, the interaction between GDP and the real exchange rate are
identical to those implied by the Balassa-Samuelson model, which explicitly
incorporates these features, and focuses on the real exchange rate process as
being driven by productivity growth diﬀerentials across sectors.
     Our results above indicate an empirical elasticity of the real exchange rate
to relative GDP per capita of 0.35 to 0.4, both across countries and over time.
We use the model to reproduce this elasticity in both dimensions. Since there
is no physical capital and no borrowing or lending, then the comparison of two
periods with diﬀerent values of GDP per capita is equivalent to a comparison
of two small countries, both interacting with the rest of the world, but one
country having the same diﬀerence in GDP per capita relative to the other
country.
     The key aspect of the model calibration is to determine the relationship
between growth in real GDP per capita and movements in the real exchange
rate. Without loss of generality, we set the ratio of YM to YN∗ in the rest
of the world economy to unity, and assume a zero growth rate in YM and
YN∗ . This is simply a benchmark for comparison with the home economy, and

                                       24
neatly accords with the data, which is expressed in relative terms. Then, we
assume that process for YN in the home economy is given by:

                                  YN = aY b ,                                (5)
where a is a constant, Y is real GDP per capita, relative to the rest of the
world, and b satisﬁes 0 ≤ b ≤ 1. The solution procedure involves pre-
assigning Y , substituting for (5), and then solving (??),(3), and (4) for the 6
                               ∗
variables C, C ∗ , PN , PN∗ , PM , and YX , with the home traded good X taken as
the numeraire. The combination of parameters a and b determine the level
and the slope of the real exchange rate locus as a function of Y , for any given
time, or the evolution of the real exchange rate over time, as Y moves along
its historical path. More speciﬁcally, if we take the case a = YM = YN∗ = 1,
then for Y = 1, it must be that RER = 1, since all endowments are equal
across sectors and countries in this case, and by symmetry, full PPP holds.
On the other hand, if b = 1 then the real exchange rate is constant (not
necessarily equal to unity, unless a = 1 also), since YN and YX then move in
proportion to one another as relative GDP per capita (Y ) moves. That model
simulation involves choosing the path of YX to reproduce the historical series
for Y , given the condition (5). Lower values of b reduce the proportionate
response to YN to changes in Y as YX changes, and as a consequence, involve
a higher elasticity of the real exchange rate to Y . Intuitively, for a low value
of b, movements in YX are not accompanied by proportional movements in
YN and hence must be accompanied by greater relative price change.
    Since the evidence suggests that, on average, countries with GDP per
capita above the EU average (below the EU average) have real exchange rates
above (below) unity, in what follows, we choose a = 1 as a level benchmark.
This ensures that the average country has a real exchange rate equal to unity.
This leaves the parameter b to be chosen. The estimates above suggest that
the elasticity of the real exchange rate to relative GDP in the cross section
and time dimension is between 0.35 and 0.4. The choice of b will determine
this elasticity in the model. The elasticity is not independent of the value
of Y itself however. For given b, the elasticity is higher, for higher Y . We
choose b = .7. This value reproduces an elasticity of 0.39 at the symmetric
point Y = RER = 1.
    Figure 19, illustrates the workings of the model for a case where the home
economy is growing relative to the rest of the world at 4 percent per year.
The Figure illustrates the path of the home country’s relative GDP and the


                                       25
real exchange rate. The second panel of the Figure illustrates the analogue
of the empirical elasticity of the real exchange rate to relative GDP. It is
the ratio of the rate of change of the real exchange rate to the rate of change
of relative GDP per capita, as a function of relative GDP per capita (on the
x-axis). The simulation illustrates the key properties of the real exchange
rate seen in the data - the deviations in relative GDP per capita are larger
than the deviations in the real exchange rate from PPP, and as relative GDP
per capita transits from below average to above average, the real exchange
rate moves from being below PPP to being above PPP, with the relative
GDP per capita locus intersecting the real exchange rate locus from below.
    We now take this exact calibration and apply it to to observed GDP data
for all countries in the sample. What we are doing then is to use the same
calibration for all countries, but solving the model as described above so as
to reproduce the observed movements in relative GDP per capita for each
country.
    One important issue we have not dealt with up to now is the presence
of diﬀerential tax rates on goods across European countries. VAT rates and
other expenditure taxes are not identical in the 31 economies in our sample.
This will make a diﬀerence to the price comparisons, since retail prices are
measured inclusive of taxes. In the initial simulations reported in Figures
20-22, we ignore expenditure taxes. Later on, we incorporate diﬀerences in
tax rates using published VAT rates for European countries and report how
the results are aﬀected by this inclusion.
    Figures 20-22 report the initial results for the three groups of countries.
Figure 20 gives the path of relative GDP per capita, the historical sample
path of the real exchange rate, and the simulated model-generated real ex-
change rate for the eurozone countries. The evaluation of the model hinges
on the closeness of the sample path and the simulated real exchange rates. For
all countries except Finland and Luxembourg, the average simulated model
real exchange rate is close to the sample average. That is, the model gets the
levels right in most cases. In particular, Greece, Spain and Portugal, with
relative GDP per capita signiﬁcantly below the European average, have real
exchange rates about 15-20 percent below the European average. The model
tracks this very accurately. Likewise the average sample and simulated real
exchange rates are very close for the Western European countries.
    Of particular interest is the question of how the model tracks the time
path of real exchange rate movements. That is, can the model track the
dynamics of the real exchange rate? For most countries, the answer is yes.

                                      26
The Western European countries that experienced persistent depreciation of
the sample were Belgium, Germany, Austria, France, and the Netherlands.
The simulated real exchange rates very closely track the historical sample for
Belgium Germany and Austria, and are quite close for France and somewhat
less close for the Netherlands. As these countries experienced declines in their
relative GDP per capita, the magnitude of real exchange rate depreciation
implied by the model is very accurately accounted for by the model. The
opposite phenomenon takes place for the Ireland simulation. The model
very accurately tracks the path of real appreciation in Ireland, following the
transition in relative GDP from below the European average to above the
European average. In both cases (i.e. for Western European countries
and for Ireland), we see exactly the same transition in the model as in the
data - for countries moving from below (above) the European average to
below (above) the European average, the real exchange rate follows the same
process, and the relative GDP line cuts the RER locus from below (above).
Italy presents a puzzle, from the point of view of the model. Italy experienced
considerable real appreciation over the sample, almost as much as Ireland.
But Italy’s relative per capita GDP growth stalled in the late 1990’s, and
thereafter fell back. This is not seen in the behaviour of the Italian real
exchange rate.
    Figure 21 presents the same information for the ﬂoating exchange rate
countries. The model-generated real exchange rate for Switzerland is very
close to that in the data. For the UK, the model real exchange rate follows
the rising income over the sample path, but fails to account for the extent of
the UK real appreciation in the late 1990’s. For the Scandinavian countries;
Iceland, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark, the sample real exchange rate is
substantially above that produced by the model simulation - as was the
case for Finland in Figure 20. It seems that prices in these countries are
much higher than could be accounted for by the basic sectoral demand eﬀects
generated by our model. When we extend the analysis to allow for diﬀerential
rates of VAT below however, we see that the model oﬀers an improved picture
for these countries.
    Figure 22 illustrates the path of real GDP, simulated and sample real
exchange rates for the countries of Eastern and Southern Europe over the
shorter, 1999-2007 sample. As we noted previously, these countries have
very low real exchange rates relative to the EU15. Despite this, the model-
simulated exchange rate ﬁts remarkably well for most countries. With the
exception of Cyprus, Turkey, and Malta, in all cases, the average real ex-

                                      27
change rate produced by the model over the sample is very close to that in
the data, so that, in level terms, the model can quite accurately account for
the real exchange rates for Eastern and Southern European countries. But
in addition, in all cases, the model quite accurately captures the process of
real appreciation over the sample path. In the model, this is driven by the
catch-up process of economic growth, which is driven by the historical sample
path of increasing relative GDP per capita experienced by these countries.
    From these three groups of countries we may conclude that a bare-bones,
rudimentary endowment economy model of real exchange rate determina-
tion, driven by diﬀerential sectoral growth rates produces a real exchange
rate path remarkably close to the observed historical sample path of real
exchange rates for most of the 31 European countries in our sample. It is
worth emphasizing that the model simulations are not calibrated country by
country. In each case, the simulated model is based on exactly the same cal-
ibration. Moreover, the key driver of the real exchange rate in all cases is the
assumption implicit in equation (5), which contains only a single parameter
- the elasticity of the growth rate of non-tradable goods to changes in real
GDP. We set this parameter to 0.7, the same for all 31 countries, indepen-
dently of substantial diﬀerences in per capita GDP levels across countries.
Despite this extreme simplicity in calibration, the model does a very good
job of reproducing both the levels and time paths of most country’s real
exchange rates.
    The real exchange rate in the theoretical model is proportional to the
relative price of non-traded to traded goods. As relative GDP per capita
rises, this relative price rises, driving up the overall price level, relative to
the rest of the world. In a celebrated paper, Engel (1999) questions whether
much real exchange rate variation can be attributed to movements in the
internal relative price of goods within countries, as opposed to movements in
the relative prices of all goods across countries. In our model, as in the data,
growth in relative GDP per capita will drive up the prices of both traded
and non-traded goods, relative to the rest of the world. Thus, the movement
in the internal relative price will be less than the overall movement in the
real exchange rate. Nevertheless, it is still true the model implies that an
appreciating real exchange rate will be accompanied by a rising relative price
of non-traded to traded goods. Figure 23 shows that for most countries in
our sample, the path of this relative price in the data follows the path of
the real exchange rate. Countries in Western Europe that had persistent
real appreciation experienced, for the most part, declining relative prices of

                                       28
nontraded goods, whereas countries that had persistent appreciation over the
sample display, on average, increases in the relative price of nontraded goods.
13

    We noted above that the simple simulation model did not account for dif-
ferential VAT rates across diﬀerent European countries. While all countries
make extensive use of VAT as a revenue raising device, the tax rates diﬀer
considerably across countries. Southern European countries such as Greece,
Spain and Portugal generally have low rates of VAT, while Scandinavian
countries have high VAT rates. Table 6 shows estimates of VAT rates for
the full sample of countries.
    How does the presence of VAT aﬀect our results for the real exchange
rate? We explore this by incorporating VAT explicitly into the model. We
make the simplifying assumption that VAT is set at a uniform rate on all
goods, domestic and imported. Thus, taxes do not aﬀect the relative price of
any good faced by consumers in the model. It then follows that we can adjust
the real exchange rates implied by the model by the diﬀerence between each
countries eﬀective VAT rate and that of the European average.
    Figures 26 - 28 illustrate the results when the model is extended to allow
for diﬀerential VAT rates. The adjustment aﬀects only the levels, and not
the rate of changes of the simulated real exchange rates. Broadly speaking,
the results are as before. The main diﬀerence is that the real exchange
rates of the Scandinavian countries no longer look so anomalous, relative
to the model-generated real exchange rates. In particular, Norways model
generated real exchange rate is very close to that of the historical sample.
On the other hand, for some European countries (e.g. France, and Germany)
the model generated real exchange rate is somewhat less than that of the
historical sample. Among the ﬂoating exchange rate countries, Switzerland’s
real exchange rate now looks somewhat anomalous, since Switzerland has a
relatively low VAT rate. Finally, the results for the Eastern and Southern
  13
     We do not try to match this relative price with the model, since we may not be
fully conﬁdent in our choice of non-traded goods categorization, and our calibration of
the size of the distribution sector employing non-traded goods. Despite this ambiguity,
our simulation for the aggregate real exchange rate will remain relatively unchanged by
alternative values for these structural parameters. The reason is that the key aspect of
the calibration is to adjust the parameter b in (5) so as to reproduce the elasticity of the
real exchange rate to relative GDP per capita. Once this is set to match the data, the
simulated real exchange rate in the model will behave in a manner very similar to Figures
20-22, and so will closely match the historical sample path



                                            29
European countries are not much changed. Overall, we can conclude that the
incorporation of diﬀerential VAT rates into the model does not substantially
change the good performance of the model in accounting for the pattern of
real exchange rates in Europe.


8    Conclusions

This paper has explored the characteristics of European real exchange rates
at both an aggregated and disaggregated level, using a new micro data set on
prices of a large number of consumer goods for a broad sample of European
countries over a thirteen year period. The key advantage of the data-set is
that it allows for an explicit comparison of price levels across countries, so
that we can explore the characteristics of real exchange rates in the cross
section and the time series. Our results showed that there is a substantial
departure from the PPP at both the aggregate and disaggregate levels, both
in the euro area countries and the non-euro countries. Moreover, with the
exception of the emerging Eastern European countries, there is little in the
data to suggest that departures from PPP are diminishing over time.
    While real exchange rates display continuing departure from PPP, we ﬁnd
that both in the cross section and time series, relative GDP per capita can
explain a substantial part of the variation in European real exchange rates,
for both the eurozone countries, the ﬂoating exchange rate countries, and the
emerging countries of Eastern Europe.
    Finally, we employed a simple textbook general equilibrium model of the
real exchange rate, in which real exchanges were driven by diﬀerential growth
rates in traded relative to non-traded sectors. When we simulate the model
to match the historical sample path of relative GDP for each country in
our sample, we ﬁnd that, for most countries, the implied path of the real
exchange rate is remarkably close to the sample real exchange rate, both in
levels and rates of change over time.




                                     30
References
 [1] James E. Anderson and Eric van Wincoop. Trade costs. Journal of
     Economic Literature, 42(3):691–751, September 2004.

 [2] Manuel Arellano. Computing robust standard errors for within-group
     estimators. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 49(4):431–434,
     November 1987.

 [3] Patrick K. Asea and Enrique G. Mendoza. The Balassa-Samuelson
     model: A general-equilibrium appraisal. Review of International Eco-
     nomics, 2:244 – 267, October 1994.

 [4] Jeﬀrey H. Bergstrand. Structural determinants of real exchange rates
     and national price levels: Some empirical evidence. American Economic
     Review, 81(1):325–334, March 1991.

 [5] Ariel Burstein, Joao C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo. Distribution costs and
     real exchange rate dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations.
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 50:1189–1214, September 2003.

 [6] Carlos Carvalho and Fernanda Nechio. Aggregation and the PPP puzzle
     in a sticky-price model. Staﬀ Report 351, Federal Reserve Bank of New
     York, October 2008.

 [7] European Comission. VAT rates applied in the member states of the
     European Community. taxud.d.1(2009)307669 - EN, July 2009.

 [8] Mario Crucini and Mototsugu Shintani. Persistence in law-of-one-price
     deviations: evidence from micro data. Journal of Monetary Economics,
     55:629–644, 2008.

 [9] Mario Crucini and Chris Telmer. Microeconomic sources of real ex-
     change rate variability. Mimeo, Vanderbilt University, Carnegie Mellon
     University, April 2007.

[10] Mario Crucini, Chris Telmer, and Marios Zachariadis. Understanding
     European real exchange rates. American Economic Review, 95(3):724–
     738, June 2005.



                                     31
[11] Lukasz A. Drozd and Jaromir B. Nosal. Understanding international
     prices: Customers as capital. Staﬀ Reports 411, Federal Reserve Bank
     of Minneapolis, August 2008.

[12] Charles Engel. Accounting for US real exchange rate changes. Journal
     of Political Economy, 130(3):507–538, June 1999.

[13] Charles Engel and John H. Rogers. How wide is the border? American
     Economic Review, 86:1112–1125, 1996.

[14] Charles Engel and John H. Rogers. Deviations from purchasing power
     parity: causes and welfare costs. Journal of International Economics,
     55:29–57, 2001.

[15] Charles Engel and John H. Rogers. European product market integra-
     tion after the euro. Economic Policy, 39:349–384, July 2004.

[16] Riemer P. Faber and Ad C. J. Stockman. A short history of price level
     convergence in Europe. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41(2-
     3):461–477, March-April 2009.

[17] Task force of the monetary policy committee of the European system
     of central banks. Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area
     service sector. Occassional Paper 44, ECB, April 2006.

[18] Jean Imbs, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Helene Rey. PPP
     strikes back: Aggregation and the real exchange rate. Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 120(1):1–43, February 2005.

[19] Enrique G. Mendoza. The terms of trade, the real exchange rate, and
     economic ﬂuctuations. International Economic Review, 36(1):101–137,
     1995.

[20] J. Peter Neary. Determinants of the equilibrium real exchange rate.
     American Economic Review, 78(1):210–215, March 1988.

[21] Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogoﬀ. Exchange rate dynamics redux.
     Journal of Political Economics, 103(3):624–660, 1995.

[22] Kim J. Ruhl. The international elasticity puzzle. Manuscript, March
     2008.


                                    32
[23] Robert Summers and Alan Heston. The Penn World Table (Mark 5):
     An expanded set of international comparisons, 1950-1988. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 106(2):327 – 368, May 1991.




                                  33
A          Appendix: expenditure weights
Composition of the consumption baskets diﬀers across goods, countries, and
time. At the same time, components of inﬂation are known to co-move
strongly with aggregate inﬂation, suggesting that non-equal weighting should
not aﬀect the behaviour of the RER. To explore the degree to which this
may inﬂuence our results we construct expenditure weights for each good,
country, and year, using the local currency expenditures data provided by
Eurostat. Speciﬁcally, for good i, country j and year t, we construct a
                 expi,j,t
weight γi,j,t = ∑M exp        where exp is the local currency expenditure. We
                 i      i,j,t
then construct an expenditure-weighted PLI’s for all countries using γi,j,t ,
and plot them against the un-weighted PLI’s in the ﬁgures below.
   Equally-weighted and Expenditure-weighted RER’s in EU12 countries
                                                         BE                              GER                          GRE                                     SPA
                                          130                           130                            130                                 130

                                          120                           120                            120                                 120

                                          110                           110                            110                                 110

                                          100                           100                            100                                 100

                                           90                            90                             90                                  90

                                           80                            80                             80                                  80
                                           1995     2000       2005      1995          2000     2005    1995        2000         2005       1995         2000             2005

                                                         FRA                             IRE                          ITA                                     LUX
                                          130                           130                            130                                 130

                                          120                           120                            120                                 120

                                          110                           110                            110                                 110

                                          100                           100                            100                                 100

                                           90                            90                             90                                  90

                                           80                            80                             80                                  80
                                           1995     2000       2005      1995          2000     2005    1995        2000         2005       1995         2000             2005

                                                         NET                             AUS                          POR                                     FIN
                                          130                           130                            130                                 130

                                          120                           120                            120                                 120

                                          110                           110                            110                                 110

                                          100                           100                            100                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                unweighted
                                           90                            90                             90                                  90                  weighted
                                           80                            80                             80                                  80
                                           1995     2000       2005      1995          2000     2005    1995        2000         2005       1995         2000             2005




For each country, the ﬁgures plot an un-weighted average RER as the red
dashed line, as well as the expenditure-weighted RER which is the solid black
line. While there are diﬀerences between the two, these are small for most
countries. Even in situations when there is a level diﬀerence between the
two, there is a strong co-movement between them. We conclude that our
results are not driven by the use of equally-weighted average PLI’s.
Weighted and un-weighted RER’s in countries with ﬂoating currencies and
                          Eastern Europe
             DEN                     SWE                                           UK                               CYP                          CZE                             EST                        HUN                       LAT
  160                      160                                  160                                    100                         100                              100                       100                        100

                                                                                                        90                          90                               90                        90                         90
  150                      150                                  150
                                                                                                        80                          80                               80                        80                         80
  140                      140                                  140
                                                                                                        70                          70                               70                        70                         70
  130                      130                                  130                                     60                          60                               60                        60                         60

  120                      120                                  120                                     50                          50                               50                        50                         50

                                                                                                        40                          40                               40                        40                         40
  110                      110                                  110                                          2000         2005           2000          2005               2000         2005         2000          2005         2000         2005

  100                      100                                  100                                                 LIT                          MAL                             POL                        SVK                       SVN
                                                                                                       100                         100                              100                       100                        100
   90                       90                                   90
                                                                                                        90                          90                               90                        90                         90
    1995   2000     2005    1995   2000           2005           1995           2000           2005
                                                                                                        80                          80                               80                        80                         80

                                                                                                        70                          70                               70                        70                         70

                                                                                                        60                          60                               60                        60                         60
              ICE                    NOR                                          SWI
  160                      160                                  160                                     50                          50                               50                        50                         50
                                                                                          unweighted
  150                      150                                  150                       weighted      40                          40                               40                        40                         40
                                                                                                             2000         2005           2000          2005               2000         2005         2000          2005         2000         2005

  140                      140                                  140
                                                                                                                    BUL                          ROM                             TUR
                                                                                                       100                         100                              100
  130                      130                                  130
                                                                                                        90                          90                                                                     unweighted
  120                      120                                  120                                                                                                                                        weighted
                                                                                                        80                          80                               80
  110                      110                                  110                                     70                          70

  100                      100                                  100                                     60                          60                               60

                                                                                                        50                          50
   90                       90                                   90
                                                                                                        40                          40                               40
    1995   2000     2005    1995   2000           2005           1995           2000           2005          2000         2005           2000          2005               2000         2005




                                                                                                      34
       Table 1. PLI basic headings, Household expenditures
T    Rice                                                T    Major tools and equipment
T    Other cereals, ﬂour and other cereal products       T    Small tools and miscellaneous accessories
T    Bread                                               T    Non-durable household goods
T    Other bakery products                               NT   Domestic services
T    Pasta products                                      NT   Household services
T    Beef and Veal                                       T    Pharmaceutical products
T    Pork                                                T    Other medical products
T    Lamb, mutton and goat                               T    Therapeutical appliances and equipment
T    Poultry                                             NT   Medical Services
T    Other meats and edible oﬀal                         NT   Services of dentists
T    Delicatessen and other meat preparations            NT   Paramedical services
T    Fresh, chilled or frozen ﬁsh and seafood            NT   Hospital services
T    Preserved or processed ﬁsh and seafood              T    Motor cars with diesel engine
T    Fresh milk                                          T    Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of less than 1200cc
T    Preserved milk and other milk products              T    Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of 1200cc to 1699cc
T    Cheese                                              T    Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of 1700cc to 2999cc
T    Eggs and egg-based products                         T    Motor cars with petrol engine of cubic capacity of 3000cc and over
T    Butter                                              T    Motor cycles
T    Margarine                                           T    Bicycles
T    Other edible oils and fats                          T    Animal drawn vehicles
T    Fresh or chilled fruit                              T    Spare parts and accessories for personal transport equipment
T    Frozen, preserved or processed fruit                T    Fuels and lubricants for personal transport equipment
T    Fresh or chilled vegetables other than potatoes     NT   Maintenance and repair of personal transport equipment
T    Fresh or chilled potatoes                           NT   Other services in respect of personal transport equipment
T    Frozen, preserved or processed vegetables           NT   Passenger transport by railway
T    Sugar                                               NT   Passenger transport by road
T    Jams, marmalades and honey                          NT   Passenger transport by air
T    Confectionery, chocolate and other cocoa preps      NT   Passenger transport by sea and inland waterway
T    Edible ice, ice cream and sorbet                    NT   Combined passenger transport
T    Coﬀee, tea and cocoa                                NT   Other purchased transport services
T    Mineral waters                                      NT   Postal services
T    Soft drinks and concentrates                        T    Telephone and telefax equipment
T    Fruit and vegetable juices                          nT   Telephone and telefax services
T    Spirits                                             T    Equipment for reception, recording and reproduction of sound and pictures
T    Wine                                                T    Photographic and cinematographic equipment and optical instruments
T    Beer                                                T    Information processing equipment
T    Tobacco                                             T    Pre-recorded recording media
T    Narcotics                                           T    Unrecorded recording media
T    Other clothing and clothing accessories             NT   Repair of audio-visual, photographic and information processing equipment
T    Clothing materials                                  T    Major durables for outdoor recreation
T    Men’s clothing                                      T    Musical instruments and major durables for indoor recreation
T    Women’s clothing                                    NT   Maintenance and repair of other major durables for recreation and culture
T    Childrens and infants clothing                      T    Games, toys and hobbies
T    Other clothing and clothing accessories             T    Equipment for sport, camping and open-air recreation
NT   Cleaning, repair and hire of clothing               T    Gardens, plants and ﬂowers
T    Men’s footwear                                      T    Pets and related products
T    Women’s footwear                                    T    Veterinary and other services for pets
T    Children’s and infant’s footwear                    NT   Recreational and sporting services
NT   Repair and hire of footwear                         NT   Photographic services
NT   Actual rentals for housing                          NT   Other cultural services
NT   Imputed rentals for housing                         T    Games of chance
T    Materials for maintenance and repair of dwelling    T    Books
NT   Services for maintenance and repair of dwelling     T    Newspapers and periodicals
T    Water supply oils and fats                          T    Miscellaneous printed matter, stationery and drawing materials
NT   Miscellaneous services relating to the dwelling     T    Package holidays
T    Electricity                                         NT   Pre-primary and primary education
T    Gas                                                 NT   Secondary education
T    Liquid fuels                                        NT   Post-secondary education
T    Solid fuels                                         NT   Tertiary education
T    Heat energy                                         NT   Education not deﬁnable by level
T    Kitchen furniture                                   NT   Restaurant services whatever the type of establishment
T    Bedroom furniture                                   NT   Pubs, bars, cafs, tea rooms and the like
T    Living-room and dining-room furniture               NT   Canteens
T    Other furniture and furnishings                     NT   Accommodation services
T    Carpets and other ﬂoor coverings                    NT   Hairdressing salons and personal grooming establishments
NT   Repair of furniture, furnishings and ﬂoors          T    Electric appliances for personal care
T    Household textiles                                  T    Other appliances, articles and products for personal care
T    Major household appliances electric or not          NT   Prostitution
NT   Repair of furniture, furnishings and ﬂoors          T    Jewellery, clocks and watches
T    Household textiles                                  T    Other personal eﬀects
T    Major household appliances electric or not          NT   Social protection
T    Small electric household appliances                 NT   Insurance
NT   Repair of household appliances                      NT   Net purchases abroad
T    Glassware, tableware and household utensils         NT   Other ﬁnancial services n.e.c.
                                                         NT   Other services n.e.c.




                                                        35
Table 2: Mean standard deviation of disaggregated real exchange
rates
    Belgium     6.2       Netherlands     7.1      Cyprus    6.5   Slovenia   7.5
   Denmark        7           Austria     5.7   Czech Rep.   6.9   Bulgaria   5.8
   Germany      5.5          Portugal     7.8      Estonia   5.5   Romania    7.8
     Greece     7.7           Finland     6.1     Hungary    7.8    Turkey    6.1
       Spain    6.1           Sweden      8.2       Latvia   5.9
      France    6.3   United Kingdom      9.7    Lithuania   6.7
     Ireland    7.7           Iceland    13.2        Malta   7.2
        Italy   7.6           Norway      8.8       Poland   7.1
Luxembourg      6.5       Switzerland     6.4     Slovakia   6.9




                                        36
     Table 3. Price level regressions, average country price
                                 All goods and services                                     Traded goods                         Non-traded goods
                           Pooled Country FE Period FE                            Pooled    Country FE Period FE       Pooled     Country FE Period FE
                                 1              2            3                          4              5        6            7               8           9
                               ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗                        ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
        log(RGDP)         0.35           0.34         0.34                       0.28           0.29     0.29         0.55            0.48        0.48
                            (0.00)         (0.00)       (0.00)                     (0.00)         (0.00)   (0.00)       (0.00)          (0.00)      (0.00)
      Euro dummy         -0.06∗∗∗           -0.01        -0.01                  -0.07∗∗∗           -0.01    -0.01        -0.03           -0.02       -0.02
                            (0.00)         (0.23)       (0.23)                     (0.00)         (0.34)   (0.34)       (0.23)          (0.21)      (0.21)
      log(Distance)        0.1∗∗∗               –       0.2∗∗∗                   0.11∗∗∗               – 0.18∗∗∗       0.1∗∗∗                –    0.29∗∗∗
                            (0.00)                      (0.00)                     (0.00)                  (0.00)       (0.00)                      (0.00)
                  R2          0.94           0.94         0.98                       0.91           0.98     0.98         0.94            0.99        0.99
                   N           351            351          351                        351            351      351          351             351         351
     Dependant variable: Logarithm of price level relative to EU15. All standard errors computed using Arellano (1987) adjustment of White’s HCCM.
     p-values in parentheses. A   ∗   denotes 10%,   ∗∗   5% and   ∗∗∗   1% signiﬁcance.




37
     Table 4. Price level regressions (average price) by country group
                                                           Western Europe                                               Southern and Eastern Europe
                                  All                        Traded goods            Non-traded goods            All           Traded goods     Non-traded goods
                             Pool        FE                   Pool       FE              Pool      FE       Pool        FE      Pool       FE      Pool       FE
                                 1         2                      3        4                5        6          7         8         9       10        11       12
        log(RGDP)         0.41∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗                  0.36∗∗∗ 0.34∗∗∗           0.51∗∗∗ 0.57∗∗∗     0.27∗∗∗ 0.31∗∗∗ 0.23∗∗∗ 0.27∗∗∗ 0.43∗∗∗ 0.44∗∗∗
                            (0.00)    (0.00)                 (0.00)   (0.00)           (0.00)   (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.00)
      Euro dummy         -0.06∗∗∗      -0.01              -0.05∗∗∗     -0.01          -0.07∗∗    -0.02   0.06∗∗∗      0.003 0.04∗∗∗      0.004   0.11∗∗     -0.03
                            (0.00)    (0.26)                 (0.00)   (0.35)           (0.03)   (0.25)     (0.00)    (0.66)    (0.00)   (0.53)    (0.02)   (0.77)
      log(Distance)       0.11∗∗∗          –               0.13∗∗∗         –          0.07∗∗         –   0.15∗∗∗          – 0.12∗∗∗          –   0.2∗∗∗         –
                            (0.00)                           (0.00)                    (0.03)              (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)
                  R2          0.81      0.96                   0.80     0.96             0.78     0.96       0.89      0.96      0.87     0.92      0.90     0.96
                   N           234       234                    234      234              234      234        117       117       117      117       117      117
     Dependant variable: Logarithm of price level relative to EU15. ”FE” denotes a country ﬁxed eﬀect regression. All standard errors computed using
     Arellano (1987) adjustment of White’s HCCM. p-values in parentheses.
Table 5. Price level regressions, all prices
                                All goods                               Traded              Non-Traded
                     Pooled      Country dummies                   Pooled         CD      Pooled       CD
                           1            2         3                      4          5           6        7
                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
   log(RGDP)        0.40         0.39      0.39                   0.29       0.35        0.61     0.53
                      (0.00)       (0.00)    (0.00)                 (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)   (0.00)
 Euro dummy        -0.04∗∗∗     -0.01∗∗∗ -0.01∗∗∗                -0.06∗∗∗ -0.01∗∗        -0.02∗∗ -0.02∗∗
                      (0.00)       (0.00)    (0.00)                 (0.00)     (0.03)      (0.02)   (0.04)
 log(Distance)      0.11∗∗∗             –      0.23               0.11∗∗∗           –    0.11∗∗∗    0.38∗
                      (0.00)                 (0.14)                 (0.00)                 (0.00)   (0.09)
             R2         0.48         0.50      0.50                   0.43       0.45        0.67     0.71
              N      51,246       51,246    51,246                 34,047     34,047      17,199   17,199
Dependant variable: Logarithm of price level relative to EU15. p-values in parentheses, computed using
Newey-West standard errors. A   ∗   denotes 10%,   ∗∗   5% and   ∗∗∗   1% signiﬁcance.




                                              38
Table 6. Value    Added Tax rates
 Country           VAT rate (in %)
 Belgium           21.0
 Germany           19.0
 Greece            19.0
 Spain             16.0
 France            19.6
 Ireland           21.5
 Italy             20.0
 Luxembourg        15.0
 Netherlands       19.0
 Austria           20.0
 Portugal          20.0
 Finland           22.0
 Denmark           25.0
 Sweden            25.0
 UK                15.0
 Iceland           24.5
 Norway            25.0
 Switzerland       7.6
 Cyprus            15.0
 Czech Republic    19.0
 Estonia           20.0
 Hungary           25.0
 Latvia            21.0
 Lithuania         21.0
 Malta             18.0
 Poland            22.0
 Slovakia          19.0
 Slovenia          20.0
 Bulgaria          20.0
 Romania           19.0
 Turkey            18.0




            39
                                 Figure 1: Examples of prices


             Pasta product prices, EU 12                                  Beer prices, EU 12

                                                         200
130
                                                         180
120
                                                         160
110
                                                         140

100                                                      120

 90                                                      100

                                                          80
 80

      1996   1998    2000   2002   2004    2006                1996   1998   2000   2002    2004   2006



      Pasta product prices, floating ER countries                  Beer prices, floating ER countries

160
                                                         300
150

140                                                      250
130

120                                                      200

110
                                                         150
100

 90                                                      100
      1996   1998    2000   2002   2004    2006                1996   1998   2000   2002    2004   2006



Pasta product prices, Southern and Eastern Europe              Beer prices, Southern and Eastern Europe

110
                                                         110
100                                                      100
 90                                                       90

 80                                                       80

 70                                                       70
                                                          60
 60
                                                          50
 50
                                                          40
      1996   1998    2000   2002   2004    2006                1996   1998   2000   2002    2004   2006


                                                    40
                          Average PLI for eurozone countries                            Price dispersion for eurozone countries
     BE    120                                                                                                                    STD
     GER                                                                                                                          MAD
                                                                          12
     GRE 115
     SPA
           110                                                            11
     FRA
     IRE   105
                                                                          10
     ITA
           100
     LUX                                                                   9
     NET    95
     AUS                                                                   8
            90
     POR
     FIN    85                                                             7

                 1996     1998      2000      2002     2004      2006            1996      1998     2000      2002      2004      2006




41
                 Average PLI for countries with floating exchange rates        Price dispersion for countries with floating exchange rates

     DEN 150
                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                             Figure 2: Average PLI’s




     SWE
     UK    140
     ICE                                                                  25
     NOR 130
     SWI
           120                                                            20


           110
                                                                          15

           100
                                                                                                                                  STD
                                                                          10                                                      MAD
            90
                 1996     1998      2000      2002     2004      2006            1996      1998     2000      2002      2004      2006
Figure 3: Price dispersion between eurozone countries without Ireland


13                                                             STD
                                                               MAD


12



11



10



 9



 8



 7



 6
      1996       1998       2000        2002      2004       2006




                                   42
                  Average PLIs in Southern and Eastern Europe                    Price dispersion in Southern and Eastern Europe

     CYP
                                                                                                                            STD
     CZE
                                                                                                                            MAD
     EST
           90                                                             35
     HUN
     LAT
     LIT
           85
     MAL
     POL
     SVK                                                                  30
     SVN 80
     BUL
     ROM
     TUR 75
                                                                          25




43
           70



           65                                                             20



           60


                                                                          15
           55



           50
                                                                                                                                          Figure 4: Average PLI’s in Southern and Eastern Europe




                                                                          10
           1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006    2007
 1.5
             BE
                             1.5
                                         DEN
                                                         1.5
                                                                     GER
                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                 GRE
                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                             SPA            Europe
  1                           1                           1                           1                           1
 0.5                         0.5                         0.5                         0.5                         0.5
  0                           0                           0                           0                           0
−0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5
       20 40 60 80100
                    120
                      140          20 40 60 80100
                                                120
                                                  140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                            120
                                                                              140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                                                        120
                                                                                                          140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                                                                                    120
                                                                                                                                      140
             FRA                         IRE                         ITA                         LUX                         NET
 1.5                         1.5                         1.5                         1.5                         1.5
  1                           1                           1                           1                           1
 0.5                         0.5                         0.5                         0.5                         0.5
  0                           0                           0                           0                           0
−0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5
       20 40 60 80100
                    120
                      140          20 40 60 80100
                                                120
                                                  140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                            120
                                                                              140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                                                        120
                                                                                                          140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                                                                                    120
                                                                                                                                      140




  44
             AUS                         POR                         FIN                        SWE                          UK
 1.5                         1.5                         1.5                         1.5                         1.5
  1                           1                           1                           1                           1
 0.5                         0.5                         0.5                         0.5                         0.5
  0                           0                           0                           0                           0
−0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5
       20 40 60 80100
                    120
                      140          20 40 60 80100
                                                120
                                                  140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                            120
                                                                              140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                                                        120
                                                                                                          140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                                                                                    120
                                                                                                                                      140
              ICE                       NOR                          SWI
 1.5                         1.5                         1.5
                                                                                               1995
  1                           1                           1                                    2000
 0.5                         0.5                         0.5                                   2007
  0                           0                           0
−0.5                        −0.5                        −0.5
       20 40 60 80100
                    120
                      140          20 40 60 80100
                                                120
                                                  140          20 40 60 80100
                                                                            120
                                                                              140
                                                                                                                                            Figure 5: Prices of 146 goods and services vis-a-vis EU15 mean, Western
              CYP                             CZE                           EST                            HUN
 0.5                            0.5                            0.5                            0.5
  0                              0                              0                              0
−0.5                           −0.5                           −0.5                           −0.5
 −1                             −1                             −1                             −1
−1.5                           −1.5                           −1.5                           −1.5
       20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140
              LAT                             LIT                           MAL                            POL

 0.5                            0.5                            0.5                            0.5
                                                                                                                            Southern and Eastern Europe




  0                              0                              0                              0
−0.5                           −0.5                           −0.5                           −0.5
 −1                             −1                             −1                             −1
−1.5                           −1.5                           −1.5                           −1.5
       20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140




  45
              SVK                             SVN                           BUL                            ROM

 0.5                            0.5                            0.5                            0.5
  0                              0                              0                              0
−0.5                           −0.5                           −0.5                           −0.5
 −1                             −1                             −1                             −1
−1.5                           −1.5                           −1.5                           −1.5
       20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140          20 40 60 80 100120140
              TUR

 0.5                                   2000
  0                                    2005

−0.5                                   2007

 −1
−1.5
       20 40 60 80 100120140
                                                                                                                            Figure 5 continued: Prices of 146 goods and services vis-a-vis EU15 mean,
                    CVs in eurozone          CVs in countries with floating exchange rates          CVs in Southern and Eastern Europe
     BE    0.28                                                                              0.65                                        CYP
     GER                                                                      DEN                                                        CZE
                                             0.35                             SWE
     GRE                                                                                                                                 EST
                                                                              UK
     SPA                                                                      ICE                                                        HUN
                                                                                              0.6
     FRA 0.26                                                                 NOR                                                        LAT
     IRE                                                                      SWI
                                                                                                                                         LIT
     ITA                                                                                                                                 MAL
     LUX                                                                                     0.55
                                                                                                                                         POL
     NET 0.24                                                                                                                            SVK
     AUS                                                                                                                                 SVN
     POR                                      0.3                                             0.5                                        BUL
     FIN                                                                                                                                 ROM
           0.22                                                                                                                          TUR

                                                                                             0.45




46
            0.2
                                                                                              0.4

                                             0.25

           0.18                                                                              0.35
                                                                                                                                               Figure 6: Dispersion within countries




                                                                                              0.3
           0.16



                                                                                             0.25
                                              0.2
           0.14

             1995     2000            2005     1995          2000           2005                      2000    2002    2004     2006
Figure 7: Relationship between mean PLI and price dispersion within country


                  Western Europe                                Southern and Eastern Europe
           14                                             7




           12
                                                          6



           10
                                                          5


            8
mean STD




                                               mean STD




                                                          4

            6


                                                          3
            4



                                                          2
            2




            0                                             1
             80   100              120   140               80        100              120     140
                        mean PLI                                           mean PLI




                                          47
             BE                        DEN                     GER                      GRE                    SPA
 0.06                       0.02                    0.04                    0.02                    0.03

 0.04                      0.015                    0.03                   0.015
                                                                                                    0.02
                            0.01                    0.02                    0.01
 0.02                                                                                               0.01
                           0.005                    0.01                   0.005

     0                        0                       0                       0                       0
         0   200    400            0   200   400           0   200   400           0    100   200          0   100   200
             FRA                       IRE                     ITA                      LUX                    NET
 0.04                       0.03                    0.04                    0.03                    0.04

 0.03                                               0.03                                            0.03
                            0.02                                            0.02
 0.02                                               0.02                                            0.02
                            0.01                                            0.01
 0.01                                               0.01                                            0.01

     0                        0                       0                       0                       0
         0   200     400           0   200   400           0   200   400           0    200   400          0   100   200




48
             AUS                       POR                     FIN                      SWE                    UK
 0.04                       0.03                    0.03                    0.03                    0.04

 0.03                                                                                               0.03
                            0.02                    0.02                    0.02
 0.02                                                                                               0.02
                            0.01                    0.01                    0.01
 0.01                                                                                               0.01

     0                        0                       0                       0                       0
         0   200     400           0   100   200           0   200   400           0    200   400          0   200   400
              ICE                      NOR                     SWI
 0.02                       0.02                    0.02
                                                                                       1995
0.015                      0.015                   0.015                               2000
 0.01                       0.01                    0.01                               2007

0.005                      0.005                   0.005

     0                        0                       0
         0           500           0   200   400           0   200   400
                                                                                                                           Figure 8: Kernel density estimates of all price levels, Western Europe
             CYP                              CZE                            EST                            HUN
 0.02                            0.02                            0.02                           0.02
0.015                           0.015                           0.015                          0.015
                                                                                                                              Eastern Europe


 0.01                            0.01                            0.01                           0.01

0.005                           0.005                           0.005                          0.005

   0                               0                               0                              0
  −200   0     200       400      −100    0         100   200     −100   0         100   200     −100   0         100   200
             LAT                              LIT                            MAL                            POL
 0.02                            0.02                           0.015                           0.03

0.015                           0.015
                                                                 0.01                           0.02
 0.01                            0.01
                                                                0.005                           0.01
0.005                           0.005

   0                               0                               0                              0
  −100   0         100    200     −100    0         100   200     −200   0         200   400     −100   0         100   200




  49
             SVK                              SVN                            BUL                            ROM
0.015                            0.03                            0.02                           0.02

                                                                0.015                          0.015
 0.01                            0.02
                                                                 0.01                           0.01
0.005                            0.01
                                                                0.005                          0.005

   0                               0                               0                              0
  −100   0         100    200     −200    0         200   400     −100   0         100   200     −200   0         200   400
             TUR
0.015
                                         2000
 0.01                                    2005
                                         2007
0.005

   0
  −200   0         200    400
                                                                                                                              Figure 8 continued: Kernel density estimates of all price levels, Southern and
        Figure 9: Evolution of price distribution for euro-member countries


                                             Euro
 0.03
                                                                              1995
                                                                              1996
                                                                              1997
                                                                              1998
0.025                                                                         1999
                                                                              2000
                                                                              2001
                                                                              2002
                                                                              2003
 0.02
                                                                              2004
                                                                              2005
                                                                              2006
                                                                              2007
0.015




 0.01




0.005




   0
        0       50       100      150        200     250      300      350           400




                                        50
Figure 9 continued: Evolution of price distribution for countries with ﬂoating
exchange rates



                                       Floaters
0.018
                                                                             1995
                                                                             1996
0.016                                                                        1997
                                                                             1998
                                                                             1999
0.014                                                                        2000
                                                                             2001
                                                                             2002
                                                                             2003
0.012
                                                                             2004
                                                                             2005
                                                                             2006
 0.01                                                                        2007


0.008


0.006


0.004


0.002


   0
        0   50      100     150      200      250     300     350      400          450




                                     51
Figure 9 continued: Evolution of price distribution for countries in Southern
and Eastern Europe



                                          East
0.015
                                                                           1999
                                                                           2000
                                                                           2001
                                                                           2002
                                                                           2003
                                                                           2004
                                                                           2005
                                                                           2006
 0.01                                                                      2007




0.005




   0
   −50       0        50       100        150     200      250       300          350




                                     52
Figure 10: Decomposition into Traded and Non-Traded, Western Europe


         Average PLI of traded goods, eurozone countries            Price dispersion of traded goods
        120                                                9.5
                                                                                                    STD
                                                                                                    MAD
                                                            9
        115

                                                           8.5
        110
                                                            8

        105                                                7.5

                                                            7
        100
                                                           6.5
         95
                                                            6

         90                                                5.5
  BE
  GER                                                       5
  GRE    85
  SPA         1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006            1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006
  FRA
  IRE
  ITA
  LUX
  NET
  AUS           Average PLI of non−traded goods                   Price dispersion of non−traded goods
  POR
  FIN                                                      20

        120                                                19

                                                           18
        110
                                                           17

                                                           16
        100
                                                           15

                                                           14
         90
                                                           13

                                                           12
         80
                                                           11

         70                                                10

              1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006            1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006




                                                 53
Figure 11: Decomposition into Traded and Non-Traded, countries in Western
Europe with ﬂoating exchange rates


    Average PLI of traded goods, countries with floating currencies        Price dispersion of traded goods
         160
                                                                   30                                      STD
                                                                                                           MAD
         150                                                      28

                                                                  26
         140
                                                                  24

         130                                                      22

                                                                  20
         120

                                                                  18
         110
                                                                  16

         100                                                      14

                                                                  12
          90
               1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006                  1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006
    DEN
    SWE
    UK
    ICE
    NOR
    SWI
                  Average PLI of non−traded goods                        Price dispersion of non−traded goods
         160
                                                                  35

         150
                                                                  30

         140

                                                                  25
         130

                                                                  20
         120


                                                                  15
         110



         100                                                      10


               1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006                  1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006




                                                  54
Figure 12: Decomposition into Traded and Non-Traded, Southern and East-
ern Europe


     Average PLI of traded goods, Southern and Eastern Europe          Price dispersion of traded goods
          100                                                                                        STD
                                                                25                                   MAD
           90

                                                                20
           80


    CYP    70                                                   15
    CZE
    EST
           60                                                   10
    HUN
    LAT         2000     2002      2004      2006                    2000      2002      2004       2006
    LIT
    MAL
                 Average PLI of non−traded goods                     Price dispersion of non−traded goods
    POL
    SVK
    SVN                                                         50
           70
    BUL
    ROM    60                                                   40
    TUR
           50                                                   30

           40
                                                                20
           30
                2000     2002      2004      2006                    2000      2002      2004       2006




                                               55
                   BE                     GER                    GRE                    SPA                   FRA                   IRE
     P                                                  90                     90
         110
     Y                          120                                                                  110
                                                        80                                                                 120
         105                                                                                         105
                                110                                            80
         100                                            70                                           100                   100
                                100                                            70
          95                                            60                                            95
                                 90                                                                   90                    80
          90                                            50                     60
          1995   2000    2005    1995    2000   2005    1995    2000   2005    1995    2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000    2005

                   ITA                    LUX                    NET                    AUS                   POR                    FIN
                                                                                                      90
                                                       110                    120
         100                                                                                          80
                                200                                                                                        120
                                                                              115
                                                       105
                                                                              110                     70




56
          90                                                                                                               110
                                                       100
                                150                                           105
                                                                                                      60
                                                        95                    100
          80                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                      50
                                                                               95
                                100                     90
          1995   2000    2005     1995   2000   2005     1995   2000   2005    1995    2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000    2005

                  DEN                     SWE                     UK                    ICE                   NOR                   SWI
         145
                                130                    120                                           180                   180
         140                                                                  150
                                125                    110                                           170
         135                                                                  140                                          160
                                120                                                                  160
                                                       100                    130
         130                    115                                                                  150                   140
                                                        90                    120
         125                    110                                                                  140
                                                                              110                                          120
         120                    105                     80                                           130
                                                                              100
          1995   2000    2005    1995    2000   2005    1995    2000   2005     1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000    2005
                                                                                                                                                  Figure 13: Relative GDP per capita and average PLI’s in Western Europe
                     CYP                  CZE                  EST                  HUN                  LAT                  LIT
                              70
     P                                                                  70                   70
                                                   70                                                             60
     Y
         90                   60                                                             60
                                                   60                   60
                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                             50
         80                   50                   50                   50
                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                             40
                              40                   40                   40
         70                                                                                                       30
                                                                                             30
                                                   30                   30
         60                   30                                                             20                   20
                                                   20                   20
              2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000         2005

                     MAL                  POL                  SVK                  SVN                  BUL                  ROM

                              70                   70                   80
         80                                                                                  50                   60
                              60                   60
                                                                        70                   40                   50
         70                                        50
                              50
                                                                                                                  40




57
         60                                        40                   60                   30
                              40                                                                                  30
         50                   30                   30                                        20
                                                                        50                                        20
         40                                        20                                        10                   10
                              20
              2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000         2005

                     TUR
                                                                                                                                                             Southern and Eastern Europe




         80


         60


         40


         20

              2000     2005
                                                                                                                                           Figure 13 continued: Relative GDP per capita and average PLI’s in
                                Figure 14: Real exchange rate and GDP: pooled

                         1




                        0.5




                         0
deviation of log RER




                       −0.5




                        −1




                       −1.5




                        −2




                       −2.5
                         −2.5     −2      −1.5        −1             −0.5        0   0.5   1
                                                 deviation of log relative GDP




                                                         58
                     BE                    DEN                    GER                   GRE                   SPA                   FRA
                                                                                                                                                 rope
     NER
     RER
           1.2                    1.2                    1.2                   1.2                   1.2                   1.2



            1                      1                      1                     1                     1                     1



           0.8                    0.8                    0.8                   0.8                   0.8                   0.8
            1995   2000    2005    1995   2000    2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005

                    IRE                     ITA                   LUX                   NET                   AUS                   POR
           1.4                    1.4                    1.4                   1.4                   1.4                   1.4



           1.2                    1.2                    1.2                   1.2                   1.2                   1.2




59
            1                      1                      1                     1                     1                     1



           0.8                    0.8                    0.8                   0.8                   0.8                   0.8
            1995   2000    2005    1995   2000    2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005

                     FIN                   SWE                     UK                   ICE                   NOR                   SWI




           1.2                    1.2                    1.2                   1.2                   1.2                   1.2



            1                      1                      1                     1                     1                     1



           0.8                    0.8                    0.8                   0.8                   0.8                   0.8
            1995   2000    2005    1995   2000    2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005    1995   2000   2005
                                                                                                                                                 Figure 15: Real Exchange Rate and Nominal Exchange Rate: Western Eu-
                        CYP                         CZE                         EST                         HUN                         LAT
     NER   1.4                         1.4                         1.4                         1.4                         1.4
     RER   1.2                         1.2                         1.2                         1.2                         1.2
            1                           1                           1                           1                           1
           0.8                         0.8                         0.8                         0.8                         0.8
           0.6                         0.6                         0.6                         0.6                         0.6
           0.4                         0.4                         0.4                         0.4                         0.4
           0.2                         0.2                         0.2                         0.2                         0.2
                 2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006

                         LIT                        MAL                         POL                         SVK                         SVN
           1.4                         1.4                         1.4                         1.4                         1.4
           1.2                         1.2                         1.2                         1.2                         1.2
            1                           1                           1                           1                           1




60
           0.8                         0.8                         0.8                         0.8                         0.8
           0.6                         0.6                         0.6                         0.6                         0.6
           0.4                         0.4                         0.4                         0.4                         0.4
           0.2                         0.2                         0.2                         0.2                         0.2
                 2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006

                        BUL                         ROM                         TUR
                                                                                                                                                                           Southern and Eastern Europe




           1.4                         1.4                         1.4
           1.2                         1.2                         1.2
            1                           1                           1
           0.8                         0.8                         0.8
           0.6                         0.6                         0.6
           0.4                         0.4                         0.4
           0.2                         0.2                         0.2
                 2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006         2000 2002 2004 2006
                                                                                                                                                       Figure 15 continued: Real Exchange Rate and Nominal Exchange Rate:
                   Average monthly price for eurozone countries                              Price dispersion for eurozone countries

     BE                                                                                                                                STD
          115
     DE                                                                      11.5                                                      MAD
     GR 110
     ES                                                                       11
          105
     FR
     IRE 100                                                                 10.5
     IT    95
     LU                                                                       10
     NL    90
     AT    85                                                                 9.5
     PT
           80
     FI                                                                        9
           75
                   1998     2000     2002     2004     2006       2008                    1998     2000      2002     2004     2006      2008




61
          Average monthly price for countries with floating exchange rates          Price dispersion for countries with floating exchange rates

     DK                                                                                                                                STD
     SE 160                                                                   35                                                       MAD
     NO
          150
     IS                                                                       30
     UK 140

                                                                              25
          130

          120                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                  Figure 16: Average monthly prices relative to EU15 mean




          110
                                                                              15
          100

                   1998     2000     2002     2004     2006       2008                    1998     2000      2002     2004     2006      2008
Figure 17: Monthly price dispersion between eurozone countries without
Ireland

                    Price dispersion for eurozone countries without Ireland

                                                                                 STD
                                                                                 MAD

  11.5




   11




  10.5




   10




   9.5




    9




             1998        2000             2002            2004            2006   2008




                                           62
                 Average monthly price for east European countries         Price dispersion for east European countries
     CY    100
                                                                                                                     STD
     MT
                                                                      35                                             MAD
     EST
     LV     95

     LT
     PL
            90
     SK
     TR                                                               30

            85



            80

                                                                      25

            75




63
            70

                                                                      20

            65



            60

                                                                      15

            55
                                                                                                                                 Figure 18: Average monthly prices relative to EU15 mean




            50

                   1998     2000     2002     2004     2006    2008        1998    2000     2002     2004     2006        2008
               Relative GDP and the RER in the model                        Elasticity of RER to relative GDP
     1.4                                                       0.35




     1.3
                                                               0.34




     1.2
                                                               0.33



     1.1

                                                               0.32


      1




64
                                                               0.31

     0.9



                                                                0.3
     0.8




                                                               0.29
     0.7
                                                                                                                            Figure 19: Model elasticity of RER to RGDP




                                                   RGDP
                                                   RER

           0   2     4       6      8      10     12      14          0.7   0.8    0.9      1   1.1      1.2    1.3   1.4
                                                                                     relative GDP
                           BE                      GER                     GRE                     SPA

                                                                 90                      90
     Y          110
                                        120
     RER                                                         80                      85
         data   105
                                        110                                              80
     RERmodel
                100                                              70                      75
                                        100                                              70
                 95                                              60
                                                                                         65
                                         90
                 90                                              50                      60
                 1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005

                           FRA                     IRE                     ITA                     LUX
                                                                105
                                        130                                             220
                110                                             100
                                        120                                             200
                105                                              95
                                        110                                             180




65
                100                                              90                     160
                                        100
                 95                                              85                     140
                                         90
                                                                 80                     120
                 90                      80
                                                                 75                     100
                                         70
                 1995    2000    2005     1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005

                           NET                     AUS                     POR                     FIN
                                                                 90
                110                     120
                                                                 80                     120
                                        115
                105
                                        110                      70
                100                                                                     110
                                        105
                                                                 60
                 95                     100
                                                                                        100
                                                                                                                Figure 20: Model prediction and Average PLI’s in EU12




                                                                 50
                                         95
                 90
                  1995   2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005
Figure 21: Model prediction and Average PLI’s in countries with ﬂoating
exchange rates

                     DEN                                       SWE
                                             130
  140

  130                                        120

  120                                        110
  110
                                             100
        1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006              1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006

                     UK                                         ICE
  120
  110                                        140
  100
                                             120
   90
   80                                        100
        1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006              1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006

                    NOR                                         SWI
  180                                        180                        Y
                                                                        RERdata
  160                                        160
                                                                        RERmodel
  140                                        140

  120                                        120

        1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006              1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006




                                        66
                 CYP
                          70
                                      CZE                    EST                  HUN                  LAT                  LIT
                                                                                                                                         Europe
                                                                      70                   70
                                                 70                                                             60
     90                   60                                                               60
                                                 60                   60
                                                                                                                50
                                                                                           50
     80                   50                     50                   50
                                                                                                                40
                                                                                           40
                          40                     40                   40
     70                                                                                                         30
                                                                                           30
                                                 30                   30
     60                   30                                                               20                   20
                                                 20                   20
          2000     2005        2000       2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000         2005

                 MAL                  POL                    SVK                  SVN                  BUL                  ROM

                          70                     70                   80
     80                                                                                    50                   60
                          60                     60
                                                                      70                                        50
     70                                                                                    40
                          50                     50
                                                                                                                40




67
     60                                          40                   60                   30
                          40                                                                                    30
     50                   30                     30                                        20
                                                                      50                                        20
     40                                          20                                        10                   10
                          20
          2000     2005        2000       2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000         2005


                 TUR
     80
                                      Y
                                      RERdata
     60
                                      RERmodel

     40


     20

          2000     2005
                                                                                                                                         Figure 22: Model prediction and Average PLI’s in Southern and Eastern
                BE                      GER                      GRE                     SPA
      1.1                     1.2
                                                     0.84
                                                                              0.98
                             1.15                    0.82
                                                                              0.96
     1.05
                                                      0.8
                                                                              0.94
                              1.1                    0.78
       1                                                                      0.92
                                                     0.76
                             1.05                                              0.9
                                                     0.74
     0.95                                                                     0.88
                               1                     0.72
       1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005     1995    2000    2005     1995   2000     2005

                FRA                     IRE                      ITA                     LUX
     1.15

                             1.05                      1                      1.15
      1.1




68
                               1                     0.95                      1.1
     1.05
                             0.95
                                                      0.9                     1.05
       1
                              0.9
       1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005     1995    2000    2005     1995   2000     2005

                NET                     AUS                      POR                     FIN
     1.15
                                                      0.9                     1.15             PNT/PT
      1.1                    1.15

                                                     0.85                      1.1
     1.05                     1.1

       1                     1.05                     0.8                     1.05

     0.95
                               1                                                1
                                                     0.75
                                                                                                        Figure 23: Price of Non-traded to Traded good PLI’s in EU12




       1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005      1995   2000    2005     1995   2000     2005
                DEN                      SWE                      UK

     1.15                                              1.2
                              1.16

                              1.14
      1.1                                             1.15
                                                                                ing exchange rates


                              1.12

                               1.1
                                                       1.1
     1.05                     1.08

                              1.06
                                                      1.05
       1                      1.04

                              1.02                      1
       1995   2000     2005     1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005




69
                 ICE                     NOR                     SWI

     1.05                                                              PNT/PT
                                                       1.3
                              1.15
       1
                                                      1.25
                               1.1
     0.95


      0.9                     1.05                     1.2


     0.85                       1                     1.15

      0.8
                              0.95
                                                       1.1
       1995   2000     2005     1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005
                                                                                Figure 24: Price of Non-traded to Traded good PLI’s in countries with ﬂoat-
                   CYP                        CZE                        EST                        HUN
                                                                                                                  0.66
                                                                                                                                LAT
                                                                                                                                             Europe
                                                            0.7                       0.65
      0.8                                                                                                         0.64
                                0.56
     0.78                                                                                                         0.62
                                0.54                       0.65                        0.6
     0.76                                                                                                          0.6
                                0.52
                                                            0.6                       0.55                        0.58
     0.74
                                 0.5
                                                                                                                  0.56
     0.72
            2000         2005          2000         2005          2000         2005          2000          2005          2000         2005

                   LIT                        MAL                        POL                         SVK                        SVN
                                                           0.74                        0.6                         0.8
     0.65                       0.76
                                0.74                       0.72

                                0.72                        0.7                       0.55
                                                                                                                  0.75
      0.6




70
                                 0.7                       0.68
                                0.68                       0.66                        0.5
     0.55                                                                                                          0.7
                                0.66                       0.64
                                0.64                       0.62                       0.45
            2000         2005          2000         2005          2000         2005          2000          2005          2000         2005

                   BUL                        ROM                        TUR
     0.52                       0.55                       0.62                                     PNT/PT

      0.5                                                   0.6

     0.48                        0.5                       0.58

     0.46                                                  0.56
                                                           0.54
     0.44                       0.45
                                                           0.52
     0.42
            2000         2005          2000         2005          2000         2005
                                                                                                                                             Figure 25: Price of Non-traded to Traded good PLI’s in Southern and Eastern
                            BE                      GER                     GRE                     SPA
     Y                                                            90
                 110                                                                      90
     RER                                 120
         data                                                                             85
                                                                  80
     RER         105
         model                           110                                              80
                 100                                              70                      75
                                         100                                              70
                  95                                              60
                                                                                          65
                                          90
                  90                                              50                      60
                  1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005

                            FRA                     IRE                     ITA                     LUX
                                                                 105
                                         130                                             220
                 110                                             100
                                         120                                             200
                 105                                              95
                                         110                                             180




71
                 100                                              90                     160
                                         100
                  95                                              85                     140
                                          90
                                                                  80                     120
                  90                      80
                                                                  75                     100
                                          70
                  1995    2000    2005     1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005     1995   2000    2005

                            NET                     AUS                     POR                     FIN
                                                                  90
                 110                     120
                                                                  80                     120
                                         115
                 105
                                         110                      70
                 100                                                                     110
                                         105
                                                                  60
                  95                     100
                                                                                         100
                                                                  50
                                          95
                  90
                   1995   2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005    1995    2000    2005
                                                                                                                 Figure 26: Prediction of model with taxation, and average PLI’s in EU12
Figure 27: Prediction of model with taxation, and average PLI’s in countries
with ﬂoating exchange rates

                     DEN                                       SWE
                                             130
  140
                                             120
  130
                                             110
  120

        1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006              1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006

                     UK                                         ICE
  120
  110                                        140
  100
   90                                        120

   80
                                             100
        1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006              1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006

                    NOR                                         SWI
  180                                        180
                                                                        Y
                                             160                        RERdata
  160                                        140                        RERmodel
                                             120
  140
                                             100

        1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006              1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006




                                        72
                 CYP                  CZE                    EST                  HUN                  LAT                  LIT
                          70
                                                                      70                   70
                                                 70                                                             60
     90                   60                                                               60
                                                 60                   60
                                                                                                                50
                                                                                           50
     80                   50                     50                   50
                                                                                                                40
                                                                                           40
                          40                     40                   40
                                                                                                                                         and Eastern Europe



     70                                                                                                         30
                                                                                           30
                                                 30                   30
     60                   30                                                               20                   20
                                                 20                   20
          2000     2005        2000       2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000         2005

                 MAL                  POL                    SVK                  SVN                  BUL                  ROM

                          70                     70                   80
     80                                                                                    50                   60
                          60                     60
                                                                      70                                        50
     70                                                                                    40
                          50                     50
                                                                                                                40




73
     60                                          40                   60                   30
                          40                                                                                    30
     50                   30                     30                                        20
                                                                      50                                        20
     40                                          20                                        10                   10
                          20
          2000     2005        2000       2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000     2005        2000         2005


                 TUR
     80                               Y
                                      RERdata
     60                               RERmodel


     40


     20

          2000     2005
                                                                                                                                         Figure 28: Prediction of model with taxation, and average PLI’s in Southern
