                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE SUPPLY SIDE OF INNOVATION:
                    H-1B VISA REFORMS AND US ETHNIC INVENTION

                                          William R. Kerr
                                         William F. Lincoln

                                        Working Paper 15768
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15768


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2010




Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu and wlincoln@umich.edu. We thank
Sarah Rahman for excellent research assistance. We thank seminar participants at AEA, ERSA, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, Harvard, ISIM, Michigan, MIT Sloan, NBER Innovation Policy and the
Economy, NBER Labor Studies, NBER Productivity, and SOLE for helpful suggestions; we especially
thank Lindsay Lowell and Debbie Strumsky for data assistance and Dan Aaronson, Ajay Agrawal,
David Autor, Gadi Barlevy, Lisa Barrow, Charlie Brown, Jeff Campbell, Brendan Epstein, Richard
Freeman, Jeff Furman, Luojia Hu, Jennifer Hunt, Larry Katz, Sari Kerr, Miles Kimball, Jacob Kirkegaard,
Josh Lerner, Jim Levinsohn, Norm Matloff, Guy Michaels, Matt Mitchell, Ramana Nanda, Derek Neal,
Paul Oyer, Jeff Smith, Dan Sullivan, and anonymous referees for their insights. This paper is a revised
and shortened version of HBS Working Paper 09-005, and a subsequent version will be published
in the Journal of Labor Economics. This research is supported by the Innovation Policy and the Economy
group, Kauffman Foundation, Harvard Business School, the University of Michigan, the National
Science Foundation, and the MIT George Shultz Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by William R. Kerr and William F. Lincoln. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and US Ethnic Invention
William R. Kerr and William F. Lincoln
NBER Working Paper No. 15768
February 2010
JEL No. F15,F22,J44,J61,O31

                                             ABSTRACT

This study evaluates the impact of high-skilled immigrants on US technology formation. We use reduced-form
specifications that exploit large changes in the H-1B visa program. Higher H-1B admissions increase
immigrant science and engineering (SE) employment and patenting by inventors with Indian and Chinese
names in cities and firms dependent upon the program relative to their peers. Most specifications find
limited effects for native SE employment or patenting. We are able to rule out displacement effects,
and small crowding-in effects may exist. Total SE employment and invention increases with higher
admissions primarily through direct contributions of immigrants.


William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

William F. Lincoln
8QLYHUVLW\RI0LFKLJDQ
Economics Department
107 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
wlincoln@umich.edu
1    Introduction

The H-1B visa program governs most admissions of temporary immigrants into the US for
employment in science and engineering (SE). This program has become a point of signi…cant
controversy in the public debate over immigration, with proponents and detractors at odds over
how important H-1B admission levels are for US technology advancement and whether native
US workers are being displaced by immigrants. This study quanti…es the impact of changes
in H-1B admission levels on the pace and character of US invention over the 1995-2008 period.
We hope that this assessment aids policy makers in their current decisions about appropriate
admission rates in the future.

    The link between immigration policy and innovation may appear tenuous at …rst, but im-
migrant scientists and engineers are central to US technology formation and commercialization.
Immigrants represented 24% and 47% of the US SE workforce with bachelor’s and doctorate
educations in the 2000 Census, respectively. This contribution was signi…cantly higher than
the 12% share of immigrants in the US working population. The growth of this importance in
recent years is even more striking. From the Current Population Survey (CPS), we estimate
that immigrant scientists and engineers accounted for more than half of the net increase in the
US SE labor force since 1995.

    Greater in‡ows and employment shares of educated immigrants do not necessarily increase
the pace of US innovation, however. Aggregate innovation could be una¤ected, for example, if
immigrants displace natives. To disentangle these issues, it is possible to exploit variation across
dimensions like geography and industry. Establishing this variation is quite challenging with
standard data sources, however, and partial correlations may not identify causal relationships in
this context due to the endogeneity of immigrant location decisions.

    To bring identi…cation to this question, we exploit large changes in the H-1B worker popula-
tion over the 1995-2008 period. The national cap on new H-1B admissions ‡uctuated substan-
tially over these years, ranging from a low of 65,000 new workers a year to a high of 195,000.
SE and computer-related occupations account for approximately 60% of H-1B admissions, and
changes in the H-1B population account for a signi…cant share of the growth in US immigrant
SE employment. In a reduced-form framework closely related to Card (2001), our empirical
approach considers di¤erences across US …rms, cities, and states due to ‡uctuations in the H-1B
population.

    We …rst analyze CPS employment records for 1995-2008 using state-level variation. Growth
in the H-1B program was associated with increased employment growth for immigrant scientists
and engineers, especially among non-citizen immigrants. A 10% growth in the national H-1B


                                                 1
population corresponded with a 2%-4% higher growth in immigrant SE employment for each
standard deviation increase in state dependency. We do not …nd any substantive e¤ect on native
scientists and engineers across a range of labor market outcomes like employment levels, mean
wages, and unemployment rates. We are able to rule out crowding-out e¤ects, and our results
suggest potentially small crowding-in e¤ects. The total SE workforce in the state increased
mainly through the direct contributions of immigrants. A 10% growth in the national H-1B
population corresponded with about a 0.5% higher growth in total SE employment for each
standard deviation increase in state dependency.

    While the CPS data a¤ord direct observation of employment, wages, and immigration status,
the data also have substantive limitations. To make additional progress and to more closely
study the link between the H-1B program and US innovation, we devote the rest of the paper to
characterizing di¤erences in patenting behavior across cities and …rms. We assemble micro-data
on all US patent grants and applications through May of 2009. These base patent records o¤er
complete patenting histories annually for cities and …rms. Moreover, while immigration status is
not directly observed, we can identify the probable ethnicities of inventors through their names.
For example, inventors with the last names Gupta or Desai are more likely to be Indian than
they are to be Anglo-Saxon or Vietnamese. This micro-level detail also allows us to analyze
situations where no other data exist (e.g., how the H-1B program impacts the annual patenting
contributions of Indian ethnicity inventors within Intel versus Proctor & Gamble).

   We …nd that increases in H-1B admissions substantially increased rates of Indian and Chi-
nese invention in dependent cities relative to their peers. A 10% growth in the H-1B population
corresponded with a 1%-4% higher growth in Indian and Chinese invention for each standard
deviation increase in city dependency. We again …nd very little impact for native inventors as
proxied by inventors with Anglo-Saxon names (who account for approximately 70% of all do-
mestic patents). The evidence does not support crowding-out theories, and there is suggestive
support for small crowding-in e¤ects. Overall, a 10% growth in the H-1B population corre-
sponded with a 0.3%-0.7% increase in total invention for each standard deviation growth in city
dependency.

    These city-level …ndings are robust to including a variety of regression controls like expected
technology trends, labor market conditions, and region-year …xed e¤ects. We also examine
e¤ects throughout the city dependency distribution and drop very dependent cities, …rms, and
sectors (e.g., computer-related patents). These tests help to con…rm that our results are not
due to endogenous changes in national H-1B admissions following lobbying from very dependent
groups. Finally, we show that our results for US cities are not re‡ected in a placebo experi-
ment involving shifts in ethnic invention among Canadian cities. Section 4 also discusses some
limitations of our analysis, especially around the lag structure of treatment e¤ects.


                                                2
    Our …rm-level analysis creates a panel of 77 publicly listed …rms that account for about a
quarter of US patents. Within this group, we again …nd that invention rates of more H-1B
dependent …rms are particularly sensitive to the size of the program. A 10% growth in the
H-1B population corresponded with a 4%-5% higher growth in Indian and Chinese invention for
each standard deviation increase in …rm dependency. These elasticities are particularly strong
for computer-oriented …rms (e.g., Microsoft, Oracle) relative to …rms in other sectors.

    Our project most directly relates to recent empirical studies on the relationship between
immigration and US innovation. Peri (2007) and Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2008) explore
long-run relationships between immigration and patenting rates using state-decade variation.
The latter study in particular …nds substantial crowding-in e¤ects for native scientists and
engineers. Chellaraj et al. (2008) also …nd strong crowding-in e¤ects when using time-series
variation. In contrast, Borjas (2005, 2006) …nds that natives are crowded-out from graduate
school enrollments by foreign students, especially in the most elite institutions, and su¤er lower
wages after graduation due to increased labor supply. This disagreement in the academic
literature is re‡ected in the public debate over high-skilled immigration and the H-1B visa in
particular.

    Our paper contributes to this research through its measurement of ethnic patenting and the
use of H-1B policy changes for the identi…cation of immigrant SE in‡ows. Our limited e¤ects for
natives fall in between the results of prior academic work and the e¤ects suggested in the public
debate. This may re‡ect the high-frequency variation that we exploit and institutional features
of the H-1B program that we discuss below. We also contribute to the literature through the
…rst description of ethnic invention within …rms and the …rst characterization of the …rm-level
link between immigration and innovation. Understanding these mechanisms is important as
immigration policies in‡uence …rms, universities, and other institutions di¤erently.1

    In a broader context, we view this paper as a building block for describing the supply side
of innovation. The demand side of the economy governs the pace of innovation in most models
of endogenous growth; larger markets encourage greater entrepreneurial innovation due to pro…t
incentives. In these basic frameworks, labor adjusts freely across research and production
sectors, and high-skilled labor in‡ows do not increase innovation except trivially through larger
economy size. There are, however, at least two deeper channels through which immigration
can in‡uence innovation. First, there are often signi…cant adjustment costs when workers move
across occupations and sectors, particularly when moving into research-oriented occupations.
   1
     Related papers describing the contributions of immigrants to US science and engineering include Stephan
and Levin (2001), Saxenian (2002), Matlo¤ (2003, 2004), Miano (2005, 2008), NFAP (2008), Lowell and Christian
(2000), Wadhwa et al. (2007), Kerr (2008), and Hunt (2009). Freeman (2006) surveys global labor ‡ows and
discusses their deep scienti…c impacts. General surveys of immigration include Borjas (1994), Friedberg and
Hunt (1995), and Kerr and Kerr (2008). Foley and Kerr (2008) examine the …rm-level link between immigration
and FDI.


                                                     3
These slower adjustments open up the possibility for supply shocks to US innovation through
shifts in immigration policy. Second, the sharing of ideas across countries can lead directly
to higher levels of innovation. We believe that these e¤ects can be large with high-skilled
immigration, especially when the knowledge needed to create new ideas is tacit. We hope that
future research studies these mechanisms in greater detail.2


2     US Ethnic Invention

We quantify ethnic technology development in the US through the individual records of all
patents granted by the United States Patent and Trademark O¢ ce (USPTO) from January 1975
to May 2009. Each patent record provides information about the invention (e.g., technology
classi…cation, …rm or institution) and the inventors submitting the application (e.g., name, city).
Hall et al. (2001) provide extensive details about these data, and Griliches (1990) surveys the
use of patents as economic indicators of technology advancement. The data are extensive, with
over eight million inventors and four million granted patents during this period.

    While immigration status is not collected, one can determine the probable ethnicities of in-
ventors through their names. USPTO patents must list at least one inventor, and multiple
inventors are often listed. Our approach exploits the idea that inventors with the surnames
Chang or Wang are likely of Chinese ethnicity, those with surnames Rodriguez or Martinez of
Hispanic ethnicity, etc. Two commercial ethnic name databases originally used for market-
ing purposes are utilized, and the name-matching algorithms have been extensively customized
for the USPTO data. The match rate is 99%. Kerr (2007) provides further details on the
matching process, lists frequent ethnic names, and provides multiple descriptive statistics and
quality assurance exercises. As our regressions employ ethnic patenting for dependent vari-
ables, remaining measurement error in inventor ethnicities will not substantively in‡uence the
consistency of our estimates.3

    Figure 1 illustrates the evolving ethnic contribution to US technology development as a
percentage of patents granted by the USPTO. These descriptive statistics and the regression
analyses below only use patents …led by inventors residing in the US (with the exception of the
Canadian regressions). When multiple inventors exist on a patent, we make individual ethnicity
assignments for each inventor and then discount multiple inventors such that each patent receives
the same weight. We group patents by the years in which they applied to the USPTO. For
   2
     For related research on these issues, see Acemoglu and Linn (2004), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995), Freeman
(1971), Siow (1984), Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991), Ryoo and Rosen (2004), and Furman et al. (2002).
   3
     One of our quality assurance exercises regards the estimated ethnic composition of foreign patents registered
with the USPTO. The resulting compositions are quite reasonable. About 90% of inventors …ling from India
and China are classi…ed as ethnically Indian and Chinese, respectively. This is in line with what we would
expect, as native shares should be less than 100% due to the role that foreign inventors play in these countries.

                                                        4
presentation purposes, Figure 1 does not include the Anglo-Saxon and European ethnic shares.
They jointly decline from 90% of total US domestic patents in 1975 to 76% in 2004. This
declining share is primarily due to the exceptional growth over the 30 years of the Chinese and
Indian ethnicities, which increase from under 2% to 9% and 6%, respectively.

    We de…ne cities through 281 Metropolitan Statistical Areas. In descriptive analyses, we …nd
that ethnic inventors are generally concentrated in gateway cities closer to their home countries
(e.g., Chinese in San Francisco, Hispanics in Miami). Not surprisingly, total patenting shares
are highly correlated with city size, and the three largest shares of US domestic patenting for
1995-2004 are San Francisco (12%), New York City (7%), and Los Angeles (6%). Ethnic
patenting is generally more concentrated, with shares for San Francisco, New York City, and
Los Angeles being 22%, 10%, and 9%, respectively. Indian and Chinese invention are even
further agglomerated. San Francisco shows exceptional growth from an 8% share of total US
Indian and Chinese patenting in 1975-1984 to 26% in 1995-2004, while New York City’s share
declines from 17% to 10%.4

    Figures 2 and 3 provide a more detailed view of Indian and Chinese contributions for di¤erent
technology sectors. These two ethnicities are more concentrated in high-tech sectors than in
traditional …elds, and their growth as a share of US innovation in the 1990s is remarkable. A
large portion of this growth is due to the rapid economic development of these countries and their
greater SE integration with the US. Similarly, sustained US economic growth made America
attractive as a host country. The US Immigration Act of 1990 also facilitated greater permanent
immigration of SE workers from large countries like India and China (e.g., Kerr 2008).

    Figure 2 exhibits an interesting downturn in the Indian share of computer-related invention
after 2000, which includes software patents. This shift from strong growth in the 1990s is striking
and may re‡ect more restrictive US immigration policies. Many factors likely contributed to
this shift, however, such as the high-tech recession and the increasing attractiveness of foreign
opportunities like Bangalore. Accordingly, our estimations control for these aggregate trends.

    As a …nal descriptive feature, it is important to assess whether major di¤erences exist across
ethnicities in the quality of innovations. The most tractable approach for our sample is to
examine the number of claims made by patents …led by di¤erent ethnicities. Each patent
includes a series of claims that delineate the property rights of the technology. These claims
de…ne the novel features of each invention from prior inventions and become a crucial factor in
future patent infringement litigations. USPTO examiners review and modify the claims argued
for by inventors in their applications, and several studies link the granted number of claims on a
patent with its economic value. The average claims on Indian (19.7) and Chinese (18.9) patents
  4
      Agrawal et al. (2008) and Kerr (2009) further describe ethnic inventor agglomeration.


                                                        5
are slightly above the sample average of 18.8. This comparability holds in simple regressions
that control for technology category by year …xed e¤ects.5

    While the ethnic patenting data provide a tractable platform for examining immigration and
innovation, several limitations exist. First, our approach does not distinguish between foreign-
born inventors working in the US and later generations. Our panel econometrics, however,
identify o¤ of relative changes in ethnic inventor populations. For Indian and Chinese inventors,
these changes are mainly due to new immigration or school-to-work transitions that require a
visa, weakening this overall concern. Similarly, we study native outcomes through inventors with
Anglo-Saxon names. In addition to capturing e¤ects on US natives, inventors with Anglo-Saxon
names also re‡ect some immigration from the UK, Canada, etc. Relative magnitudes suggest
that this second factor is very small, however. Canada and the UK account for about 10,000
new H-1B workers annually over the 2000-2005 period, a small number compared to a native SE
workforce of more than 2.5 million. Our CPS analysis further addresses these concerns.6


3     H-1B Visa Program

The H-1B visa is a temporary immigration category that allows US employers to seek short-
term help from skilled foreigners in "specialty occupations." These occupations are de…ned as
those requiring theoretical and practical application of specialized knowledge like engineering or
accounting; virtually all successful H-1B applicants have a bachelor’s education or higher. The
visa is used especially for SE and computer-related occupations, which account for roughly 60%
of successful applications. Approximately 40% and 10% of H-1B recipients over 2000-2005 came
from India and China, respectively. Shares for other countries are less than 5%.7

    The sponsoring …rm …les the H-1B application and must specify an individual candidate.
   5
     Hunt (2009) …nds that immigrants entering on temporary work visas or student/trainee visas typically out-
perform natives in patenting and related activities. This greater performance is mostly explained by immigrants’
higher education and selected …elds of study. Thus, the disproportionate contributions of immigrant scientists
and engineers come primarily through greater involvement and training for SE …elds.
   6
     The base data contain information on all patents granted from January 1975 to May 2009. Application
years of patents, however, provide the best description of when innovative research is being undertaken due
to substantial and uneven lags in USPTO reviews. Inventors also have strong incentives to …le for patent
protection as soon as their research project is su¢ ciently advanced. Accordingly, our annual descriptions are
measured through patent application years. This standard approach leads to sample attrition after 2004 as many
applications have not yet been processed for approval when our data were collected. To compensate for this,
we also employ a data set of over one million published patent applications, which the USPTO began releasing
in 2000. Our preferred data set combines the patent grants and applications data, removing applications that
have been granted. This union yields more consistent sample sizes in later years. We also consider estimations
that only use grants data in robustness checks and come to similar conclusions.
   7
     Broad statistics on the H-1B program are taken from reports submitted annually to Congress: "Charac-
teristics of Specialty Occupation Workers (H-1B)." Data on source countries compositions are only publicly
available for the period 2000-2005. Lowell and Christian (2000), Lowell (2000), Matlo¤ (2003), and Kirkegaard
(2005) provide additional details on the H-1B program. Facchini et al. (2008) and Hunt (2009) overview other
temporary immigration categories.


                                                       6
The employer-employee match must therefore be made in advance.8 Workers are tied to their
sponsoring …rm, although some recent changes have increased visa portability. Firms can
petition for permanent residency (i.e., a green card) on behalf of the worker. If permanent
residency is not obtained, the H-1B worker must leave the US at the end of the visa period for
one year before applying again. Firms are also required to pay the visa holder the higher of
(1) the prevailing wage in the …rm for the position or (2) the prevailing wage for the occupation
in the area of employment. These restrictions were designed to prevent H-1B employers from
abusing their relationships with foreign workers and to protect domestic workers.9

    Since the Immigration Act of 1990, there has been an annual cap on the number of H-1B
visas that can be issued. The cap governs new H-1B visa issuances only; renewals for the second
three-year term are exempt, and the maximum length of stay on an H-1B visa is thus six years.
While most aspects of the H-1B program have remained constant since its inception, the cap has
‡uctuated signi…cantly. The largest amount of controversy about the H-1B program focuses on
this cap. Indeed, a search of Lexis-Nexis …nds more than three thousand news articles about the
visa from 1995-2006. Executives of high-tech …rms often argue that higher H-1B admissions are
necessary to keep US businesses competitive, to spur innovation and growth, and to keep …rms
from shifting their operations abroad. Detractors, on the other hand, argue that the program
displaces American workers, lowers wages, and discourages on-the-job training.

   Figure 4 uses …scal year data from the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
(USCIS) to plot the evolution of the numerical cap.10 The 65,000 cap was not binding in
the early 1990s but became so by the middle of the decade. Legislation in 1998 and 2000
sharply increased the cap over the next …ve years to 195,000 visas. The language contained in
the 1998 legislation argued that "American companies today are engaged in …erce competition
in global markets" and "are faced with severe high-skill labor shortages that threaten their
competitiveness." These short-term increases were allowed to expire during the US’high-tech
downturn, when visa demand fell short of the cap. The cap returned to the 65,000 level in 2004
and became binding again, despite being subsequently raised by 20,000 through an "advanced
degree" exemption.11
    8
      Di¤erent employers can simultaneously seek visas for the same prospective employee, although …rms generally
make applications only on behalf of committed workers due to the time and legal fees involved. The application
fee for a …rm with 26 or more full-time employees was $2,320 in 2008.
    9
      Studies of the impact of H-1Bs on wages are mixed and include Lowell (2001), Zavodny (2003), Matlo¤ (2003,
2004), Kirkegaard (2005), Miano (2005), Tambe and Hitt (2009), Mithas and Lucas (2009), and Hunt (2009).
   10
      The USCIS is the successor to the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS).
   11
      The two legislations are the American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act of 1998 and the
American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000. See Reksulak et al. (2006) and Public
Law 105-777, Division C, American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Law, Section 416(c)(2).
   Unlike permanent immigration, immediate family members of the H-1B worker do not count towards the visa
cap. These family members are, however, restricted from working unless they otherwise obtain an appropriate
work visa. Free trade agreements require that 1,400 and 5,400 of the visas be reserved for citizens of Chile
and Singapore, respectively. These special allotments are often under-utilized, however, and excess visas are
returned to the general pool. In recent years, additional extensions have been granted for H-1B holders who are
still waiting for permanent residency approval when their initial six years have expired.

                                                       7
    These adjustments to the H-1B cap are large enough to be economically important. Back-
of-the-envelope calculations using the CPS suggest that raising the H-1B cap by 65,000 visas
would increase the US SE labor force by about 1.2%, holding everything else constant. This
increase would be about half of the median annual growth rate of SE workers, calculated at 2.7%
during the period. Thus, while the H-1B program does not have the size to dramatically alter
aggregate levels of US invention in the short run, it does have the size to substantially in‡uence
the growth rate of US innovation, which is what our empirical speci…cations test. These e¤ects
on the growth of innovation can have very signi…cant impacts on economic growth and aggregate
welfare when compounded over time.

    The two closest temporary worker visas to the H-1B are the L-1 and TN visas. Neither of these
visa categories is a particularly good substitute for the H-1B. The L-1 is issued to multinationals
in order to bring in managers or employees with "specialized knowledge" that have worked for
the …rm abroad for at least one year. The TN visa was established under NAFTA and allows
citizens from Mexico and Canada to work in the US in certain high-skilled occupations. Both of
these programs are less than 10% of the size of the H-1B program for high-tech workers during
the 1995-2006 period and contain institutional features that limit …rms’ability to use them to
circumvent the H-1B quota. Neither visa category shows substantial increases after the H-1B
cap was dramatically reduced in 2004, and the Department of Homeland Security has argued
that limited substitution exists across the H-1B and L-1 visas.12

    Prior research on the H-1B program is mostly descriptive due to data limitations. Indeed,
data constraints signi…cantly shape our empirical approach discussed below. The most impor-
tant work for our study are estimates of the H-1B entry rates and population stocks, neither of
which is de…nitively known. Lowell (2000) builds a demographic model for this purpose that
factors in new admissions and depletions of the existing H-1B pool by transitions to permanent
residency, emigration, or death. While H-1B in‡ows are reasonably well measured, the latter
out‡ows require combining available statistics with modelling assumptions. In Lowell’s model,
emigration and adjustment to permanent residency are roughly comparable in magnitude, with
the time spent from entry to either event being estimated through typical H-1B experiences.

    Figure 4 shows Lowell’s updated estimates provided to us for this paper. The H-1B popula-
tion grew rapidly in the late 1990s before leveling o¤ after 2000. The lack of growth immediately
after 2000 can be traced to weak US employment opportunities for scientists and engineers dur-
ing the high-tech recession. When demand returned, however, the reduced supply of H-1B visas
restricted further growth. This constraint is obscured in Figure 4, where entry rates exceed
the cap. This decoupling of the numerical cap and H-1B entry rates is due to the American
Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000. This legislation made universities,
  12
     Our earlier working paper further discusses the L-1 and TN visas.   This paper is available at
http://www.people.hbs.edu/wkerr/.

                                                 8
government research labs, and certain nonpro…ts exempt from the cap and took e¤ect in …scal
year 2001. We consequently focus on patents from the private sector that remain subject to
the cap and that constitute the vast majority of patents. We also test whether using Lowell’s
population estimates or a measure based solely on the cap in‡uences our results.

    Firms in particular remain subject to the cap, and their growth in H-1B usage has been
constrained by recent lower admissions levels. USCIS begins accepting applications on April
1st for the following …scal year and announces when the cap is reached. It has been reached in
every …scal year since the cap was lowered in 2004, often on the …rst day of accepting applications.
A lottery has been used since 2006 among …rms that applied close to the cut-o¤ date. Whether
or not a shortage of SE workers exists is strongly debated (e.g., Lowell and Salzman 2007).
Unemployment rates for SE workers are typically quite low (e.g., Kannankutty 2008), but a
number of studies document stagnating SE wages compared to similarly skilled occupations
(e.g., Lemieux 2007).

    Beyond these broad statistics, data regarding the H-1B program are very limited. Our pri-
mary data source in this regard is the published micro-records on Labor Condition Applications
(LCAs). To obtain an H-1B visa, an employer must …rst …le an LCA with the US Department
of Labor (DOL). The primary purpose of the LCA is to demonstrate that the worker in question
will be employed in accordance with US law. The second step in the application process after
the LCA is approved is to …le a petition with the USCIS, which makes the ultimate determina-
tion about the visa application. The DOL releases micro-records on all applications it receives,
numbering 1.8 million for 2001-2006. These records include …rm names and proposed work
locations.13 We use these data to describe both city and …rm dependencies, although it should
be noted that LCA approvals do not translate one-for-one into H-1B grants.


4       Spatial Analyses of the H-1B Program

4.1       Empirical Framework

We seek to quantify the impact of changing H-1B admission levels on SE employment and
innovation. We are unlikely to successfully capture this relationship using aggregate trends
given the many contemporaneous changes to the US economy over the past two decades. We
thus need to exploit variation across more narrowly de…ned labor markets within the US. Such
variation allows us to control for national changes and thereby use relative di¤erences in localized
expansions or contractions to measure the H-1B program’s e¤ects.
 13
      Our earlier working paper describes in greater detail the preparation of all data employed in this study.



                                                         9
   We take cities to be the primary labor market for this analysis, a decision further discussed
below. De…ning H-1B as the stock of H-1B immigrants in city  in year , the impact of the
H-1B program could in principle be estimated with a panel speci…cation of the form

                                  =           +          + ~ ln(H-1B ) + ~                    (1)

where  and  are city and year …xed e¤ects. Year e¤ects would control for aggregate time
trends, and city e¤ects would account for permanent di¤erences across cities. The dependent
variables of interest would include log employment of di¤erent types of SE workers, log SE
wages, and log patents. The ~ coe¢ cient would measure how much growth in the local H-1B
population impacted the corresponding outcome variable of interest.

      There are several challenges, however, to speci…cation (1). Most immediately, population
estimates of H-1B do not exist due to data constraints. Second, even if these data existed,
the resulting model would likely return a biased estimate of the true ~ parameter. Local H-1B
populations are not randomly assigned, and their growth may be correlated with the error term
~ . The …rm-sponsored nature of the visa and its intended use for labor scarcity, moreover,
would make the direction of this endogeneity and resulting bias ambiguous.14

    Due to these issues, we implement a variant of the supply-push immigration framework of
Card (2001). We test whether shifts in national H-1B admissions are associated with stronger
or weaker SE employment and innovation in cities that are very dependent upon the program
relative to less dependent peers. De…ning H-1B as city ’s …xed dependency on the program
and H-1B as the national H-1B population, the modi…ed estimating framework is

                              =       +          +        [H-1B ln(H-1B )] +                   (2)

where main e¤ects for H-1B and ln(H-1B ) are absorbed into the panel …xed e¤ects.                      Thus,
framework (2) only exploits the residual variation in the interaction for identi…cation.

   This equation is a reduced-form estimate of the true relationship (1). The coe¢ cient mea-
sures the impact of national H-1B population growth on outcomes of interest in more dependent
versus less dependent cities. This approach properly identi…es treatment e¤ects if (1) national
H-1B admission decisions are made exogenously by the federal government, (2) the national
changes have heterogeneous impacts across cities due to di¤erences in …xed dependencies, and
(3) neither of the terms are correlated with omitted factors that also shape SE employment
and patenting outcomes. Failure of these conditions would again lead to biased estimates.
For example, national technology trends may be correlated with H-1B policy adjustments, and
  14
    For example, an upward bias for native employment outcomes may result from localized productivity or
technology shocks simultaneously increasing H-1B and native SE labor demand. On the other hand, a downward
bias may result from situations where …rms employ H-1B workers to overcome a declining ability to attract native
SE workers to the city (e.g., due to weakening amenities).

                                                                  10
the former can independently produce employment di¤erences across cities if technology com-
positions closely align with cities’ H-1B dependencies. Alternatively, the interaction will not
overcome the endogeneity problem if very dependent …rms and cities in‡uence the size of the pro-
gram established by the federal government through lobbying or similar activities (e.g., Reksulak
et al. 2006, Facchini et al. 2008). Our empirical analysis will thus test for these issues.

    We now describe more closely the two elements of the interaction. The interaction term
does not recover the true ~ coe¢ cient of interest, and we must carefully de…ne the variables to
provide scale and intuition for the results. First, H-1B is Lowell’s measure of the visa-holding
population. We lag the years shown in Figure 4 by one year to align USCIS …scal years with
calendar years. Before interacting, logarithms of H-1B are taken to remove scale dependency.
Second, we develop two estimates of H-1B , which are described shortly. We normalize each of
these dependency measures to have unit standard deviation before interacting.

    Our …rst measure of a city’s H-1B dependency is derived from the DOL microdata on LCAs.
This measure is constructed as the yearly average of the city’s LCAs in 2001-2002 normalized by
the city population. There are several advantages of this metric. First, it is very closely tied
to the H-1B program and can be measured for all cities. Second, the metric can be extended
to the …rm level, a disaggregation that we exploit in Section 5. Finally, LCAs measure latent
demand for H-1B visas; demand is measured independent of whether an H-1B visa is ultimately
realized or not. Moreover, measured demand is real in that non-trivial application and legal
costs exist, and …rms must list individual candidates on accompanying documents.

    These strengths of the LCA-based dependency make it our preferred metric, but it does have
important weaknesses. Our primary concern is that the dependency is measured at a mid-point
during the sample period, rather than in a pre-period. To the extent that cities endogenously
develop stronger attachment to the H-1B program, our measured dependency is not really …xed
cross-sectionally and will lead to upwardly biased treatment e¤ects. Second, the LCA data also
have some noise in actual H-1B visa placement. While the H-1B visa is granted for a speci…c
worker and a speci…c location, one of the most common abuses of the program is for …rms to
shift workers illegally to other locations. A 2008 USCIS investigation found violations of this
nature in 11% of sampled H-1B cases (compared to 6% of cases where the prevailing wage was
not being paid). This measurement error will tend to bias treatment e¤ects downward.15

    Given these weaknesses of the LCA metric, our second measure of H-1B is the 1990 count of
non-citizen immigrant scientists and engineers in the city with bachelor’s educations or above,
again normalized by city population. This metric is calculated from the 1990 Census of Popu-
lations and is much more conservative, being entirely measured before the 1990s growth in SE
  15
     Overall, the 2008 USCIS study found fraud or technical violations in 20% of sampled H-1B cases, with incident
rates especially high among small employers and business services …rms (e.g., accounting, human resources, sales).

                                                       11
immigration evident in Figures 1-3. This measure also has the nice advantage of allowing con-
trasts with Canadian cities that we exploit below. It is very closely related to the measures used
in Card (2001) and Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2008), albeit with a focus on local SE employ-
ment. Its primary disadvantage is that the non-citizen immigrant category includes permanent
residents and other temporary workers besides H-1B holders (e.g., exchange visitors, students).
Measurement error in the regressor of this form will bias elasticity estimates downward from
their true treatment e¤ects.

    Table 1 documents the most dependent cities and states. A number of big cities are depen-
dent upon the H-1B program, which is similar to other immigration clustering, but many smaller
cities are in‡uenced as well. San Francisco is the most dependent city in the LCA-based rank-
ing. In the Census-based ranking, Lafayette-West Lafayette, IN, and Bryan-College Station,
TX, are ranked higher than San Francisco. These cities are home to Purdue University and
Texas A&M University, respectively, and their surrounding SE industries. Other heavily depen-
dent cities include Raleigh-Durham, Boston, and Washington, although considerable variation
exists outside of the top rankings. The least dependent cities are Pascagoula, MS, and Rapid
City, SD, according to the LCA and Census metrics, respectively. The bottom 40% of cities
includes 16 cities with populations in 1994 greater than half a million. Prominent examples are
San Antonio, TX, Tampa-St. Petersburg, FL, Providence, RI, and Norfolk-VA Beach, VA. The
pairwise correlation of the two rankings is 0.5 across all cities.

    We now return to the de…nition of cities as the relevant market for these e¤ects. The
appropriate market de…nition should re‡ect the speeds of SE labor, product, and technology
‡ows. While the SE market is national in scope in the long-run, we believe that cities are an
appropriate choice for a short-run analysis given the location-speci…c nature of H-1B visas, local
labor mobility, and short-run rigidities in …rm location choices.16 We generally prefer cities to
states as economic units in this context, although data limitations require us to study the latter
when using the CPS. For example, a state-level dependency for North Carolina would mask
substantial di¤erences between Raleigh-Durham and Wilmington, among the most and least
H-1B dependent cities nationally. From an econometric perspective, city-level granularity also
allows for stronger regional trends and controls. We further exploit some sector-level variation
in robustness checks and our …rm-level analyses.17

   These decisions may in‡uence our measured treatment e¤ects. For many variables, we would
anticipate a positive coe¢ cient regardless of the variation exploited. For example, one would
  16
     Agglomeration studies typically identify cities and commuting regions as the relevant spatial unit for labor
market e¤ects on …rms, and technology spillovers are found to operate at even shorter distances. For example,
Rosenthal and Strange (2001), Ellison et al. (2009), and Glaeser and Kerr (2009).
  17
     Borjas (2003) argues analyzing immigration through education-experience cells under the assumption of an
otherwise national labor market. The H-1B program is almost entirely con…ned to workers with bachelor’s
education levels and above, limiting the e¤ectiveness of this technique.


                                                       12
anticipate that localized growth in H-1B populations would increase employment of temporary
immigrant scientists and engineers or patents by Indian and Chinese inventors whether looking
across cities, industries, or occupations. Of course, the magnitudes of these e¤ects are unknown
and important to assess.

    For e¤ects on natives, however, even the sign of the coe¢ cient is unclear as immigrants may
substitute or complement native workers. A negative coe¢ cient would suggest that natives are
crowded-out of SE employment or patenting by H-1B workers, either through direct replacement
within …rms or through worker choices (e.g., switching occupations due to lower salaries). On the
other hand, crowding-in e¤ects could exist. For example, employing immigrants with special
SE skills may lead …rms to devote more resources to R&D, thereby expanding employment
and innovative activity for natives. Moreover, agglomeration economies may exist at the city
level. If H-1B expansions lead to greater SE employment and innovation in an area, similar
…rms may bene…t from locating nearby or expanding employment in local facilities. These
agglomeration forces are particularly strong in innovative …elds and are one of the central ways
that the economics of high-skilled immigration may di¤er from low-skilled immigration.

    Finally, it is important to stress that our empirical analysis of the H-1B program emphasizes
short-term e¤ects. Several channels through which immigrant scientists and engineers may
impact the US economy operate over longer horizons than the panel considered (e.g., adjusting
college major choices for natives, immigrants starting entrepreneurial …rms). These e¤ects may
lead to long-run e¤ects that di¤er from our work.


4.2    CPS State-Level Employment Outcomes

Our …rst analysis considers employment outcomes in the CPS at the state level over the 1995-
2008 period. This analysis is a nice starting point as employment and wage patterns most
directly relate to the theoretical framework outlined above and are themselves a central policy
concern. Since 1994, the CPS has identi…ed whether respondents are non-citizen immigrants,
citizen immigrants, or US natives. This reporting of immigration status is also an important
complement to our patenting analysis where immigration status is inferred.

    The CPS, however, also brings substantial liabilities. Most importantly, the CPS is designed
as a representative sample for the US, not for small geographic areas like cities and states.
As a consequence, immigrant SE records are incomplete for a quarter of potential state-year
observations. Even for complete series, small sample sizes also result in substantial measurement
error. Second, the CPS redesign in 2003 creates a structural break in variable de…nitions between
2002 and 2003. As a consequence, we employ a …rst-di¤erenced version of speci…cation (2) that


                                               13
drops 2002-2003 changes. This dropped year is an important in‡ection point for the H-1B
program, but we unfortunately cannot separate economic changes from survey coding changes.18

    Regressions are unweighted and cluster standard errors at the cross-sectional level by state;
we discuss our clustering choices further in the city analysis below. In addition to year …xed
e¤ects, we also control for contemporaneous changes in state labor market conditions with sev-
eral unreported controls. These controls help isolate the impact of the H-1B program from
unmodeled factors speci…c to states and from CPS variable rede…nitions.19

   Table 2 presents the CPS results with Panels A and B utilizing LCA-based and Census-
based dependencies, respectively. Column 1 …nds growth in non-citizen immigrant scientists
and engineers with higher H-1B admission rates. A 10% growth in the national H-1B population
corresponded with a 3%-4% higher growth in non-citizen immigrant SE employment for each
standard deviation increase in state dependency. The estimates are statistically precise and
economically meaningful in size. Moreover, the 10% increase discussed is realistic as the average
annual increase in the H-1B population during the sample period is 7%.

    Column 2 …nds a weaker elasticity for employment growth of all immigrant SE workers,
which is to be expected. Column 3 …nds very limited e¤ects on native SE workers. The point
estimates suggest a growth of 0.1%-0.4% with a 10% increase in the H-1B population, but these
estimates are not statistically di¤erent from no e¤ect at all. In aggregate, Column 4 suggests
a 0.3%-0.6% growth in the total SE workforce following a 10% growth in the national H-1B
population per standard deviation increase in state dependency. The 0.6% outcome with the
LCA-based measure is statistically signi…cant, while the Census-based elasticity is not.20

   The …nal three columns consider three other outcome measures for native SE workers with
bachelor’s educations and higher: labor force participation rates, unemployment rates, and mean
weekly wages. We present a battery of measures as e¤ects for natives may come through di¤erent
forms (e.g., unemployment rates may be misleading in this context to the extent that natives are
pushed into part-time work). The point estimate with LCA-based dependency suggests a 1%
decline in native SE weekly wages, but this e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant. The remaining
  18
     Crossing 51 states/DC and 14 years yields 663 potential observations, but these data limitations result in
495 observations per regression. While the resulting panel is unbalanced, we …nd similar results when keeping
just the 26 states that have full employment history for all SE categories.
  19
     The state-level controls are log population, log income per capita, log workforce size, the overall labor force
participation rate among worker age groups, the overall unemployment rate, and the overall mean log weekly
wage for full-time male workers with bachelor’s educations or higher. We construct the latter four controls to
mirror the SE outcome variables in Table 2. This helps to ensure our robustness to general changes in CPS
sampling frames or variable de…nitions, although similar results are found without these controls.
  20
     Unreported elasticities for citizen immigrant SE employment are 0.131 (0.091) and 0.044 (0.133) with the
LCA and Census dependencies, respectively. These elasticities con…rm the concentrated impact of the H-1B
reduced-form interaction on its primary population. They also suggest that previous immigrant SE workers are
not being displaced by H-1B workers.



                                                        14
outcomes further reinforce the conclusion that native SE workers are not strongly a¤ected.21


4.3     City-Level Patenting Outcomes

Tables 3 and 4 present our city-level patenting results using the LCA-based and Census-based
dependencies, respectively. Estimations consider 281 cities over 1995-2007 for a total of 3653
observations. Column headers indicate dependent variables. We test for e¤ects on the log
level of city patenting for four ethnic groups in separate regressions: Indian, Chinese, Anglo-
Saxon, and Other Ethnicity inventors. Other Ethnicity inventors include European, Hispanic,
Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese contributions. The …fth column considers log total
patenting in the city.

    Regressions again cluster standard errors cross-sectionally, this time by city. As our inter-
action term additionally relies on common annual variation from changes in H-1B populations,
we also tested clustering by year. These standard errors are substantially smaller than clus-
tering cross-sectionally, and so we take the more conservative approach. We further tested the
two-way clustering technique of Cameron et al. (2006), which returns results very similar to
cross-sectional clustering.

    The …rst column of Table 3 …nds a positive relationship between increases in H-1B visa
allocations and Indian patenting in dependent cities. A 10% increase in the H-1B population
is associated with a 3% increase in Indian patenting for each standard deviation growth in city
dependency. Column 2 …nds a slightly stronger relationship for Chinese invention. These
elasticities are comparable to the CPS employment estimates for non-citizen immigrant SE
workers in Table 2, a point to which we will return after viewing the full set of results.

    Column 3 shows that the Other Ethnicity inventor group increases patenting in dependent
cities, too. The elasticities, however, are less than half of the magnitude for Indian and Chinese
inventors in Columns 1 and 2, and the linear di¤erences are statistically signi…cant. This
con…rms our expectations about the distribution of treatment e¤ects of the H-1B program across
di¤erent immigrant groups. Column 4 further …nds that growth in inventors with Anglo-Saxon
names in dependent cities is weakly responsive to shifts in H-1B admissions. We estimate that a
10% increase in the H-1B population is associated with a 0.5% increase in Anglo-Saxon invention
  21
    Having viewed these results, we can comment further on our reduced-form estimation design. It was earlier
mentioned that the reported coe¢ cients do not recover the ~ parameter from speci…cation (1). Estimating this
parameter would be advantageous and is the rationale for implementing a two-stage least squares (2SLS) model.
In our patenting analyses, this is not feasible as we do not observe the endogenous regressor (i.e., H-1B ) by
city or …rm. A 2SLS model would potentially be feasible in Table 2 if we made the endogenous regressor the
broader non-citizen immigrant SE population. The coe¢ cients in Column 1 would be the …rst-stage estimations,
and Columns 2-7 would be the reduced-form outcomes. The evident statistical power of both these components,
however, shows that the resulting two-stage model would be imprecisely estimated.


                                                       15
per standard deviation of city dependency. This elasticity is about a seventh of the magnitude
estimated for Indian and Chinese inventors.

    The …nal column …nds a positive e¤ect for total patenting. The weaker e¤ect for total
invention compared to Columns 1 and 2 is to be expected given that Indian and Chinese inventors
comprise less than 15% of US domestic patenting during the period studied. The estimates
suggest that a 10% growth in the H-1B worker population is associated with a 0.7% increase
in patenting per standard deviation of dependency. This elasticity is again comparable to the
CPS estimate for the total SE employment growth by state.

   The …rst row of Table 4 repeats this analysis with the Census-based dependency. The
overall picture remains the same, especially the ordering across ethnicities. Elasticities with the
Census-based dependency are smaller for all ethnicities, likely due to both a more conservative
approach and greater measurement error in the estimated dependencies. This closely parallels
the di¤erences between Panels A and B of Table 2. The results for the growth in Anglo-Saxon
and total invention are smaller, a pattern more suggestive of the H-1B program not having any
e¤ect on native inventors and a weak total impact.

    The similar pattern of spatial e¤ects in the ethnic patenting data and the CPS are comforting
from a methodological perspective, as the patent data allow many more extensions that we turn
to next. This comparability, although perhaps initially surprising, is also to be expected upon
further re‡ection. We earlier noted that immigrant scientists and engineers are of comparable
quality to natives, with their disproportionate impact for US science and engineering coming
primarily through their more extensive training and employment in SE …elds. This comparability
is particularly emphasized by Hunt (2009). The estimations in Tables 2-4 simply show that the
larger populations of these immigrants following H-1B program expansions increase US invention
through greater numbers of SE workers. To the extent that native scientists and engineers are
not substantively a¤ected by the program, total employment and invention also expand.

    This perspective likewise addresses the fact that a substantial portion of H-1B visa holders
are not engaged in patenting activities. Many H-1B workers, for example, are engaged in routine
software coding and testing activities that do not result in patents. To this point, a number
of H-1B holders are also engaged in very advanced tasks like specialized mathematics that are
innovative but not patentable. This frequent engagement in e¤orts other than patenting is a
signi…cant aspect of H-1B employment, just as it is considerable among native SE workers. The
program is important enough with respect to Indian and Chinese SE activity, however, that
recent immigrants who do patent often hold an H-1B visa at some stage of the immigration
process. These workers may be hired directly from abroad on an H-1B, or they may be tran-
sitioning from school to work within the US. Both paths require a visa and are subject to the


                                                16
cap. Thus, increases in this overall population of immigrant SE workers can yield expansions of
US invention and SE employment without the H-1B program speci…cally targeting patenting.22


4.4     City-Level Robustness Analysis

The remainder of Tables 3 and 4 present robustness checks on these basic …ndings. The linear
framework (2) provides a parsimonious speci…cation, but it is useful to examine e¤ects through-
out the dependency distribution. To do so, we …rst group cities into …ve quintiles of dependency,
with each quintile containing 56 or 57 cities. We then generate three indicator variables (with
notation  ( )) for whether city  is in the 3rd, 2nd, or most dependent quintiles of H-1B de-
pendency. The bottom two quintiles, which account for 40% of US cities but only 1% of LCA
applications, serve as the reference group for measuring the e¤ects on the top three quintiles.

    Our extended estimating equation is

                      ln(  ) =          +                                                           (3)
                                         +     1   [ (Top Quintile) ln(H-1B )]
                                         +     2   [ (2nd Quintile) ln(H-1B )]
                                         +     3   [ (3rd Quintile) ln(H-1B )] +    


This ‡exible speci…cation again tests whether innovation patterns in cities thought to be de-
pendent upon H-1B workers are more or less sensitive to changes in H-1B population levels.
Considering the top three quintiles separately allows us to test for non-linear e¤ects in the city
distribution. The quintiles framework also tests whether our results are sensitive to the scale
through which H-1B dependency is measured, as only the ordinal ranking of cities is used for
grouping them. Said di¤erently, in this approach we constrain the e¤ects to be similar within
the quintiles in speci…cation (3). Main e¤ects are again absorbed into the panel …xed e¤ects.

    Panel B of Tables 3 and 4 provide a consistent picture of treatment e¤ects that grow with
dependency. They suggest that the linear approach is not identifying o¤ of the most extreme
cases. They also provide assurance that the results are not being biased by a small group of
cities or …rms that exerts a substantial impact on admissions decisions and likewise receives
disproportionate bene…ts. E¤ects are clearly strongest in the most dependent quintile, but the
pattern of results looks similar in the second and third quintiles that we expect to have very
   22
      Perhaps the more surprising …nding is the comparable elasticities for Indian and Chinese invention. Even
after considering Taiwan, Singapore, and related economies, the H-1B in‡ow of Chinese ethnicity SE workers
is smaller relative to the overall population of Chinese inventors in the US than for Indian invention. Several
factors likely lead to more equal elasticities, including a weaker propensity among marginal Indian H-1B holders
to engage in patenting compared to Chinese holders. These results also might re‡ect crowding-in e¤ects for other
Chinese inventors. We …nd evidence for this latter e¤ect in expansions of Chinese invention around technologies
initially dominated by Indian inventors.

                                                        17
little or no in‡uence on H-1B admission choices. LCA applications are signi…cantly skewed
toward the upper quintile, suggesting that this is where the vast majority of political in‡uence
comes from. This is comforting as the evolution of the H-1B program can reasonably be taken
as exogenous outside of the top cities.

    These quintile estimations also allow a second interpretation of the economic magnitudes of
the results. A 10% growth in the national H-1B population is associated with a 6%-12% growth
in Indian and Chinese patenting in cities within the most dependent quintile relative to the
control group. The corresponding impact for total invention is 0%-2%. The growth e¤ect in
the second and third quintiles is 3%-8% for Indian and Chinese patenting, with total invention
expanding by 1% or less.

    Panel C returns to the linear speci…cation to test controlling for additional labor market
characteristics. It is natural to worry whether the reduced-form interactions in (2) are cap-
turing other heterogeneity across cities than H-1B dependency or other time e¤ects than the
aggregate shifts in H-1B admissions. The ordering of elasticities across ethnicities provides
helpful assurance in the story presented, as other explanations must similarly explain localized
treatment e¤ects among Indian and Chinese inventors.

    Panel C incorporates more explicit controls. Analogous to Table 2, we …rst include the log
of the population and income per capita of the city as regressors. We also include region-year
…xed e¤ects to control for broader trend di¤erences across the nine Census regions since 1995.
These regional controls are easily extended to state-year …xed e¤ects, but the broader groupings
provide a more consistent number of cities per grouping. Finally, Figures 2 and 3 highlight
that Indian and Chinese inventors are more concentrated in high-tech sectors than other ethnic
groups. Di¤erences in sectoral growth rates or changing propensities to seek patents may
consequently impact our …ndings. We thus include measures of expected city-level patenting for
each ethnic inventor group based on national patenting trends and pre-period city technology
specializations.23

   When we introduce these strict controls, the relative ordering of treatment e¤ects remains
the same as in Panel A. The elasticities uniformly decrease in economic magnitude, while
the standard errors remain constant. These estimates …nd that a 10% increase in the H-
1B population increased Indian and Chinese invention by 1%-2% per standard deviation of
  23
     We construct our expected patenting measures by …rst calculating the mean annual patenting done in the focal
city by each ethnic group over 1990-1995 in 36 technology sectors. These sectors are the sub-categories of patent
classi…cations; examples include "Resins", "Computer Peripherals", and "Optics." We then take subsequent
growth in national patenting for each sector, weight these trends by the city’s pre-period composition, and sum
across technologies. To maintain a consistent speci…cation and to maximize explanatory power, we include the
expected patenting trends for all four ethnic groups in each estimation. Each ethnicity is particularly dependent
on the expected trend for its own ethnicity. Chinese inventors also experience large increases in cities with strong
expected Indian patenting growth in the IT sector.



                                                        18
dependency. E¤ects for Anglo-Saxon inventors are not statistically di¤erent from zero for either
dependency measure, while total invention is estimated to have increased by about 0.5% per
standard deviation of dependency.

    Continuing with this extended regression, Panel D excludes from the sample patents related
to Computers and Communications (USPTO category 2). The H-1B program is closely linked
to the development of the IT sector and grew strongly during the 1990s high-tech boom pe-
riod. Beyond the expected technology trends included in Panel C, this regression further tests
whether patents from the computer sector and neighboring …elds are solely driving the observed
relationships. Although the coe¢ cient estimates are somewhat smaller, the qualitative …ndings
are in general quite comparable.

    Our earlier working paper reports a number of additional robustness checks. We …rst sub-
stitute a six-year summation of the annual H-1B visa cap in place of Lowell’s H-1B population
estimates for H-1B . The cap summation introduces more measurement error into the H-1B
population estimate, but it perhaps bene…ts from stronger exogeneity. The results are very
similar with this alternative estimation, since the cap has been binding or close to binding in
most years. Generally, the modelling choice of H-1B is of second-order importance to the
dependency measure employed for cities.

    Comparable results are also found when excluding the West Coast, when testing before
and after 2001, and when excluding recent patent applications. We …nd similar e¤ects when
using …rst-di¤erenced speci…cations, although autoregressive tests of error terms suggest that
levels speci…cations are more appropriate. Importantly, the …ndings also hold when introducing
additional interaction terms focused on city populations or growth in US citizen immigrant
SEs. Our main estimations recode counts of less than one ethnic patent for a given city-year
observation to be equal to one ethnic patent. We do so under the claim that is not meaningful
to distinguish between zero and one Indian or Chinese patent for a city. This is merely done
to maintain consistent sample sizes, and the elasticity estimates are similar when we instead
exclude zero-valued cells.

    We further performed estimations that drop all patents associated with 307 of the most
highly-dependent …rms that we could identify. These …rms account for 30% of patents during
1995-2006 and are discussed in more detail in Section 5. This grouping includes the most
frequent LCA applicants and the largest US patentors. Our results are robust to this technique,
con…rming that the important e¤ects estimated for the second quintile are not due to a few
in‡uential …rms patenting in several cities. We also …nd similar coe¢ cients for the top quintile
when dropping the 20 most dependent cities of this group, suggesting again that the results
extend deeper than the extreme cases like San Francisco and Boston.


                                               19
    One limitation of our approach, however, is important to note. Our econometric speci-
…cations are motivated by empirical studies …nding that contemporaneous R&D investments
have the most important impact for rates of technology formation (e.g., Pakes and Griliches
1980, Hausman et al. 1984, Hall et al. 1986). In the context of this paper, we consider how
recent investments in hiring high-skilled immigrants a¤ect innovation. When looking at dy-
namic speci…cations that introduce leads and lags on the observed H-1B population, however,
the patterns are mixed. We often …nd contemporaneous e¤ects to be the most important, but
the patterns are unfortunately too sensitive to speci…cation choices or included time periods to
draw conclusions. Thus, while our interaction approach can measure cross-sectional sensitivity
to longitudinal program changes, it cannot identify the precise timing from H-1B population
adjustments to patenting outcomes.24


4.5     Comparison to Canadian Cities

Canadian cities provide a useful baseline for comparing the estimated e¤ects of the H-1B program
on US ethnic invention patterns. Indian and Chinese inventors account for about 15% of
Canada’s patents during the 1995-2007 period, only slightly more than in the US, and the
technology breakdowns are similar for the two countries. We therefore test whether Canadian
cities display similar or di¤erent trends in innovation relative to those found in the US. Identical
trends in Canada and America would warn that our estimates are biased by other secular changes
(e.g., greater Indian and Chinese immigration to North America interacting with past immigrant
networks).

   Many Canadian inventors seek patent protection from the USPTO. Using over 200,000
granted patents and non-overlapping applications …led from Canada, we estimate the ethnic
composition of Canadian inventors in metropolitan areas that are comparable in size and scope
to the US Metropolitan Statistical Areas through which we de…ne US cities. Likewise, we
use the 1991 Canadian Census of Populations (IPUMS) to construct non-citizen immigrant SE
dependency metrics roughly similar to our Census-based metrics for the US. We are able to
construct city-level dependencies for 22 cities, with Toronto and Vancouver being the most
dependent major Canadian cities. We unfortunately do not have an equivalent to the LCA
data set for Canada.
  24
     These lag structure limitations are due to both data constraints and economic reasons. Perhaps the most
important issue is a shift in occupations using H-1B visas that occurred in the mid 1990s (e.g., Hira 2004). The
share of H-1B visas granted to healthcare and therapy occupations declined from 54% in 1995 to 14% in 1998.
SE and computer specialist occupations grew from 25% to about 60% during this same period, and the SE sector
has been dominant since this inversion. Our main estimations are robust to whether we use Lowell’s total H-1B
populations, six-year summations of the H-1B cap, or attempt to adjust for occupational shifts. These modelling
choices, however, can substantively in‡uence lag structure analyses.




                                                      20
    Panel E of Table 4 presents the placebo experiment using the Canadian sample of cities.
We regress ethnic patenting in Canadian cities against each city’s non-citizen immigrant SE
dependency interacted with the log of the US H-1B population. As in Panel A, these regressions
include city and year …xed e¤ects. None of the results are signi…cantly di¤erent than zero, and
the point estimates are small in economic magnitude. Extensions of this placebo analysis, such
as estimating a variant of speci…cation (3), …nd similar results.

   The null results are reassuring for our empirical design. They suggest that our …ndings for
the US are not being driven by unmodeled secular changes that also impacted Canada. Such
secular trends could include, for example, globalization and the rapid economic development of
India and China. As the technology …elds of Indian and Chinese inventors are similar in Canada
and America, many industry cycles are also captured. Of course, this Canadian analysis will
not capture unmodeled secular trends exclusive to the US.


5     Firm-Level Analyses of the H-1B Program

We extend our city-level results with a …rm-level analysis that exploits additional detail that is
possible with the ethnic patenting data. Substantial heterogeneity exists across …rms in ethnic
invention, and this variation allows us to characterize the impacts of H-1B visa changes in an
alternative way. This is the …rst large scale description of ethnic invention within …rms and the
…rst analysis of the link between immigration and innovation at the …rm level of which we are
aware. We focus on 77 major patenting …rms that are likely to be in‡uenced by high-skilled
immigration. These …rms are all publicly listed, headquartered in the US, have at least four
patents per year, and have measurable ethnic patenting. They account for a quarter of all US
patenting during the 1995-2007 period.25

    Table 5 details the general characteristics of this sample. The …rms have over 345 patents on
average per year, and the ethnicity and geography of inventors in these …rms broadly match US
aggregates. A comparison of the means and medians across these di¤erent technology categories
and regions also demonstrates that …rms tend to specialize in particular types of innovation and
to spatially cluster their innovations. Although sampled …rms are generally quite large, substan-
tial variation exists in sales, employees, R&D expenditures, and LCA applications. Unreported
regressions …nd that larger …rms and high-tech …rms tend to have higher shares of Indian and
  25
     Our sample construction involved two steps. We …rst identi…ed 592 unique …rms that met one of three
criteria: (1) …rms included in two lists of top H-1B sponsors for 1999 and 2006 (the only two lists for our sample
period); (2) …rms accounting for 0.05% or more of patent grants or applications during 2001-2004; and (3) …rms
accounting for 0.03% or more of LCA applications during 2001-2006. Of these 592 …rms, 307 have at least one
patent during the sample period. We then made additional restrictions on the …rm being publicly listed and
having ethnic patenting in each year to facilitate an intensive margin analysis of patenting. We …nd similar
results when using an unbalanced panel built o¤ of the larger sample. We document the sample construction in
extensive detail in our earlier working paper.

                                                       21
Chinese inventors. Firms undertaking most of their innovative activity in the Middle Atlantic
and West Coast regions also have higher average shares of ethnic inventors. Among these em-
ployers, technology focus and regional location explain more of the variation in ethnic inventor
compositions than …rm size.

    In order to understand the e¤ects of di¤erent admissions levels on …rms, we consider a
speci…cation similar to the linear approach (2) employed in the city analysis. We measure H-1B
dependency through each …rm’s 2001-2002 LCA …lings normalized by Compustat employment.
We again interact this dependency with the national H-1B population estimate. Regressions
include panel …xed e¤ects and cluster standard errors cross-sectionally by …rm.

    Table 6 presents the …rm-level …ndings. Panel A …nds that ethnic invention, and Indian
invention in particular, is closely tied to H-1B admissions levels. A 10% growth in H-1B
admissions correlates with an 4%-5% growth in Indian invention for each standard deviation
increase in dependency. The program is linked to a 3% higher growth in total invention per
standard deviation increase in dependency. These results point to particularly powerful impacts
for heavily in‡uenced …rms among major patenting …rms.

    Panel B extends the estimation to include a …rm-speci…c measure of expected patenting. This
measure is based on pre-period technology specializations and national patenting trends. Unlike
before, however, we do not construct ethnic-speci…c technology trends given the limited pre-
period data for many …rms. We also include region-sector-year …xed e¤ects. We de…ne regions
through the four Census regions and sectors through patent categories. On both dimensions,
…rms are classi…ed by where they patent the most during the sample period. These …xed e¤ects
remove annual trends common to a sector and region, such as the growth of the computer-
oriented sector on the West Coast. The patterns are very similar in this extended regression.

    Panel C …nally tests for heightened sensitivity in the computer-oriented sector where the H-
1B program has been very in‡uential. Continuing with the extended speci…cation in Panel B,
we interact the core regressor with an indicator variable for the computer and communications
patent category. We demean both regressors before interaction to restore main e¤ects, and the
main e¤ect for the computer-oriented sector is absorbed by the region-sector-year …xed e¤ects.
The base e¤ects …nd a similar pattern excepting the weaker role of Chinese inventors. The
interactions suggest that Indian and Chinese responses are particularly strong in the computer-
oriented sector.

    We consider this …rm-level analysis as a nice robustness check on the city-level and state-
level approaches. It provides microeconomic evidence in support of the labor market results,
and it quanti…es the claims of high-tech executives that their …rms are especially vulnerable to
high-skilled immigration policies for temporary workers. As some of our 77 …rms are among the

                                              22
primary lobbyists for H-1B legislation, however, these results should be interpreted as partial
correlations only.


6      Conclusion

Over the last …fteen years, the H-1B visa program for temporary workers has played a signi…cant
role in US innovation. As immigrants are especially important for US innovation and technology
commercialization, this makes the H-1B program a matter of signi…cant policy importance. We
…nd that ‡uctuations in H-1B admissions signi…cantly in‡uenced the rate of Indian and Chinese
patenting in cities and …rms dependent upon the program relative to their peers. Most spec-
i…cations …nd limited e¤ects for native SE employment or patenting. We are able to rule out
displacement e¤ects, and small crowding-in e¤ects may exist. We conclude that total inven-
tion increased with higher admissions primarily through the direct contributions of immigrant
inventors.

    We close with four related research questions that we hope can be addressed in future work.
First, we have focused exclusively on the H-1B program given its particular importance in science
and engineering and large admissions ‡uctuations. We hope that future research will consider
other temporary visa categories. The H-1B program has unique characteristics, and quantifying
the impacts of other visa programs will clarify whether our results apply generally or are due
to particular features of the H-1B program. For example, the prevailing wage requirement may
limit adverse e¤ects for natives to the extent that the requirement is followed. Likewise, the
manner in which H-1B workers are tied to their sponsoring …rms may produce special outcomes.
Such comparative assessments will also aid policy makers when crafting future immigration
policies.

    Second, our analysis considers high-frequency variation since 1995, and we cannot quantify
long-run impacts of these policy choices as a consequence. Given the time and expense involved
in training new SE workers, long-run e¤ects may be di¤erent. Fluctuations in the H-1B cap
are quite recent, so researchers will need to unite our work with studies exploiting low-frequency
variation to understand these dynamics. It is also important for future research to extend
beyond area-based studies to analyze variations across alternative dimensions like occupations
and industries. These complementary approaches will help assess likely e¤ects at the national
level and would further inform future theoretical work on how the supply side of innovation
in‡uences overall US technology growth.26
  26
    We earlier noted general mechanisms that are likely to exist regardless of approach (e.g., increased supply
of knowledge, complementarities). We also noted that agglomeration economies are likely to play an important
role in spatial analyses. Future work should evaluate whether relevant agglomeration economies are stronger


                                                      23
    Third, our analysis quanti…es patenting growth due to higher H-1B admission rates for cities
and …rms. There are many di¤erent types of research organizations: universities, government
labs, private inventors, and others. We have not analyzed how changes in the H-1B program
alter the local relationships among these di¤erent institutions. For example, the comparative
advantage that universities have had for obtaining H-1B visas since 2001 may result in greater
dependencies of local industry on universities for certain forms of SE advancement. Under-
standing these local inter-linkages will be informative for both H-1B program assessments and
of general interest for technology transfer studies.

    Finally, although ethnic patenting data allows us to characterize the role of H-1B workers
for US innovation and SE employment in a unique way, we recognize that the H-1B program
impacts other aspects of the US economy. About half of the major employers of H-1B visas
that we identi…ed for potential inclusion in our …rm sample did not …le for a patent during our
period of study. Future research should quantify the economic impacts for other sectors like
accounting and consulting …rms, banks and …nancial institutions, and public services in ways
that are appropriate for these sectors. It will likewise be particularly interesting to quantify job
creation or displacement e¤ects for occupations other than inventors among high-tech …rms.


References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn, "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from
     the Pharmaceutical Industry", The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2004), 1049-1090.
 [2] Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, and John McHale, "How do Spatial and Social Proximity
     In‡uence Knowledge Flows? Evidence from Patent Data", Journal of Urban Economics 64
     (2008), 258-269.
 [3] Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995).
 [4] Borjas, George, "Economics of Immigration", Journal of Economic Literature 32 (1994),
     1667-1717.
 [5] Borjas, George, "The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact
     of Immigration on the Labor Market", The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118:4 (2003),
     1335-1374.
 [6] Borjas, George, "Do Foreign Students Crowd Out Native Students from Graduate Pro-
     grams?", in Ehrenberg, Ronald, and Paula Stephan (ed.), Science and the University (Madi-
     son, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 2005).
 [7] Borjas, George, "Immigration in High-Skill Labor Markets: The Impact of Foreign Students
     on the Earnings of Doctorates", NBER Working Paper 12085 (2006).
or weaker at the national level. Some agglomeration rationales like labor pooling would suggest that city-level
e¤ects would be stronger. We note, however, that current concerns over higher rates of return SE migration to
India and China focus on a loss of US technology leadership. The fear is less about losing individual scientists
than losing the critical mass of frontier scientists, a process that would depend upon signi…cant country-level
agglomeration economies.

                                                      24
 [8] Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller, "Robust Inference with Multi-way
     Clustering", Working Paper (2006).
 [9] Card, David, "Immigrant In‡ows, Native Out‡ows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
     of Higher Immigration", Journal of Labor Economics 19:1 (2001), 22-64.
[10] Chellaraj, Gnanaraj, Keith Maskus, and Aaditya Mattoo, "The Contribution of Skilled
     Immigrations and International Graduate Students to U.S. Innovation", Review of Interna-
     tional Economics 16:3 (2008), 444-462.
[11] Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, "What Causes Industry Agglomera-
     tion? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns", forthcoming in American Economic Re-
     view (2009).
[12] Facchini, Giovanni, Anna Maria Mayda, and Prachi Mishra, "Do Interest Groups A¤ect
     Immigration Policy?", Working Paper (2008).
[13] Foley, C. Fritz, and William Kerr, "U.S. Ethnic Scientists and Foreign Direct Investment
     Placement", Working Paper (2008).
[14] Freeman, Richard, The Market for College-Trained Manpower: A Study in the Economics
     of Career Choice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971).
[15] Freeman, Richard, "People Flows in Globalization", Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2
     (2006), 145-170.
[16] Friedberg, Rachel, and Jennifer Hunt, "The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country Wages,
     Employment and Growth", Journal of Economic Perspectives 9:2 (1995), 23-44.
[17] Furman, Je¤rey, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, "The Determinants of National Innovative
     Capacity", Research Policy 31 (2002), 899-933.
[18] Glaeser, Edward, and William Kerr, "Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship:
     How Much of the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?", Journal of Economics and Man-
     agement Strategy 18:3 (2009), 623-663.
[19] Griliches, Zvi, "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey", Journal of Economic
     Literature 28:4 (1990), 1661-1707.
[20] Hall, Bronwyn, Zvi Griliches, and Jerry Hausman, "Patents and R and D: Is There a Lag?",
     International Economic Review 27 (1986), 265-283.
[21] Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "The NBER Patent Citation Data
     File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper 8498 (2001).
[22] Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall, and Zvi Griliches, "Econometric Models for Count Data
     with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship", Econometrica 52 (1984), 909-938.
[23] Hira, Ron, "U.S. Immigration Regulations and India’s Information Technology Industry",
     Technological Forecasting & Social Change 71 (2004), 837-854.
[24] Hunt, Jennifer, "Which Immigrants are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions
     by Entry Visa", NBER Working Paper 14920 (2009).



                                             25
[25] Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, "How Much Does Immigration Boost
     Innovation?", forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics (2008).
[26] Kannankutty, Nirmala, "Unemployment Rate of U.S. Scientists and Engineers Drops to
     Record Low 2.5% in 2006", NSF SRS Info Brief (2008).
[27] Kerr, Sari, and William Kerr, "Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey", HBS Working
     Paper 09-013 (2008).
[28] Kerr, William, "The Ethnic Composition of US Inventors", HBS Working Paper 08-006
     (2007).
[29] Kerr, William, "Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology Di¤usion",
     Review of Economics and Statistics 90:3 (2008), 518-537.
[30] Kerr, William, "The Agglomeration of US Ethnic Inventors", in Edward Glaeser (ed.)
     Economics of Agglomeration (2009).
[31] Kirkegaard, Jacob, "Outsourcing and Skill Imports: Foreign High-Skilled Workers on H-
     1B and L-1 Visas in the United States", Peterson Institute for International Economics
     Working Paper 05-15, (2005).
[32] Lemieux, Thomas, "The Changing Nature of Wage Inequality", NBER Working Paper
     13523 (2007).
[33] Lowell, B. Lindsay, "H-1B Temporary Workers: Estimating the Population", The Center
     for Comparative Immigration Studies Working Paper 12 (2000).
[34] Lowell, B. Lindsay, "Skilled Temporary and Permanent Immigrants in the United States",
     Population Research and Policy Review 20:1-2 (2001).
[35] Lowell, B. Lindsay, and Bryan Christian, "The Characteristics of Employers of H-1Bs",
     Institute for the Study of International Migration Working Paper (2000).
[36] Lowell, B. Lindsay, and Hal Salzman, "Into the Eye of the Storm: Assessing the Evidence
     on Science and Engineering Education, Quality, and Workforce Demand", Working Paper
     (2007).
[37] Matlo¤, Norman, "On the Need for Reform of the H-1B Non-Immigrant Work Visa in
     Computer-Related Occupations", University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform (2003).
[38] Matlo¤, Norman, "Needed Reform for the H-1B and L-1 Work Visas (and Relation to
     O¤shoring)", Working Paper (2004).
[39] Miano, John, "The Bottom of the Pay Scale: Wages for H-1B Computer Programmers",
     CIS Backgrounder (2005).
[40] Miano, John, "H-1B Visa Numbers: No Relationship to Economic Need", CIS Backgrounder
     (2008).
[41] Mithas, Sunil, and Henry Lucas, "Does High-Skill Immigration Make Everyone Better O¤?
     United States’Visa Policies and Compensation of Information Technology Professionals",
     Working Paper (2009).
[42] NFAP Policy Brief, "H-1B Visas and Job Creation", Arlington, VA (2008).

                                            26
[43] Pakes, Ariel and Zvi Griliches "Patents and R&D at the Firm Level: A First Look", Eco-
     nomics Letters 5 (1980), 377-381.
[44] Peri, Giovanni, "Higher Education, Innovation and Growth", in Giorgio Brunello, Pietro
     Garibaldi, and Etienne Wasmer (eds.) Education and Training in Europe (Oxford: Oxford
     University Press, 2007).
[45] Reksulak, Michael, William Shughart, and Gokhan Karahan, "Barrier to Entry: The Po-
     litical Economy of H-1B Visas", University of Mississippi Working Paper (2006).
[46] Rivera-Batiz, Luis and Paul Romer, "Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth", The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:2 (1991), 531-555.
[47] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "The Determinants of Agglomeration", Journal of
     Urban Economics 50 (2001), 191-229.
[48] Ryoo, Jaewoo, and Sherwin Rosen, "The Engineering Labor Market", Journal of Political
     Economy 112:2 (2004), S110-S140.
[49] Saxenian, AnnaLee, "Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant High-Growth Entrepreneurs", Eco-
     nomic Development Quarterly 16:1 (2002), 20-31.
[50] Siow, Aloysius, “Occupational Choice under Uncertainty”, Econometrica 52 (1984), 631-
     645.
[51] Stephan, Paula, and Sharon Levin, "Exceptional Contributions to US Science by the
     Foreign-Born and Foreign-Educated", Population Research and Policy Review 20:1 (2001),
     59-79.
[52] Tambe, Prassana, and Lorin Hitt, "H-1B Visas, O¤shoring, and the Wage of US Information
     Technology Workers", Working Paper (2009).
[53] United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, "Characteristics of Specialty Occupa-
     tion Workers (H-1B)", Washington DC (1998-2006).
[54] United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, "H-1B Bene…t Fraud & Compliance
     Assessment", Washington DC (2008).
[55] Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Gere¢ , "America’s New Immi-
     grant Entrepreneurs I", Working Paper (2007).
[56] Zavodny, Madeline, "The H-1B Program and its E¤ects on Information Technology Work-
     ers", Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review (2003).




                                             27
                                         Fig. 1: Growth in US Ethnic Patenting
                       10%        Notes: Trends are ethnic shares of patents filed by inventors residing in the US.
                                  Patents are grouped by application years. Anglo-Saxon (76%→63%) and
                                  European (16%→13%) shares are excluded for visual clarity. Other Asian
                                  contributions include Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese inventors.
                                                                                                                      Chinese
Percentage of US Patents




                                                                                                                                Indian
                           5%
                                                                                                                          Hispanic


                                                                                                      Russian
                                                                                                                Other Asian


                           0%
                                 1975            1980              1985               1990              1995              2000



                                   Fig. 2: Indian Contributions by Technology
                           10%    Notes: Trends are Indian invention shares by broad
                                  technology categories for patents filed by inventors            Computers &
                                  residing in the US. Patents are grouped by application         Communications
                                  years.
Percentage of US Patents




                                                                                                                        Electrical &
                                                                                                                        Electronics

                                                                                                                           Chemicals
                           5%
                                                                                                                             Drugs &
                                                                                                                             Medical
                                                                                                     Mechanical

                                                                                                                        Miscellaneous


                           0%
                                 1975            1980              1985               1990              1995              2000
                                  Fig. 3: Chinese Contributions by Technology
                           15%    Notes: Trends are Chinese invention shares by broad technology
                                  categories for patents filed by inventors residing in the US. Patents
                                  are grouped by application years.                                                  Electrical &
                                                                                                                     Electronics
Percentage of US Patents




                           10%                                                              Computers &
                                                                                           Communications
                                                                                                                           Drugs &
                                                                                                                           Medical
                                                                 Chemicals
                           5%

                                                                                   Mechanical                        Miscellaneous


                           0%
                                 1975            1980               1985              1990                 1995          2000



                                 Fig. 4: H-1B Visas and Population Estimates
 600,000                          Notes: Data are given by fiscal years used for H-1B
                                  visa issuances. Visa issuances can exceed the cap
                                  in later years due to exemptions for universities and
                                  similar institutions described in the text.
 500,000
                                                                                                            Lowell H-1B Visa
                                                                                                           Population Estimate
 400,000


 300,000

                                                                                                                   Total H-1B Visa
 200,000
                                                                                                                     Issuances

 100,000
                                                                                        Annual H-1B Visa Issuance Cap
                             0
                                 1990       1992        1994       1996        1998        2000           2002    2004    2006      2008
             Table 1: Most Dependent Cities and States on H-1B Program
                     LCA-Based Dependency                                  Census-Based Dependency
                   2001-2002 LCA Filings for                             1990 Non-Citizen Immigrant SE
                  H-1B Visas Per Capita (x1000)                           Workforce per Capita (x1000)
                                 (1)                                                     (2)
                                                 A. Most Dependent Cities
#1                          San Francisco, CA           8.323               Lafayette-W. Lafayette, IN          7.810
#2                                  Miami, FL           5.502               Bryan-College Station, TX           5.571
#3                            Washington, DC            5.430                       San Francisco, CA           5.096
#4                       Raleigh-Durham, NC             5.220                           Columbia, MO            4.462
#5                                Boston, MA            5.149                          Gainesville, FL          4.146
#6                                  Austin, TX          4.897            Champaign-Urbana-Rantoul, IL           4.023
#7                             New York, NY             4.777                         Washington, DC            3.168
#8                             Burlington, VT           4.491                              Boston, MA           3.129
#9                                 Atlanta, GA          4.116                    Raleigh-Durham, NC             2.723
#10                     Dallas-Fort Worth, TX           3.943                         Los Angeles, CA           2.288
#11              Champaign-Urbana-Rantoul, IL           3.819                          Rochester, MN            2.247
#12                              Iowa City, IA          3.804                          New York, NY             2.185
#13                               Houston, TX           3.712                             Houston, TX           2.156
#14                 Bryan-College Station, TX           3.577                            Spokane, WA            2.078
#15                                Seattle, WA          3.393                        State College, PA          2.058

                                                 B. Most Dependent States
#1                           District of Columbia       9.829                                  New Jersey       2.491
#2                                     New Jersey       4.013                                   California      2.455
#3                                 Massachusetts        4.005                              Massachusetts        2.056
#4                                      California      3.502                        District of Columbia       2.012
#5                                      New York        3.366                                    Maryland       1.884
#6                                    Connecticut       2.804                                   New York        1.485
#7                                       Delaware       2.526                                    Delaware       1.395
#8                                       Maryland       2.277                                 Connecticut       1.092
#9                                         Florida      2.183                                       Texas       1.047
#10                                         Texas       2.116                                     Virginia      1.014
#11                                       Virginia      2.113                                    Michigan       0.976
#12                                       Georgia       1.974                            New Hampshire          0.967
#13                                   Washington        1.937                                      Illinois     0.963
#14                                        Illinois     1.868                                 Washington        0.890
#15                                      Michigan       1.673                                      Hawaii       0.832
Notes: Table presents largest dependencies on the H-1B program by city and state. Dependency in Column 1 is
measured as the sum of Labor Condition Applications (LCAs) over 2001-2002 normalized by population. These
applications are an initial step for obtaining an H-1B visa. Dependency in Column 2 is measured as non-citizen
scientists and engineers per capita in the 1990 Census. Non-citizens include temporary visa holders (e.g., H-1B) and
permanent residents. Both dependencies are multiplied by 1000 for presentation purposes. Washington, DC, in Panel
A differs from the District of Columbia in Panel B as the former includes metropolitan areas in Virginia and Maryland.
    Table 2: State-Year Regressions of H-1B Program Dependency and Science and Engineering Employment
                                               Δ Log                                                                            Native SE Workers
                                            non-Citizen         Δ Log            Δ Log            Δ Log               Δ Labor        Δ Unem-     Δ Mean Log
                                             Immigrant        Immigrant          Native            Total               Force         ployment   Male Weekly
                                            SE Workers       SE Workers        SE Workers       SE Workers           Part. Rate        Rate         Wage
                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)              (7)
                                                                                          A. LCA-Based Dependency
Δ Log National H-1B Population x                0.385            0.200             0.037            0.062               0.004            -0.002            -0.010
State Dependency [LCA]                         (0.062)          (0.067)           (0.025)          (0.023)             (0.004)          (0.005)           (0.013)

                                                                                          B. Census-Based Dependency
Δ Log National H-1B Population x                0.270            0.150             0.010            0.034               0.005            0.000             0.003
State Dependency [Census]                      (0.151)          (0.107)           (0.036)          (0.038)             (0.006)          (0.005)           (0.018)
Notes: State-year regressions estimate the effect of changes in the national H-1B population over 1995-2008 for science and engineering (SE) workforces by state
using the Current Population Survey (CPS). The annual H-1B population regressor is interacted with state-level dependencies. Dependency in Panel A is measured
through LCA applications in 2001-2002 divided by state populations. Dependency in Panel B is measured through non-citizen immigrant SE workforces in the 1990
Census divided by state populations. Dependencies are normalized to have unit standard deviation before interacting. First-differenced specifications are utilized due
to the redesign of the CPS in 2003; changes from 2002-2003 are excluded. The CPS sample is restricted to state-years where changes in all outcome variables from the
prior year are observed, for a total of 495 observations in each regression. The text describes the sample composition further. Regressions are unweighted and cluster
standard errors by state. Regressions include year fixed effects and control for contemporaneous changes in log state population, log state workforce, overall state
labor force participation rate among worker age groups, overall state unemployment rate, log state income per capita, and overall mean log weekly wage for full-time
male workers with bachelor's educations or higher in the state. Similar results are found without these controls for contemporaneous changes in state labor market
conditions.
              Table 3: City-Year Regressions of H-1B Program Dependency and US Invention
                                                      Log                 Log                 Log                  Log                 Log
                                                     Indian              Chinese         Other Ethnicity       Anglo-Saxon             Total
                                                    Patenting           Patenting          Patenting            Patenting            Patenting
                                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)
                                                                                    A. LCA-Based Dependency
Log National H-1B Population x                        0.339                0.390               0.168               0.056                0.074
City Dependency [LCA]                                (0.048)              (0.061)             (0.035)             (0.028)              (0.028)

                                                                                    B. Quintiles Specification
Log National H-1B Population x                        0.357                0.343               0.219               0.053                0.071
(0,1) Third Dependency Quintile                      (0.096)              (0.098)             (0.108)             (0.106)              (0.106)
Log National H-1B Population x                        0.661                0.833               0.382               0.116                0.125
(0,1) Second Dependency Quintile                     (0.089)              (0.106)             (0.088)             (0.089)              (0.084)
Log National H-1B Population x                        0.988                1.208               0.507               0.180                0.227
(0,1) Most Dependent Quintile [LCA]                  (0.077)              (0.092)             (0.088)             (0.090)              (0.089)

                                                   C. Including Tech. Trends, Local Labor Market Conditions, and Region-Year Effects
Log National H-1B Population x                        0.142                0.174               0.056               0.023                0.048
City Dependency [LCA]                                (0.045)              (0.061)             (0.034)             (0.029)              (0.029)

                                                                D. Panel C excluding Computers and Communications Patents
Log National H-1B Population x                        0.132                0.160               0.051               0.020                0.038
City Dependency [LCA]                                (0.045)              (0.059)             (0.035)             (0.029)              (0.029)
Notes: City-year regressions estimate the effect of changes in the national H-1B population over 1995-2007 for patenting by city. The annual H-1B
population regressor is interacted with city-level dependencies as defined in Table 1. Panels A, C, and D present linear specifications where
dependencies are normalized to have unit standard deviation before interacting. Panel B groups cities into quintiles based upon dependencies. The
annual H-1B population regressor is interacted with binary indicator variables for the top three dependency quintiles to measure effects relative to
the bottom two quintiles. Regressions include city and year fixed effects, are unweighted, have 3653 observations, and cluster standard errors by
city. Panel C incorporates log expected patenting trends for each city-ethnicity, log city populations, log city mean income levels, and region-year
fixed effects (nine Census regions). Panel D further excludes patents from the computer sector (USPTO category 2).
         Table 4: City-Year Regressions with Census-Based Dependency and Canadian Placebo
                                                    Log                Log                 Log                Log                Log
                                                   Indian             Chinese         Other Ethnicity     Anglo-Saxon            Total
                                                  Patenting          Patenting          Patenting          Patenting           Patenting
                                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)
                                                                               A. Census-Based Dependency
Log National H-1B Population x                      0.240              0.291               0.091               0.014              0.032
City Dependency [Census]                           (0.031)            (0.047)             (0.029)             (0.023)            (0.023)

                                                                                 B. Quintiles Specification
Log National H-1B Population x                      0.258              0.584               0.196               0.042              0.065
(0,1) Third Dependency Quintile                    (0.111)            (0.128)             (0.103)             (0.103)            (0.103)
Log National H-1B Population x                      0.444              0.529               0.232               0.088              0.092
(0,1) Second Dependency Quintile                   (0.092)            (0.119)             (0.098)             (0.103)            (0.098)
Log National H-1B Population x                      0.570              0.751               0.125               -0.012             0.028
(0,1) Most Dependent Quintile [Census]             (0.100)            (0.107)             (0.098)             (0.083)            (0.085)

                                                 C. Including Tech. Trends, Local Labor Market Conditions, and Region-Year Effects
Log National H-1B Population x                      0.084              0.127               0.043               0.026              0.045
City Dependency [Census]                           (0.027)            (0.039)             (0.026)             (0.023)            (0.022)

                                                              D. Panel C excluding Computers and Communications Patents
Log National H-1B Population x                      0.089              0.107               0.042               0.020              0.038
City Dependency [Census]                           (0.026)            (0.044)             (0.030)             (0.023)            (0.024)

                                                                 E. Placebo Experiment with Canadian Sample of Cities
Log National H-1B Population x                      -0.039             0.097               0.045               0.015              0.029
City Dependency [Census]                           (0.065)            (0.086)             (0.048)             (0.067)            (0.055)
Notes: See Table 3. Panels A-D consider the Census-based dependency of the city instead of using the LCA-based dependency. Panel E further
considers a placebo experiment with Canadian cities for which pseudo-dependencies can be calculated from the 1991 Canadian Census.
                    Table 5: Descriptive Statistics for Firm Panel
                                        Median        Mean        Stand. Dev.       Minimum   Maximum

Firm-Level Patenting
Annual Patent Count                       167          345             499            42       3,501

Indian Inventors                           6%           8%             5%             1%       32%
Chinese Inventors                          9%          10%             6%             2%       28%
Other Ethnic Inventors                    22%          22%             4%             9%       43%
Anglo-Saxon Inventors                     62%          60%            11%            34%       81%

Chemicals                                  6%          14%            17%             0%       76%
Computers & Communications                16%          28%            29%             0%       99%
Drugs & Medical                            0%          16%            29%             0%       89%
Electrical & Electronic                   12%          19%            20%             0%       96%
Mechanical                                 5%          12%            14%             0%       55%
Miscellaneous                              4%          10%            15%             0%       72%

New England                                2%           6%            14%             0%       93%
Middle Atlantic                            1%          15%            27%             0%       94%
East North Central                         1%          19%            31%             0%       97%
West North Central                         0%           4%            13%             0%       80%
South Atlantic                             2%           7%            15%             0%       84%
East South Central                         0%           2%            11%             0%       95%
West South Central                         1%          10%            23%             0%       98%
Mountain                                   1%           4%            10%             0%       79%
Pacific                                   10%          32%            38%             0%       98%

Firm-Level LCA Applications
Annual LCA Count                           53          171             333             0       2,254

Firm-Level Compustat Activity
Annual Sales ($m)                        9,538        22,455         37,508           18      193,289
Annual Employees (k)                       37           65             91              0        567
Annual R&D ($m)                           519         1,224           1,637           17       8,413
Notes: Descriptive statistics for 77 firms including in firm panel for 1995-2007.
                Table 6: Firm-Year Regressions of H-1B Program Dependency and US Invention
                                                            Log                 Log                 Log                 Log                  Log
                                                           Indian              Chinese         Other Ethnicity      Anglo-Saxon              Total
                                                          Patenting           Patenting          Patenting           Patenting             Patenting
                                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)
                                                                                         A. LCA-Based Dependency
Log National H-1B Population x                              0.452               0.315               0.357                0.256               0.331
Firm Dependency [LCA]                                      (0.120)             (0.114)             (0.080)              (0.077)             (0.077)

                                                                       B. Including Tech. Trends and Region-Sector-Year Effects
Log National H-1B Population x                              0.497               0.379               0.370                0.246               0.335
Firm Dependency [LCA]                                      (0.143)             (0.153)             (0.097)              (0.106)             (0.099)

                                                                            C. Panel B with Interaction for Computer Sector
Log National H-1B Population x                              0.336               0.144               0.278                0.149               0.216
Firm Dependency [LCA]                                      (0.170)             (0.202)             (0.106)              (0.122)             (0.120)
Log National H-1B Population x                              0.449               0.656               0.255                0.271               0.332
Firm Dependency [LCA] x                                    (0.262)             (0.300)             (0.174)              (0.192)             (0.181)
(0,1) Computer Sector
Notes: Firm-year regressions consider 1995-2007. Regressions include firm and year fixed effects, have 1001 observations, are unweighted, and cluster
standard errors by firm. Panel B incorporates expected technology trends for each firm and region-sector-year fixed effects. Section 4.4 describes the
construction of the expected technology trends. We define regions through the four Census regions and sectors through patent categories. On both
dimensions, firms are classified by where they patent the most during the sample period. Panel C further distinguishes effects within and outside of the
computer sector. We interact the core regressor with an indicator variable for the computer and communications patent category. We demean both
regressors before interaction to restore main effects, and the main effect for the computer-oriented sector is absorbed by the region-sector-year fixed
effects.
