                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    LABOR MARKET FRICTIONS AS A SOURCE OF COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE,
         WITH IMPLICATIONS FOR UNEMPLOYMENT AND INEQUALITY

                                         Elhanan Helpman

                                       Working Paper 15764
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15764


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2010




I thank Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding for comments, Jane Trahan for editorial assistance, and
the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Labor Market Frictions as a Source of Comparative Advantage, with Implications for Unemployment
and Inequality
Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 15764
February 2010
JEL No. F12,F16,J64

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent research has emphasized firm heterogeneity as a source of comparative advantage. Combining
this approach with labor market frictions and worker heterogeneity provides a framework for studying
the impact of trade on unemployment and inequality. This paper reviews this approach and reports
a number of results from recent studies.


Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu
1    Introduction
Until the 1980s, studies of international trade were dominated by two sources of compar-
ative advantage: technological capabilities and factor endowments. The former approach,
originally attributed to David Ricardo, starts from the observation that sectoral relative la-
bor productivity varies across countries, and derives from this feature implications for the
structure of foreign trade. The latter approach, originally attributed to Eli Heckscher and
reformulated by Bertil Ohlin, starts from the observation that endowments vary across coun-
tries, and derives from this feature implications for the structure of trade, assuming that
technologies are the same in every country. While the Ricardian approach abstracts from
diﬀerences in the composition of factor endowments, the Heckscher-Ohlin approach abstracts
from diﬀerences in technologies. These two approaches are complementary to each other, em-
phasizing alternative sources of comparative advantage. Both focus, however, on explaining
the structure of trade at the sectoral level; that is, on predicting which country exports food,
which exports electronic products, which exports chemical products, and so forth.
    As growth in world trade proceeded at a rapid pace after World War II, and especially
so in manufactures, it became apparent that this focus was not adequate, because much of
world trade was taking place within industries. Namely, many countries both exported and
imported food, exported and imported electronic products, and exported and imported chem-
ical products. Moreover, it was recognized that an emphasis on diﬀerences across countries,
either in technologies or factor endowments, is useful for explaining trade among countries
which diﬀer from each other, but not for explaining trade among countries that are similar
to each other. Yet the majority of world trade took place (and still does) among the indus-
trial countries, which are similar to each other, rather than between the industrial and less
developed countries, which diﬀer substantially.
    In response to these empirical observations the analysis of trade was further enriched in the
1980s with the development of trade models that featured economies of scale and imperfect
competition. Particularly successful was the integration of monopolistic competition into an
otherwise standard Heckscher-Ohlin framework, thereby accounting for the existence of both
intersectoral and intra-industry trade, and for large volumes of trade among similar countries.
Over time, the resulting Helpman-Krugman model became the standard tool for addressing
trade issues, such as the link between trade and growth, because it proved to be flexible
enough for both theoretical and empirical analysis.
    Despite the desirable features of the trade models from the 1980s, they turned out to
be inadequate for explaining a range of new findings that emerged in the 1990s. In that
decade new firm-level data sets became available, which led to the discovery of new patterns
of trade within industries. Of particular interest was the finding that within a sector, such
as food or electronics, only a fraction of firms export, and that this fraction varies greatly


                                               1
across industries. Moreover, within an industry, exporting firms diﬀer systematically from
nonexporters; in particular, exporters are bigger and more productive than nonexporters, they
employ a diﬀerent composition of workers, and they pay higher wages. These findings led to
a reexamination of the monopolistic competition approach to international trade, enriching
it with heterogeneous firms within industries and to a new workhorse for trade analysis, the
Melitz model.
    In parallel, both theory and empirical analysis started to pay more attention to institu-
tional determinants of comparative advantage. Scholars incorporated incomplete contracts
into trade theory in order to study firm choices between outsourcing and inhouse production
of intermediate inputs on the one hand and oﬀshoring versus domestic sourcing of interme-
diate inputs on the other.1 This brought to the fore the role of legal institutions in shaping
comparative advantage. Indeed, diﬀerences across countries in the quality of legal systems
proved to be an important determinant of trade flows.2 Other studies examined the role of
financial institutions in shaping world trade, and found that diﬀerences across countries in
level of financial development had a large impact on trade flows, and this eﬀect was related
to variation across sectors in the degree of dependence on external finance.3 Finally, diﬀer-
ences across countries in labor market characteristics shape trade structure, by impacting the
degree to which it pays a country to lock in resources in industries with diﬀerent volatility
levels.4
    The addition of within-industry heterogeneity and institutional factors to the toolkit of
international trade analysis has enriched our ability to understand new sources of compara-
tive advantage and, as a result, new developments in international trade and foreign direct
investment. It is not my intention to review all these developments, but rather to discuss
one line of inquiry in which heterogeneity within industries and diﬀerences across countries
in labor market frictions play a central role. For this purpose I first review some of the
insights from Melitz (2003) on trade with heterogeneous firms, followed by a discussion of
search and matching frictions in labor markets–which have been introduced into the litera-
ture by Diamond (1982a,b) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). Finally, I discuss the work
of Helpman and Itskhoki (2009) and Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2009, 2010), which
combine search and matching frictions in labor markets with Melitz-style firm heterogeneity
in order to investigate the determinants of unemployment and inequality in trading countries.
This discussion is organized around the following three questions: (i) What are the impacts
of one country’s labor market frictions on its trade partner? (ii) How does removing trade
impediments impact countries with diﬀerent labor market frictions? and (iii) What is the
   1
     See Helpman (2006) for a review of this literature.
   2
     Nunn (2007) in particular finds that the quality of legal institutions is at least as important as human
capital in explaining the structure of exports.
   3
     See Manova (2008, 2009).
   4
     See Cuñat and Melitz (2007).


                                                     2
impact of trade on inequality and unemployment?


2       Heterogeneous Firms within Industries
As pointed out above, in the 1990s a number of studies examined how firms diﬀer by trade
status. Bernard, Jensen and Lawrence (1995) and Bernard and Jensen (1999) addressed this
question with U.S. data, and their work was followed by studies based on data from Canada,
Colombia, France, Mexico, Morocco, Spain and Taiwan.5 All these studies found that only
a small fraction of firms export, that exporting firms are larger and more productive than
nonexporters, and that firms exhibit persistence in their export status; namely, nonexporters
persist in not exporting while exporters persist in exporting, although occasionally firms
switch status. The last finding was interpreted to reflect the sunk costs of exporting, meaning
that a firm has to bear a fixed cost in order to penetrate a foreign market.6 Das, Roberts
and Tybout (2007) found such costs to be around $400,000 for Colombian firms.
    According to the World Trade Organization (2008, Table 5), in the United States 18
percent of manufacturing firms exported in 2002, in France 17.4 percent of firms in this sector
exported in 1986, in Japan this fraction was 20 percent in 2000, and in Norway it exceeded
39 percent in 2003. The same publication (2008, Table 6) reports a high concentration of
exports in large firms. In the United States, for example, in 2002 the top 1 percent of firms
by size controlled 81 percent of manufacturing exports, while the top 10 percent controlled
96 percent. In France the comparable numbers were 44 and 84 percent, respectively, in 2003,
and in Norway they were 53 and 91 percent, respectively, in 2003.
    Exporting firms are both larger and more productive than nonexporters. For example,
in the United States exporters employ about twice as many workers as nonexporters, and
the value-added per worker of exporters is 11 percent larger than the value-added per worker
of nonexporters.7 Nevertheless, exporting firms sell abroad only a small fraction of their
output.8
    Melitz (2003) develops a theoretical framework that can explain these data. His point
of departure is a sector in which firms engage in monopolistic competition and produce a
large assortment of brands of a diﬀerentiated product, as in the Helpman-Krugman model.
Unlike Helpman-Krugman, however, Melitz assumes that an entrant to the industry faces
uncertainty regarding its total factor productivity. Upon bearing the entry cost a firm learns
the productivity of its technology, yet before entry all it knows is the distribution from which
    5
     See Baldwin and Gu (2003) for Canada; Clerides, Lach and Tybout (1998) for Colombia, Mexico and
Morocco; Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003) and Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2004) for France;
Delgado, Fariñas and Ruano (2002) for Spain; and Aw, Chung and Roberts (2000) for Taiwan.
   6
     See Roberts and Tybout (1997) for Colombia and Bernard and Jensen (2004) for the United States.
   7
     See Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott (2007, Table 3) for estimates with industry fixed eﬀects.
   8
     See Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott (2007, Table 2).



                                                  3
its productivity level will be drawn. For this reason, to evaluate the profitability of entry, a
firm has to form strategies conditional on every conceivable productivity draw: whether it
will stay in the industry and bear the fixed cost of production, whether it will serve only the
domestic market, or whether in addition to serving the domestic market it will also export
and bear the fixed cost of exporting. In what follows I focus on a two-country world, so that
a firm does not need to choose to which countries to export–only whether to export or not–
and it cannot engage in foreign direct investment.9 After forming these contingent plans, a
firm faces a distribution of profits at the entry stage and it enters only if the expected profits
are suﬃciently high to cover the entry cost. In a free-entry equilibrium, expected profits just
equal the entry cost. This is the economic structure modelled by Melitz (2003).
     Firms produce output according to the production function

                                                      y = θh,                                            (1)

where y is output, θ is productivity–drawn from a known cumulative distribution G (θ)–
and h is labor employment. This production function applies to every variety of the product.
Preferences are CES with the elasticity of substitution ε. The fixed production cost is fd , the
fixed export cost is fx , and the fixed entry cost is fe .10 In addition, there are variable trade
costs, summarized by the parameter τ > 1; τ − 1 measures the fraction of extra costs, due to
tariﬀs or shipment outlays, that an exporter has to bear in order to deliver a product to the
foreign country. From this specification it is possible to compute operating profits from serv-
ing only the domestic market as a function of productivity, denoted π d (θ), and the combined
profits from both serving the domestic market and from exporting (net of the fixed costs of
production and exporting) as a function of productivity, denoted π d+x (θ). As a result, the
highest attainable profit level as a function of productivity is π (θ) = max {0, π d (θ) , π d+x (θ)},
and the free-entry condition is        Z       ∞
                                                   π (θ) dG (θ) = fe .                                   (2)
                                           0

   It is clear from this exposition that if the lowest value of θ in the support of G (·) is low
enough, then there exists a productivity cutoﬀ θd –the domestic cutoﬀ–at which π d (θd ) = 0;
that is, firms with this productivity break even by serving the domestic market only. Firms
with productivity above this cutoﬀ have no reason to leave the industry because they make
profits after entry. In addition, whenever

                                                   τ ε−1 fx > fd ,
   9
     See, however, Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004) for multiple countries with FDI, and Helpman, Melitz
and Rubinstein (2008) for multiple countries and the choice of exporting to only some of them.
  10
     Melitz (2003) analyzes a dynamic model, while I use a static version in this paper. For this reason I do
not distinguish between fixed costs and the sunk cost of entry.



                                                         4
                              serve only the             serve the domestic
                  exit
                              domestic market            market and export
                                                                                         θ
              0          θd                       θx


           Figure 1: Optimal strategies for firms with diﬀerent productivity levels


there also exists an export cutoﬀ, θx , at which profits from serving the domestic market
just equal profits both from serving the domestic market and from exporting, i.e., π d (θx ) =
π d+x (θx ), such that θx > θd . Under these circumstances the optimal strategies of firms are
represented in Figure 1: the lowest productivity firms, with θ < θd , exit the industry, those
with productivity θd < θ < θx stay and serve only the domestic market, and those with
θ > θx stay and serve both the domestic and the foreign market.
    This sorting pattern is consistent with the evidence. First, only a fraction of firms export.
Second, exporters sell only a portion of their output to foreign customers. Third, exporters are
more productive and larger than nonexporters.11 And finally, the distribution of export sales
is skewed toward larger firms. This analysis oﬀers a simple explanation of these patterns in
the data, but it does not explain why exporters pay higher wages than nonexporters, because
it assumes that the labor market is competitive and therefore all firms pay the same wages.
As a result, there is no wage inequality among workers.
    This framework is also useful for understanding episodes of trade liberalization. Balassa
(1966, 1967) was the first to note that the formation of the European Common Market
did not lead to major reallocations of resources across industries, as would be predicted
by traditional Ricardian or Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory, but rather to large reallocations
within industries. And more recent studies of trade liberalization, which use detailed firm-
level data–such as Tybout and Westbrook (1995) for Mexico, Pavcnik (2002) for Chile, and
Trefler (2004) for Canada–find large market share reallocations within industries from low-
to high-productivity firms, and the exit of low-productivity firms.
    To see how the Melitz model can explain these findings, consider a reduction in τ . This
raises profits from export sales, which leads to an expansion of output by exporters and
thereby to a shift in market share from firms that do not export to exporters. The expansion
  11
    They are larger because higher-productivity firms employ more workers, produce more goods, and thus
have higher revenue.


                                                  5
of exporting firms raises demand for domestic factors of production and leads to a hike in
wages relative to product prices, thereby reducing the profitability of all firms, exporters
and nonexporters alike. As a result, the profits of nonexporters decline, and those who are
least productive and barely breaking even lose money after trade liberalization and exit the
industry. On the other side, while higher input costs reduce the profits of exporters, this
reduction is not suﬃcient to fully oﬀset the initial rise in their profitability as a result of the
decline in variable trade costs. Therefore, the final outcome is exit of the least productive
firms and market share reallocation from low-productivity domestic firms to high-productivity
exporters. This reallocation of resources within the industry raises the industry’s average
productivity.
    I will use these insights in the analysis of the interdependence of countries with diﬀerent
levels of labor market frictions. But first I discuss the nature of the labor market frictions
that will be used in this analysis.


3    Search and Matching Frictions in Labor Markets
To understand the relationship between trade and unemployment, we need to explicitly for-
mulate frictions that lead to unemployment in the first place. For this purpose Helpman
and Itskhoki (2009) and Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2009, 2010) use the Diamond-
Mortensen-Pissarides search and matching framework for labor markets, which is described
in detail in Pissarides (2000). While the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides framework is dy-
namic, it was adapted to static models in the Helpman-Itskhoki-Redding studies. However,
our static framework represents the steady state of a dynamic model.
    Imagine a labor market in which workers match with firms and the number of successful
matches depends on how many workers search for jobs and how many vacancies are posted by
firms; the more workers search for jobs or the more vacancies are posted the larger the number
of successful matches. This relationship is represented by a matching function, assumed to
take the Cobb-Douglas form

                                  H = mV χ N 1−χ , 0 < χ < 1,

where H is the number of successful matches, V is the number of vacancies, and N is the
number of workers searching for jobs. The parameter m measures the eﬃciency of the match-
ing processes, while χ measures the weight of vacancies in the matching function. In this
representation the details of the matching process are not spelled out, yet the matching func-
tion is assumed to represent the outcome of this process. This choice of functional form is
not arbitrary, however, because it fits the data well.
    In the dynamic version of the model, V and N are stocks while H is a flow. As a


                                                6
result, the ratio H/N is a hazard rate, representing the instantaneous probability (per unit
time) that a worker finds employment. In the static version of the model to be considered
here, H/N simply represents the probability that a worker finds employment, and we treat
this probability as a measure of labor market tightness, to be denoted by x. Similarly, the
probability that a firm that posts a vacancy finds a worker equals H/V . Therefore, if v
denotes the cost of posting a vacancy, then the expected cost of hiring a worker is b ≡ vV /H,
i.e., it equals the cost of a vacancy divided by the probability of finding a worker per vacancy
posted. We refer to b as the cost of hiring, and the matching function implies that it equals

                           1                2v
                        b = axα , where a ≡ 1+α and α ≡ (1 − χ) /χ.                                     (3)
                           2               m

The derived parameter a summarizes labor market frictions; it rises with the cost of posting
vacancies, v, and declines with the eﬃciency of the matching process, m. In an economy
with multiple sectors, equation (3) is sector-specific; it represents a relationship between the
tightness of the sector’s labor market and the sector’s cost of hiring.
    Workers choose in which sector to search for jobs. Once a worker has committed to a
sector, however, his chance of being matched with a firm equals the ratio of hires in the sector,
H, to the number of workers searching for jobs in this sector, N. And the probability that a
firm fills a posted vacancy equals the sectoral ratio H/V . We allow both the cost of vacancies,
v, and the eﬃciency of matching, m, to vary across sectors, but–for simplicity–assume that
χ is the same in every industry, and therefore so is α. Under the circumstances our measure
of labor market frictions, a, also varies across sectors, reflecting diﬀerences in the eﬃciency
of matching and vacancy costs.
    As described above, a worker chooses in which sector to search for a job, and the proba-
bility of finding employment may diﬀer across sectors. In addition, the wage rate may diﬀer
across sectors. Therefore, risk-neutral workers choose to search for work in the sector that
yields the highest expected wage rate.12 For now assume that being matched with a firm
secures employment and that all employed workers in a sector are paid the same wage rate
(as will be the case in Section 4 but not in 5). Then a worker chooses the sector with the
highest value of xw, where x is the sector’s labor market tightness and w is the sector’s wage
rate. In equilibrium, xw obtains the same value in all sectors in which workers search for
jobs. In other words, there exists an expected income ω that represents the outside option of
a worker who chooses in which sector to search for a job, and in equilibrium

                                                 xw = ω                                                 (4)
  12
     I focus on risk-neutral workers. See, however, the appendix in Helpman and Itskhoki (2009) for a formu-
lation with risk-averse individuals.




                                                     7
in every sector with a positive number of workers.13 After the matching process ends, every
firm bargains with its workers over wages.


4         Trade and Interdependence
In this section I describe a number of results on trade and interdependence that are developed
in Helpman and Itskhoki (2009). Their model features two countries that are alike except for
frictions in their labor markets. There are two sectors, one producing a homogeneous product
under constant returns to scale–with one unit of output per worker–the other producing
varieties of a diﬀerentiated product. Each sector has labor market frictions of the type
described in the previous section, with the coeﬃcient a varying across sectors and countries.
The countries are indexed by A and B, a0j denotes the coeﬃcient of labor market frictions in
the homogeneous sector of country j, and aj denotes the coeﬃcient of labor market frictions in
the diﬀerentiated sector of country j. For concreteness it is assumed that aA /a0A > aB /a0B ,
so that country B has relatively lower labor market frictions in the diﬀerentiated sector. This
implies bA > bB ; that is, the cost of hiring in the diﬀerentiated sector is larger in country
A, as I explain below. The homogeneous sector serves as numeraire, so that the price of the
homogeneous product equals one and all costs are measured in units of this good.
     Every country is populated by a continuum of representative families, with each family
having a continuum of members who are workers. A family’s preferences are quasi-linear, with
the marginal utility of the homogeneous good being constant and equal to one. As a result,
families are risk-neutral and each family allocates its workers across sectors to maximize the
family’s income, which is not random due to the law of large numbers.14
     In the homogeneous sector every firm matches with a single worker and firms enter the
industry until the expected profits equal the entry cost, with the latter being the cost of
posting a vacancy, v0 . When a worker and a firm match they split equally the surplus from
the relationship, which equals 1. As a result, the wage rate equals 1/2 in the homogeneous
sector and so does the cost of hiring, i.e., w0j = b0j = 1/2. Under these circumstances the
free-entry condition pins down uniquely the level of tightness in the sector’s labor market,
              −1/α
i.e., x0j = a0j , and therefore the outside option of workers searching for jobs in the diﬀer-
                                −1/α
entiated sector is ω = a0j /2. In other words, the higher the frictions in the homogeneous
sector’s labor market are, the worse is the outside option of workers searching for jobs in the
diﬀerentiated sector. Using this value of ω, equations (3) and (4) provide solutions to the
hiring cost and market tightness in the diﬀerentiated sector. Note that bj and xj depend
on labor market frictions but not on trade frictions. As a result, both a closed and an open
economy have equally tight labor markets, the same hiring costs, and the same wage rates,
    13
         In this equation x and w are sector-specific while ω is the same for all sectors.
    14
         See, however, the appendix in Helpman and Itskhoki (2009) for a treatment of risk-averse workers.


                                                         8
measured in units of the homogeneous good. Real wages are not the same in a closed and
open economy, however, as argued below.
    The diﬀerentiated sector is structured in the same way as in the model described in Section
2, except for the labor market frictions. In particular, firms enter the industry after bearing
a fixed entry cost, fe . Upon entry a firm learns its productivity level θ that is drawn from
a known distribution, G (θ). Once it knows its productivity it has to decide whether to stay
in the industry and bear the fixed cost of production, fd or exit. Should it decide to stay,
it has to choose whether to serve only the domestic market or to serve the domestic market
and also export. Exporting requires it to bear the fixed cost, fx , and the variable cost, τ .
After deciding on its strategy, which includes the export status, a firm posts vacancies in
order to be matched with h workers. The search and matching process in the labor market
implies that the cost of being matched with these workers is bj h in country j. After hiring
the workers a firm engages in multilateral bargaining with them in the manner proposed by
Stole and Zwiebel (1996a,b). This bargaining game yields a solution in which the wage rate
equals a fixed fraction of revenue per worker, where this fraction depends on the elasticity
of substitution between brands of the diﬀerentiated product. Anticipating this equilibrium
wage structure, a profit-maximizing firms chooses employment h up to the point at which
it pays a wage rate equal to the hiring cost, bj . As a result, similar to the simpler model
discussed in Section 2, all firms pay the same wage rate–independently of their productivity
or export status–despite the fact that wages are determined in a diﬀerent manner. The
domestic cutoﬀ, θd , and the export cutoﬀ, θx , are determined in the same way as in Section
2, and the free-entry condition, i.e., that expected profits equal the entry cost, fe , is also
similar (see (2)).
    Helpman and Itskhoki (2009) use this general equilibrium model of two countries to derive
results on the impact of labor market and trade frictions on trade flows, productivity, welfare
and unemployment. In this framework country j’s unemployment rate equals the weighted
average of its sectoral rates of unemployment, 1 − x0 and 1 − x, expressed as

                                        N0j              Nj
                                 uj =       (1 − x0j ) +     (1 − xj ) ,                             (5)
                                        N̄j              N̄j

where N0j is the number of workers searching for jobs in the homogeneous sector, and Nj is
the number of workers searching for jobs in the diﬀerentiated sector, and N̄j = N0j + Nj is
the total number of workers in this country.
   First, a larger fraction of diﬀerentiated-sector firms export in country B, which has the
smaller hiring cost (i.e., bA > bB ). Moreover, country B exports diﬀerentiated products on net
and imports homogeneous goods.15 In addition, the share of intra-industry trade is smaller
  15
   Davidson, Martin and Matusz (1999) were the first to point out that across-country diﬀerences in labor
market frictions of the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides type can be a source of comparative advantage.


                                                    9
the larger the ratio bA /bB is, i.e., the larger the proportional diﬀerence in the diﬀerentiated
sectors’ hiring costs.
     Second, diﬀerentiated-sector TFP is higher in every trade equilibrium than in autarky,
as in Melitz (2003). And if the productivity θ is distributed Pareto, then TFP is higher in
country B’s diﬀerentiated sector than in A’s. Sectoral productivity in the diﬀerentiated sector
is sensitive to labor market frictions. In particular, a decline in aj raises this productivity
in country j but reduces it in the trade-partner country. In other words, if labor market
frictions decline in the diﬀerentiated sector of a country this country enjoys higher total
factor productivity, but this generates a negative productivity shock in the trade-partner
country.
     Third, despite the labor market frictions, both countries gain from trade, but a country’s
welfare level depends on labor market frictions in its trade-partner country in addition to its
own. On the one hand, a reduction in labor market frictions in country j’s diﬀerentiated sector
raises its welfare and reduces the welfare level of its trade partner. This negative transmission
is related to the negative transmission of productivity discussed above. On the other hand,
a simultaneous proportional reduction in labor market frictions in the diﬀerentiated sectors
of both countries raises welfare in both of them. This suggests that labor market reforms
may turn into beggar-thy-neighbor policies, unless they are coordinated across countries. In
addition, a reduction in labor market frictions in country j at a common rate in both sectors
raises its welfare and does not aﬀect the welfare level of its trade partner. And a reduction
of trade impediments raises welfare in both countries.
     Fourth, in a symmetric world economy in which a0 is the same in both countries, and so is
a, a reduction in labor market frictions in the diﬀerentiated sectors at the same rate in both
countries reduces aggregate unemployment if and only if a is suﬃciently small relative to
a0 , and raises unemployment otherwise. In this case lower frictions reduce the sectoral rates
of unemployment (by rasing x0 and x), but they also reallocate labor to the diﬀerentiated
sector, which raises aggregate unemployment when a > a0 (see (5)). The former eﬀect
dominates when a is suﬃciently small relative to a0 , and unemployment necessarily declines
when a < a0 . Moreover, a reduction in labor market frictions at a common rate in both
sectors and both countries reduces aggregate unemployment. Finally, a reduction in trade
impediments–including the opening of trade–raises aggregate unemployment if and only
if a > a0 , because it reallocates labor toward the diﬀerentiated sector and trade does not
impact the sectoral rates of unemployment.
     When the countries are not symmetric, richer patterns of unemployment emerge in equi-
librium. In particular, the rate of unemployment can be higher in either country A or country
B. For example, the rate of unemployment may rise in both countries in response to higher
labor market frictions in country A, or it may rise in B and decline in A.
     It follows from this analysis that while trade may raise unemployment (which happens

                                               10
when labor market frictions are higher in the diﬀerentiated sector), it always raises welfare.
Moreover, unemployment does not reflect welfare in the cross section; the country with higher
welfare may have higher or lower unemployment. And importantly, uncoordinated reductions
of labor market frictions in one country only, while benefitting the reforming country, hurt
the trade partner.
    The last result has a bearing on the debate about labor market policies in the EU.
In October 1997, the EU amended its governing agreement by the Treaty of Amsterdam,
which made employment policies a priority. In November 1997, the extraordinary European
Council meeting in Luxembourg launched the European Employment Strategy. Two and a
half years later, during the European Council meeting in Lisbon in March 2000, the heads of
state launched the Lisbon Agenda, designed for the EU "...to become the most competitive
and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world." What exactly should the European
Union do in order to achieve these objectives? As an example, the UK has been concerned
with lack of labor market flexibility in countries such as France and Spain, and it has been
promoting labor market reforms. Our results suggest that unilateral labor market reforms in,
say, France, may not benefit the UK. But coordinated reductions in labor market frictions
can benefit every country.


5    Inequality
In the previous section wages diﬀer across sectors but not across firms or workers within
a sector. Moreover, all firms employ the same composition of workers, who are perfect
substitutes for each other. In the data, however, substantial diﬀerences exist in workforce
composition across firms of diﬀerent size, there is large variation in wages of workers with the
same observed characteristics, larger firms pay higher wages, and exporters pay an export
wage premium (that is, they pay higher wage than a nonexporter with the same productivity
would pay). As a result, there is substantial wage inequality within industries, and this
inequality varies across sectors. To address these issues Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding
(2010) extend the analytical framework from the previous section and provide an analysis
of the determinants of both unemployment and wage inequality within industries. In what
follows I report some of their findings, focusing on equilibrium outcomes within a sector for
the case of a single type of risk-neutral worker.16
    Instead of workers being identical, as in the previous section, now assume that workers
are perfect substitutes for each other in the homogeneous product sector, but that in the
diﬀerentiated product sector they are identical ex-ante but not ex-post. In particular, suppose
that when a worker is matched with a firm in the diﬀerentiated sector the quality of the match
  16
     Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010) also discuss the case of multiple types of workers, risk-averse
workers, and general equilibrium interactions.


                                                   11
is random, with a representing the realized ability of the worker on the job in the firm. The
ability level, a, is drawn from the Pareto distribution F (a) = 1 − (amin /a)k for a ≥ amin > 0,
k > 1, and these draws are independent across firms and individuals. Importantly, the ability
level, a, is observed neither by the individual worker nor by his employer. In this event, all
firms have the same composition of workers if they do not screen job candidates. But because,
as will soon become clear, the ability distribution of the workforce impacts a firm’s overall
productivity, firms have an incentive to screen job candidates. To this end they have an
imperfect screening technology which allows a firm to determine only whether the ability of
a worker is above or below a threshold, ac , but this technology is costly to implement, with
the cost being caδc /δ units of the homogeneous good. That is, higher ability thresholds are
more costly to administer, but the higher the threshold ac > amin is, the higher is the average
ability of the firm’s workforce if it retains only workers above the screening threshold.17
    For the following analysis also assume that the distribution of a firm’s productivity is
Pareto, given by G (θ) = 1 − (θmin /θ)z for θ ≥ θmin > 0 and z > 1, and that the production
function is
                                     y = θhγ ā,    0<γ<1                                    (6)

instead of (1), where ā is the average ability of the firm’s workers. In this specification
output is larger the more productive the firm is, the higher is the average ability of its
employees, and the more workers it employs. An important feature of this production function
is complementarity between the ability levels of workers; the higher the average ability of the
workforce, the higher is the marginal product of a worker. Every employee contributes to
output both through the employment level, h, and through the average ability, ā. For this
reason adding a worker with below average ability to the pool of employees raises output
through h but reduces it through ā. For a given pool of potential employees with whom a
firm is matched, output rises with the threshold ac when γk < 1. In other words, in this case
dropping the least able workers raises output because the gain in average ability ā exceeds
the loss in the employment level h. Under the circumstances a firm has an incentive to engage
in costly screening.
     In this setup the cost of matching with workers is b . After being matched with workers
a firm chooses a screening threshold ac ≥ amin and hires only workers with ability a above the
threshold. The resulting employment level is h = (amin /ac )k and the firm bargains with the
h workers over wages. At this stage the firm knows that every worker has ability above ac ,
but it does not know the ability level of each individual worker. This leads to an equilibrium
wage which is the same for every worker in the firm. Stole-Zwiebel multilateral bargaining
implies that the wage rate is again a fraction of the revenue per worker, except that now this
fraction depends both on the elasticity of substitution between brands of the diﬀerentiated
 17
      The Pareto distribution implies that the average ability of these workers is ā = kac /(k − 1).


                                                        12
product and on the parameter γ from the production function (6).
    As in Melitz (2003), profit-maximizing firms sort into sales strategies by productivity, as
described in Figure 1: the least productive firms exit, the most productive firms export, and
firms with productivity between θd and θx serve only the domestic market. Unlike Melitz
(2003), however, wages diﬀer across firms. In equilibrium

                                                w(θ)h (θ)
                                                          = b,
                                                   (θ)

where w (θ) is the wage rate in a firm with productivity θ, (θ) is the number of workers it
chooses to match with, and h (θ) is its employment level. Consistent with the data, more-
productive firms match with more workers, employ more workers, have a better workforce
composition (i.e., they are more selective in hiring), and pay higher wages, including an
export wage premium. Risk-neutral workers are indiﬀerent between being matched with a
high- or low-productivity firm, because conditional on being matched, the expected wage is
the same in all firms. That is, a worker matched with a firm of productivity θ is hired with
probability h (θ) / (θ), and if hired he receives the wage rate w (θ), which implies that the
expected wage rate equals b.
     Now a worker can be unemployed for two reasons. First, he may not be matched with
a firm. Second, even if matched with a firm, his match-specific ability a may fall below the
firm’s cutoﬀ ac , in which case he is not hired. As a result the sectoral rate of unemployment
is not 1 − x but rather 1 − σx, where σ is the industry’s average hiring rate h (θ) / (θ).
     In this framework sectoral wage inequality is larger in the open economy than in the
closed economy, as long as only a fraction of firms export (i.e., as long as θx > θd ). When
all firms export, wage inequality in the open economy is the same as in the closed economy.
This implies that rising trade costs may generate nonmonotonic responses of wage inequality.
In particular, wage inequality within an industry may rise initially with the trade cost and
decline with further increases in the trade cost. This is necessarily the case when the fixed
export cost fx rises, but may also be the case when the variable trade cost τ rises.18
     When ω is invariant to trade (as in the previous section), sectoral unemployment is
strictly higher in the open economy than in the closed economy, because exporters are more
selective in their hiring than nonexporters.19 Nevertheless, every worker’s ex-ante welfare is
higher in the open economy than in the closed economy. In other words, workers gain from
trade despite the fact that they face more income risk and higher unemployment in the open
  18
     It is also possible for wage inequality to be rising in the variable trade cost everywhere when fx > fd , but
wage inequality as a function of the variable trade cost has an inverted-U shape when fx < fd .
  19
     I focus here on the case of a constant ω. In many cases, however, ω changes with trade, and then a
general equilibrium analysis is required in order to assess the impact of trade on workers’ expected income.
See Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010) for a discussion of such general equilibrium feedbacks.




                                                       13
                     average
                  unemployment

                                                                        open economy

                                                                       closed economy




                                                                                          average
                         Quantile 1   Quantile 2   Quantile 3   Quantile 4   Quantile 5    wages



                       Figure 2: Average unemployment across wage quantiles


economy.20
     Interestingly, trade diﬀerentially impacts matches with diﬀerent abilities a. Helpman,
Itskhoki and Redding (2009) show that the rate of unemployment of workers with match-
specific ability a, u (a), is decreasing in a for all a ≥ ad . When an economy opens to trade,
unemployment rises for every ability level, but it rises most for medium-ability workers and
least for high-ability workers.
     The distribution of wages conditional on a, measured in units of the homogeneous good,
implies that both average wages and wage inequality are higher for workers with higher
ability. But trade aﬀects wage distributions diﬀerently for workers with diﬀerent abilities.
For low values of a, the conditional wage distribution is the same in autarky and in the trade
equilibrium. For high values of a, the conditional wage distribution in the open economy
first-order stochastically dominates the conditional wage distribution in the closed economy.
And for intermediate values of a, the conditional wage distribution in the open economy is
first-order stochastically dominated by the wage distribution in the closed economy. It follows
that medium-ability workers are the least fortunate when trade opens up, both in terms of
wage gains and unemployment. This results from the fact that trade leads to the loss of job
opportunities for workers with intermediate ability levels in high-productivity firms, which
become exporters. The lowest-productivity workers are not employed by high-productivity
firms in the closed as well as open economies, while the highest-productivity workers are
employed by high-productivity firms in both the closed and open economies, and therefore
the middle range of abilities suﬀers a relative disadvantage from trade.
     Our results on the variation in unemployment and wage distributions across workers with
 20
      This result also holds when workers are risk-averse, but the relative measure of risk-aversion is low.


                                                         14
diﬀerent match-specific ability levels imply that average wages and unemployment rates are
negatively correlated in the cross section. Figure 2 illustrates this relationship in a closed and
open economy across quantiles of the wage distribution (with the same number of workers
in every quantile); when the economy opens to trade, the largest increase in unemployment
takes place among workers with the lowest average wages.

   International trade makes trading countries interdependent, which impacts unemployment
and inequality. New research that emphasizes firm heterogeneity within industries provides
a suitable framework for studying the determinants of trade and foreign direct investment,
as well as interdependence across countries in rates of unemployment and income inequality.
I have reviewed in this paper recent research that incorporates labor market frictions and
worker heterogeneity into this framework in order to address these issues. The new models
capture important features of the data and provide a suitable framework for studying trade
and labor market policies.




                                               15
References
 [1] Aw, Bee-Yan, Sukkyun Chung and Mark J. Roberts (2000), "Productivity and Turnover
     in the Export Market: Micro-level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan
     (China)." World Bank Economic Review 14, pp. 65-90.

 [2] Balassa, Bela (1966), "Tariﬀ Reductions and Trade in Manufactures among the Industrial
     Countries." American Economic Review 56, pp. 466-473.

 [3] Balassa, Bela (1967), Trade Liberalization Among Industrial Countries (New York:
     McGraw-Hill Book Company).

 [4] Baldwin, John R. and Wulong Gu (2003), "Export Market Participation and Productiv-
     ity Performance in Canadian Manufacturing." Canadian Journal of Economics 36, pp.
     634-657.

 [5] Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum (2003),
     "Plants and Productivity in International Trade." American Economic Review 93, pp.
     1268-1290.

 [6] Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Robert Z. Lawrence (1995), "Exporters,
     Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing, 1976-1987." Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, Microeconomics, pp. 67-119.

 [7] Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1999), "Exceptional Exporter Performance:
     Cause, Eﬀect, or Both?" Journal of International Economics 47, pp. 1-25.

 [8] Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (2004), "Why Some Firms Export." Review
     of Economics and Statistics 86, pp. 561-569.

 [9] Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott (2007),
     "Firms in International Trade." Journal of Economic Perspectives 21, pp. 105-130.

[10] Clerides, Sofronis K., Saul Lach and James R. Tybout (1998), "Is Learning by Exporting
     Important? Micro-Dynamic Evidence form Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco." Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 113, pp. 903-947.

[11] Cuñat, Alejandro and Marc Melitz (2007), "Volatility, Labor Market Flexibility, and the
     Pattern of Comparative Advantage," NBER Working Paper No. 13062.

[12] Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout (2007), “Market Entry Costs,
     Producer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics,” Econometrica 75, pp. 837-873.



                                            16
[13] Davidson, Carl, Lawrence Martin and Steven Matusz (1999), "Trade and Search Gener-
     ated Unemployment," Journal of International Economics 48, pp. 271-299.

[14] Delgado, Miguel A., Jose C. Fariñas, and Sonia Ruano (2002), "Firm Productivity and
     Export Markets: A Non-Parametric Approach." Journal of International Economics 57,
     pp. 397-422.

[15] Diamond, Peter A. (1982a), “Demand Management in Search Equilibrium.” Journal of
     Political Economy 90, pp. 881—894.

[16] Diamond, Peter A. (1982b), “Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in Search Equilibrium.”
     Review of Economic Studies 49, pp. 217—227.

[17] Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz (2004), "Dissecting Trade:
     Firms, Industries, and Export Destination," American Economic Review (Papers and
     Proceedings) 94, pp. 150-154.

[18] Helpman, Elhanan (2006) "Trade, FDI, and the Organization of Firms." Journal of
     Economic Literature XLIV: 589-630.

[19] Helpman, Elhanan and Oleg Itskhoki (2009), “Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Un-
     employment,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[20] Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding (2009), "Unequal Eﬀects of
     Trade on Workers with Diﬀerent Abilities," Journal of the European Economic Associ-
     ation, forthcoming.

[21] Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen Redding (2010), "Inequality and Unem-
     ployment in a Global Economy," Econometrica, forthcoming.

[22] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004), "Export versus FDI
     with Heterogeneous Firms," American Economic Review 94, pp. 300-316.

[23] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz and Yona Rubinstein (2008), “Trading Partners and
     Trading Volumes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, pp. 441—487.

[24] Manova, Kalina (2008), "Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations and Inter-
     national Trade," Journal of International Economics 76, pp.33-47.

[25] Manova, Kalina (2009), "Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms and International
     Trade," mimeo, Stanford University.

[26] Melitz, Marc J. (2003), "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Ag-
     gregate Industry Productivity," Econometrica 71, pp. 1695-1725.

                                           17
[27] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides (1994), “Job Creation and Job De-
     struction in the Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies 61, pp. 397-415.

[28] Nunn, Nathan (2007), "Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern
     of Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics CXXII, pp. 569-600.

[29] Pavcnik, Nina (2002), “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Ev-
     idence from Chilean Plants.” Review of Economic Studies 69, pp. 245-276.

[30] Pissarides, Christopher A. (2000), Equilibrium Unemployment Theory (Cambridge, MA:
     The MIT Press, second edition).

[31] Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout (1997), "The Decision to Export in Colombia:
     An Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs." American Economic Review 87, pp.
     545-564.

[32] Trefler, Daniel (2004), "The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement."
     American Economic Review 94, pp. 870-895.

[33] Tybout, James R. and M. Daniel Westbrook (1995), "Trade Liberalization and the
     Dimensions of Eﬃciency Changes in Mexican Manufacturing Industries." Journal of
     International Economics 39, pp. 53-78.

[34] Stole, Lars A. and Jeﬀrey Zwiebel (1996a), “Organizational Design and Technology
     Choice under Intrafirm Bargaining,” American Economic Review 86, pp. 195-222.

[35] Stole, Lars A. and Jeﬀrey Zwiebel (1996b), “Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding
     Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies 63, pp. 375-410.

[36] World Trade Organization (2008), World Trade Report 2008: Transnational Corpora-
     tions, and the Infrastructure Challenge (Geneva: World Trade Organization).




                                           18
