                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    MEASURING WHAT EMPLOYERS REALLY DO ABOUT ENTRY WAGES OVER
                       THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                          Pedro S. Martins
                                             Gary Solon
                                          Jonathan Thomas

                                        Working Paper 15767
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15767


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2010




The authors are grateful for helpful discussions with Michael Elsby and Pedro Portugal and for comments
from seminar participants at Michigan State University, the National Bureau of Economic Research
Summer Institute, the CREI/Kiel Institute conference on “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Labor
Market,” and the International Tor Vergata Conference on Money, Banking, and Finance. Martins
and Thomas are grateful for the support of the ESRC (RES-062-23-0546). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Pedro S. Martins, Gary Solon, and Jonathan Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring What Employers Really Do about Entry Wages over the Business Cycle
Pedro S. Martins, Gary Solon, and Jonathan Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 15767
February 2010
JEL No. E24,E32

                                               ABSTRACT

In models recently published by several influential macroeconomic theorists, rigidity in the real wages
that firms pay newly hired workers plays a crucial role in generating realistically large cyclical fluctuations
in unemployment. There is remarkably little evidence, however, on whether employers’ hiring wages
really are invariant to business cycle conditions. We review the small empirical literature and show
that the methods used thus far are poorly suited for identifying employers’ wage practices. We propose
a simpler and more relevant approach – use matched employer/employee longitudinal data to identify
entry jobs and then directly track the cyclical variation in the real wages paid to workers newly hired
into those jobs. We illustrate the methodology by applying it to data from an annual census of employers
in Portugal over the period 1982-2007. We find that real entry wages in Portugal over this period
tend to be about 1.8 percent higher when the unemployment rate is one percentage point lower. Like
most recent evidence on other aspects of wage cyclicality, our results suggest that the cyclical elasticity
of wages is similar to that of employment


Pedro S. Martins                                       Jonathan Thomas
School of Business and Management                      School of Economics
Queen Mary, University of London                       University of Edinburgh
London E1 4NS                                          Edinburgh EH8 9JY
UK                                                     UK
p.martins@qmul.ac.uk                                   Jonathan.Thomas@ed.ac.uk

Gary Solon
Department of Economics
Marshall-Adams Hall
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
solon@msu.edu
Measuring What Employers Really Do about Entry Wages over the Business Cycle



                                     I. Introduction

       Recent theoretical efforts to explain the amplitude of cyclical unemployment

fluctuations have emphasized the potential importance of rigidity in the real wages that

firms pay to their newly hired workers. But are firms’ hiring wages really acyclical?

       In section II, we review the recent theoretical literature. In section III, we argue

that the empirical literature has not succeeded yet in identifying what employers really do

about hiring wages, and then we propose a more direct and transparent empirical

approach – using matched employer/employee longitudinal data to identify firms’ entry

jobs and then tracking the cyclical variation in the real wages paid to workers newly hired

into those jobs. In section IV, we illustrate our approach with an application to data from

the annual census of employers in Portugal. In section V, we briefly summarize our

findings, and we discuss their macroeconomic implications.



             II. The Macroeconomic Importance of Entry-Wage Cyclicality

       At least since Keynes (1936), macroeconomists have theorized that wages are

inflexible and that limited cyclical variability of wages may account for the cyclical

volatility of employment and unemployment. The idea continues to figure prominently

in the current literature. For example, the very first sentence of the recent Journal of

Political Economy paper by Gertler and Trigari (2009, p. 38) says, “A long-standing

challenge in macroeconomics is accounting for the relatively smooth behavior of real

wages over the business cycle along with the relatively volatile behavior of employment.”
       Much of the current interest in the cyclical behavior of wages, especially hiring

wages, has grown out of a debate about the ability of the canonical Mortensen-Pissarides

(1994) model to generate realistically large cyclical fluctuations in unemployment. In the

canonical model, wages within a worker/employer match are determined by Nash

bargaining, and this yields a solution where the wage depends on the worker’s

productivity in the match and the worker’s outside option, which depends in turn on the

value of search and non-market activities. Because the value of non-market activities is

less cyclical than labor productivity, the wage does not vary as much as productivity, and

employment is correspondingly more volatile.        However, as pointed out by Shimer

(2005), under standard parameter values, the outside option is almost as cyclical as

productivity, with the implication that wages in the canonical model are likewise too

cyclical to generate realistic levels of unemployment variability.

       Consequently, several authors – such as Shimer (2004), Hall (2005), Hall and

Milgrom (2008), Gertler and Trigari (2009), and Kennan (forthcoming) – have suggested

wage stickiness as one way of generating more variability of unemployment within the

model. Whether this is the right way to go, however, should ultimately be subject to

empirical investigation. How much do wages actually vary over the business cycle?

        Of course, there already is a great deal of evidence on certain aspects of that

question. Numerous studies using longitudinal microdata have found that real wages are

substantially procyclical. As will be discussed in the next section, many of those studies




                                             2
find particularly large wage cyclicality for job changers, with lesser (though

considerable) cyclicality appearing for the wages of workers in ongoing matches. 1

        This apparent difference in wage cyclicality between incumbent and newly hired

workers seems at odds with the canonical model, in which continuous Nash bargaining

would cause wages in ongoing matches to be as procyclical as those in new matches.

This is easily accommodated, though, by a sensible modification of the model. All that

matters for the job creation incentive (what determines how many new jobs there are) is

the expected (discounted) value of wages in the match, not how they are distributed over

time, a point that has long been recognized (Becker, 1962; Barro, 1977; Hall, 1980; and

Boldrin and Horvath, 1995) and has been reemphasized in the context of the current

debate (Shimer, 2004; Haefke, Sonntag, and van Rens, 2008; and Pissarides, 2009).

Hence, it is argued, all that is needed to square the model with the data is to incorporate a

labor contract that makes ongoing wages relatively insensitive to future productivity

changes, for example, by making workers slightly risk averse while maintaining the

canonical model’s assumption that firms are risk neutral. In such an environment, if both

firm and worker could commit to a future wage path, ongoing wages would be constant

but at a level influenced by productivity at the point of match initiation, so wages of new

hires could vary procyclically while those of “stayers” would be acyclical. An approach

along these lines then suggests that the wage in a new match would be persistent and the

total cost of the worker – and hence the profitability of the match – would vary with the

start wage.



1
 See Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994) and the literature review in Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1992). For
more recent studies focusing on wage cyclicality in ongoing matches, see Devereux (2001), Devereux and
Hart (2006), and Shin and Solon (2007).


                                                   3
       In fact this goes too far to the other extreme as now stayers’ wages are too rigid

relative to the data. Rudanko (2009) incorporates Thomas and Worrall’s (1988) model of

“limited commitment” into a search-matching model, so that ongoing wages respond to

compete with outside options and therefore display a degree of procyclicality. For

example, Rudanko finds that, if neither firm nor worker can commit irreversibly to a

future wage path, then the model can match the empirical aggregate wage volatility (and

while she does not examine this, the continuing match wage will also be procyclical).

However, the effect on magnifying unemployment and vacancy volatility is small –

essentially confirming the point that the distribution of wages over time in an ongoing

match is unimportant.

       This issue is considered further by Kudlyak (2007), who compares the cyclicality

of the new hire wage with that of the “user cost of labor.” The latter is defined to

measure the cost of hiring a worker today relative to postponing this decision one period,

and is the primary determinant of the current employment decision (as, in the equilibrium

of her matching model, the marginal product of labor will equal the user cost). If a

worker hired next period will be paid differently from a hire today, the user cost must

take into account this future difference in addition to the current wage.        Kudylak

emphasizes that the user cost may be even more procyclical than the new hire wage. To

understand this, consider a worker hired in a downturn, and suppose full commitment by

both worker and firm is possible. The equilibrium contract will pay a relatively low and

constant wage.    However, because of mean reversion, productivity is expected to

improve, so a worker hired next period is likely to receive a higher constant wage. Thus

the cost of filling a position today rather than tomorrow is the current wage less the




                                            4
discounted future expected savings on the lower wage contract, and the user cost falls

more than the new hire wage in a recession (and vice versa in a boom). Even when

commitment is imperfect, a similar argument may apply if wages in ongoing matches are

sufficiently inertial relative to productivity. 2

        To summarize, even if wages in ongoing employment relationships were sticky,

the wages of new hires could be highly procyclical, and the allocative importance of start

wages is all the greater the more persistent those wages are as the match continues. As

recent theoretical analyses have shown, with sufficiently procyclical start wages, the

problem of explaining the volatility of unemployment remains. But are entry wages

really very procyclical? In the next section, we explain why existing evidence is not

dispositive, and we introduce a more direct approach for measuring entry-wage

cyclicality.



                      III. Methods of Measuring Entry-Wage Cyclicality

A. Previous Empirical Studies

        Pissarides (2009) dismisses theories based on cyclically rigid wages on the

ground that, empirically, hiring wages are quite procyclical. His main basis for the claim

is a collection of microeconometric studies reporting that workers who change employers

during expansions tend to experience much better wage growth than workers who change

employers during recessions. Examples of such studies include Bils (1985) and Shin


2
  Kudlyak (2009) makes a heroic attempt to measure the cyclicality in the user cost of newly hired labor.
The true value of that user cost as perceived by the employer depends on how long the employer believes
the match will last, what the employer believes will be the future path of both the wage rate and the
productivity of the match, and the employer’s understanding of the interrelationships among these factors.
For a data analyst to impute the employer’s perception of the user cost therefore requires very strong
assumptions. Based on the assumptions she makes, Kudlyak concludes that the user cost is more
procyclical than the start wage.


                                                    5
(1994) for the United States; Devereux and Hart (2006) for the United Kingdom; and

Martins (2007) and Carneiro, Guimarães, and Portugal (2009) for Portugal. Similarly,

Haefke, Sonntag, and van Rens (2008) find that individuals moving from non-

employment to employment during expansions tend to receive higher wages than

individuals moving from non-employment to employment during recessions.

        Gertler and Trigari (2009), however, explain why such evidence does not rule out

acyclical wage setting by firms. Even if every firm maintains cyclically rigid wages in

each job title, workers taking new jobs will show procyclical wages if, during expansions,

they face better opportunities to move into higher-paying industries, higher-paying firms

within industries, or higher-paying jobs within firms. In contrast, during recessions, a

larger share of job changers are displaced workers, who often suffer wage reductions

relative to the jobs they have lost. As Gertler and Trigari (p. 73) put it, “Suppose, for

example, that a highly skilled machinist takes a job as a low-paid cab driver in a

recession and then is re-employed as a high-paid machinist in a boom. In this case there

is a cyclical movement in job match quality for the individual” even if the wages in both

the machinist job and the cab driver job are acyclical. 3 As Gertler and Trigari emphasize,

this process of so-called “cyclical upgrading” in worker/employer matches (and cyclical

downgrading in recessions) has long been discussed and documented. Early references

include Reynolds (1951), Reder (1955), and Okun (1973). Recent analyses include

Solon, Whatley, and Stevens (1997), McLaughlin and Bils (2001), and Devereux (2004).

        We should note that, from the workers’ perspective, their improved opportunities

for moving to better jobs in an expansion are a true form of wage procyclicality. But that

3
  Bewley (1999, p. 151) earlier made the exact same point: “the findings could result from the effects of
recession on the level of jobs accepted during recessions rather than from the effects on hiring pay for
particular jobs.”


                                                   6
is not what theoretical analyses such as Hall (2005) are about. Rather, those analyses are

attempting to explain the amplitude of cyclical fluctuations in unemployment by

assuming rigidity in the hiring wages that particular firms pay in particular jobs. Gertler

and Trigari therefore are correct in criticizing the existing empirical literature for

rejecting      such    theories    on    the      basis   of   evidence   confounded   by   cyclical

upgrading/downgrading.

           Gertler and Trigari claim to get better estimates of cyclicality of hiring wages

within particular jobs by using longitudinal U.S. worker data from 1990-1996 in the

Survey of Income and Program Participation. In particular, they perform least squares

estimation of a regression of the worker’s log real wage on the unemployment rate, the

interaction of the unemployment rate with a dummy variable that equals 1 if the worker

has been with the current employer for less than a year, dummy variables for every

worker/employer match, and other control variables including the current tenure of the

match. The estimated coefficient of the interaction term is statistically insignificant, and

Gertler and Trigari (pp. 73-4) conclude that, “after we control for compositional effects,

new hire wages appear no more cyclically sensitive than existing workers’ wages.”

           It is crucial, however, to consider the properties of the sort of “fixed effects

estimation” that Gertler and Trigari implement by controlling for worker/employer

matches. As is well-known from the literature on longitudinal estimation, controlling for

match-specific fixed effects is the same thing as using only the within-match variation in

the other regressors to identify the coefficients of those regressors. 4 As a result, what

Gertler and Trigari’s insignificant estimate for the coefficient of the interaction term

really means is merely this – when one contrasts how a worker’s wage moves with
4
    For example, see Wooldridge (2002, p. 273).


                                                      7
changes in the unemployment rate during the first year with an employer (say, between

the worker’s second and sixth months with the employer) with how the same worker’s

wage moves with changes in the unemployment rate after the first year with the employer

(say, between the fourteenth and eighteenth months of the match), the estimate of this

contrast is statistically insignificant. As such, the estimated coefficient of the interaction

term speaks only to a particular aspect of how workers’ wages evolve after the workers

already have been hired. It does not measure cyclicality in initial hiring wages. 5

         To summarize, we agree with Gertler and Trigari’s point that empirical

assessment of recent theories of hiring-wage rigidity requires an approach that identifies

cyclical variation in hiring wages within particular jobs. Their approach, however, does

not achieve this. In the next sub-section, we propose an alternative approach that does

track hiring wages in particular jobs.


B. Our Methodology

         To get at the question that recent researchers intended to address, we propose a

more direct and pertinent methodology – identify specific entry jobs within particular

5
  Where Gertler and Trigari control for match fixed effects, Carneiro, Guimarães, and Portugal (2009)
(using the same Portuguese data base that we use) instead control for linearly separable worker fixed
effects and firm fixed effects. Like the fixed effects estimation of Gertler and Trigari, the fixed effects
estimation of Carneiro et al. does not seem to identify what the authors intend it to. First, controlling for
linearly additive firm effects does not account for within-firm heterogeneity in match quality. Taking
Gertler and Trigari’s skilled machinist as an example, controlling for firm fixed effects successfully adjusts
for that worker’s cyclical upgrading only if the only reason the machinist is paid more by the firm that uses
him as a machinist than the firm that uses him as a cab driver is that the first firm tends to pay all its
workers more than the latter firm pays all its workers. Obviously, that need not be the case. Second, the
particular regression model estimated by Carneiro et al. includes a dummy variable for matches in their first
year (which switches off after the first year of the match) and an interaction of that dummy with the
unemployment rate. The sum of the coefficient of the interaction term and the coefficient of the
unemployment rate is taken to represent the overall cyclicality of hiring wages. Carneiro et al., however,
do not justify that interpretation and, in certain cases, it clearly is incorrect. As a particularly simple
example, consider the “full commitment” case in which a worker hired at a low wage during a recession is
thereby locked into a low wage throughout the rest of the match. With identification coming off of the
contrast between the first year and subsequent years of the match, this observation would bias the
estimation away from finding a recession effect on the hiring wage.


                                                      8
firms, track the wages paid to newly hired workers in those jobs, and measure how those

entry wages vary over the business cycle. A precedent for this approach was applied by

Solon, Whatley, and Stevens (1997, p. 412), who found that “the entry wage for

‘laborers,’ the most common occupation for newly hired workers” in the Byers iron

tubing and pipe manufacturing company, was procyclical over the 1919-1932 period.

That result, however, applied to only one company observed over 70 years ago. In the

present paper, we take a similar approach with a large number of firms observed between

1982 and 2007 in an annual census of employers in Portugal. Because we hope that our

approach eventually will be applied to other countries besides Portugal, here we describe

the general methodology. Idiosyncrasies that arise in the application to the Portuguese

data set will be addressed in section IV.

       Let w jt denote the typical real wage paid in period t to workers newly hired into

job j , which is a particular job into which a particular firm does a substantial amount of

its hiring of new employees. A convenient statistical model for w jt is

(1)     log w jt = α j + β t + ε jt

where α j is a job fixed effect, β t is a period fixed effect common to all entry jobs, and

the zero-mean error term ε jt represents temporary job-specific departures from the

general period effect. The object of our analysis is to estimate a time series for β t and

relate it to business cycle conditions.

       If the data set were a “balanced panel” with every one of the N sampled jobs

observed in all periods, the estimation of β t would be particularly simple. With the

mean of α j normalized to zero, the least squares estimator of each β t would be simply



                                            9
              N
(2)     β̂ t = ∑ log w jt / N .
              j =1



A figure that plotted the β̂ t time series along with a cycle indicator such as the

unemployment rate would give an eyeball impression of the cyclical behavior of entry

wages. A quantitative summary could be obtained by applying least squares to the

regression of β̂ t on the unemployment rate with controls for secular time trends. If non-

stationarity were a concern, the regression could be estimated in first differences instead

of levels.

        If the panel is unbalanced because observations of w jt are missing for some jobs

in some years, it is still straightforward to estimate β t in equation (1) by applying least

squares to the regression of the available observations of log w jt on a vector of period

dummy variables (for which the estimated coefficients are the β̂ t series) and a vector of

job dummies. Alternatively, exactly the same β̂ t are obtained by applying least squares

to the “de-meaned” regression of log w jt on a vector of period dummies, in which each

variable is expressed as a deviation from the job’s time mean of the variable over the

periods in which that job is observed. Either way of calculating β̂ t accounts for period-

to-period changes in which jobs are in the sample by controlling for job fixed effects.

This β̂ t series is the same as the sample means in equation (2) except that it is

regression-adjusted for changes in sample composition. Again, the β̂ t series can be

plotted along with the unemployment rate, and it can be regressed on the unemployment

rate and time trend variables.




                                            10
        Although complications inevitably arise in practice (as will be seen in the next

section), the basic methodology is almost absurdly simple. That is what we like about it.

Our method looks in a direct and transparent way at what employers actually do about

entry wages over the business cycle.



                  IV. An Application to Firm-Level Data from Portugal

A. Description of the data

        In this section, we illustrate our method for measuring entry-wage cyclicality with

an application to Portuguese data from 1982-2007. As shown in figure 1, Portugal’s

annual unemployment rate varied widely over that period, with peaks in the mid 1980’s,

mid 1990’s, and mid 2000’s. Another relevant feature of the Portuguese labor market

over that period is its system of collective wage bargaining, which is explained in detail

in Cardoso and Portugal (2005). The main message of that paper is that the bargained

wage rates function as wage floors, with employers commonly paying wages above those

floors. In the authors’ words (p. 899), “the wage cushion works as a mechanism to

overcome the constraints imposed by collective bargaining, allowing firms wide scope

for action in their wage-setting policy…. This operation of institutional forces and

market forces in the Portuguese economy may help explain why a typically European

institutional   framework    is   compatible    with   high   wage   flexibility   and   low

unemployment.”

        Our data come from Quadros de Pessoal, an annual mandatory census of all

employers in Portugal (except that most of the public sector is excluded). The census

was conducted in March in each year through 1993 and in October from 1994 on.




                                               11
Employer identification numbers enable longitudinal matching of employers.

Information on every individual employed by the firm as of the census date is available

for every year between 1982 and 2007 except 1990 and 2001. The employee information

includes wage rate, detailed occupation code, and tenure with the firm.                        Employee

identification numbers enable longitudinal matching of individual workers, even when

they change employers, from 1986 on.

         The data base suits our purposes very well. The combination of occupation and

tenure information enables us to identify jobs into which each firm commonly recruits

new employees, and we also observe the wages that the new employees in those jobs are

paid. And by tracking those entry-job wages longitudinally, we can observe how they

vary over the business cycle.

         To identify a set of jobs into which, year after year, employers are observed to

hire new workers, we apply a series of sample selection criteria. First, we consider only

firms that employed at least 50 workers in at least five years of the 1982-2007 period.

Second, we define jobs within firms in terms of five-digit occupation codes (such as

supermarket shelf stocker, bank teller, clothing machine operator). When the same

occupation code appears for different firms, we treat each occurrence as a different

occupation/firm job. We link the occupation codes used from 1995 on with a different

system of codes used through 1994, but, in the process, we lose some jobs for which the

pre-1995 codes branch out into multiple post-1995 codes. 6 Third, defining newly hired

workers as those with no more than four months of tenure, we include a job in our main


6
  We also check that all workers in the job are at the same “job level,” an eight-category variable coded as
(1) apprentices, interns, trainees; (2) non-skilled professionals; (3) semi-skilled professionals; … (8) top
executives (top management). In most cases, this check is superfluous because it is unusual for the workers
listed in the same occupation code within a firm to span more than one job level.


                                                    12
sample of entry jobs if, in at least half the years the firm is present in the data base, the

particular job accounted for at least three new hires and at least 10 percent of the firm’s

new hires in that year.

       We therefore are focusing on what Doeringer and Piore (1971) called “port-of-

entry” jobs. We do not mean, however, to subscribe to their stark description in which

firms hire into only a limited number of such jobs, with other jobs filled almost

exclusively by internal promotions and reassignments. More recent studies – such as the

case study of a particular firm by Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom (1994) – have suggested

that hiring from outside a firm can take place in a broad spectrum of jobs. Our focus on

jobs that recurrently show new hires in the annual employer census is driven mainly by a

pragmatic concern – to identify cyclical variation in hiring wages by job, we need those

wages to be observed in multiple years spanning different business cycle conditions.

       The main sample resulting from our selection criteria consists of 1,159 jobs in 998

firms. The firms are spread across a wide variety of industries, with the most common

being manufacturing, construction, retail trade, hotels and restaurants, education, and

“other business activities” (including cleaning, security, and temporary work agencies).

Our panel of wages in entry jobs is “unbalanced,” with a total of 8,804 job/years. The

unbalancedness occurs because some firms begin or end between 1982 and 2007;

because, in existing firms, it may happen that the workers observed in the job as of a

particular census month include no one hired within the last four months; and because, as

explained below, we sometimes are unable to identify a modal hiring wage.




                                             13
         Table 1 displays sample size statistics by year along with the seasonally adjusted

unemployment rate for the census month. 7 The number of entry-job wages observed per

year ranges from a low of 136 in 1982 to a high of 675 in 2003. With a total of 280,814

newly hired workers observed in the 8,804 job/years, on average more than 30 newly

hired workers are observed per job/year. On account of procyclical hiring, the number of

newly hired workers per observed entry job shows a clear tendency to be lower in years

of high unemployment. Importantly, however, there is not a clear tendency for the

number of observed entry jobs to decline in those years. If there were, we would need to

worry that rigidity in hiring wages in some firms might be causing those firms to

disappear from our sample in recession years because their hiring into their entry jobs

dropped to zero. Instead, the pattern is that hiring declines but remains positive, so that

we still observe hiring wages. 8

         Obviously, our analysis pertains to only a small fraction of all the jobs and firms

encompassed in the Portuguese census of employers. It does, however, focus on those

jobs that are most clearly recognizable as perennial entry jobs. Perhaps it is best to view

our study as a sort of summary of 1,159 case studies of particular entry jobs.

         As explained in the previous section, the dependent variable in our first-stage

regressions is the typical logarithmic real hiring wage in job j in period t. The wage

measure we start with is each newly hired worker’s monthly base pay (“corresponding to

the normal hours of work”) divided by the worker’s normal monthly hours. We use


7
  These are the Eurostat unemployment rates reported at
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/quickview.do?SERIES_KEY=132.STS.M.PT.S.UNEH.RTT000.4.000 as of June
2009. As these go back only to 1983, for March 1982 we use the first-quarter unemployment rate from
Statistics Portugal.
8
  We thank David Card, Jonathan Guryan, and Steven Rivkin for raising this issue at the NBER Summer
Institute. Note that, if we treated workers rather than jobs as our unit of analysis, variation in the number of
hires per job could cause problems of endogenous sample selection.


                                                      14
Statistics Portugal’s monthly consumer price index (for March through 1993, for October

afterwards) to convert this wage to real terms. Our main measure of the typical log hiring

wage in a job/year is the modal value (with log wages measured to two decimal places).

As mentioned above, we have dropped job/years in which we did not identify a modal

wage. This occurred because of ties, most often because the job/year contained only two

newly hired workers who received different wages. Figure 2 displays, for the 280,814

newly hired workers in our sample, the histogram of the difference between the worker’s

log wage and the modal log hiring wage in the job/year. As the figure shows, typically

most of the newly hired workers in a job/year are paid at the modal rate.



B. Empirical Analysis

          As explained in section III.B, we begin by estimating the year effects β t in

equation (1) by applying least squares to the regression of the logarithm of job-specific

real entry wages w jt on year dummy variables with controls for job fixed effects. As

discussed in section III.B, if the panel of entry jobs were balanced with entry wages

observed for all jobs in all periods, the estimated year effects would be simply

      N
β̂ t = ∑ log w jt / N .   With our highly unbalanced panel, our estimates essentially
      j =1



regression-adjust that simple statistic for year-to-year changes in sample composition.

          The resulting β̂ t series is plotted in figure 3, with the value for 1982 normalized

to zero. Recall from section IV.A that the series pertains to March for the observations

from 1982 through 1993, it pertains to October for the observations from 1994 through

2007, and it is missing the years 1990 and 2001. The figure also displays the seasonally



                                              15
adjusted unemployment rates for the corresponding months. Eyeballing the figure in a

way that takes account of the upward secular trend in wages gives the impression that the

entry-wage series and the unemployment rate are inversely related, but that the

relationship is very loose.

         As discussed in section III.B, we can quantify the cyclicality of entry wages by

estimating regressions of the β̂ t time series on the unemployment rate and secular time

trend controls.       The first row of table 2 shows the estimated coefficient of the

unemployment rate when this regression controls for a linear time trend and is estimated

by weighted least squares (weighting by the number of entry jobs observed per year, in an

effort to correct for the heteroskedasticity resulting from the wide variation in the per-

year sample size). The procyclical coefficient estimate of -1.79 (with estimated standard

error 0.39) 9 implies that, when the unemployment rate is one point higher (say, .07

instead of .06), real entry wages tend to be about 1.8 percent lower.

         Heteroskedasticity diagnostics applied to the residuals suggest that the weighting

procedure is reasonable, but in the next row of table 2 we use ordinary least squares

instead of weighted least squares.               The resulting coefficient estimate, -1.66 (with

estimated standard error 0.49), is close to the weighted result. In the third row, we apply

ordinary least squares to the first-differenced version of the regression. A linear time

trend in levels implies that, in first differences, we need to control for the varying time

interval between adjacent observations, which is usually 12 months but is 24 months for


9
  The reported standard error estimates are the old-fashioned kind, i.e., not corrected for heteroskedasticity
or serial correlation. Serial correlation diagnostics indicate a first-order autocorrelation of about 0.4 and
negligible second- and third-order autocorrelations. Despite having only 24 time series observations in our
second-stage regressions, we have experimented with Newey-West standard error estimation robust to
heteroskedasticity and first-order serial correlation. The resulting standard error estimates are very close to
the old-fashioned ones.


                                                     16
the 1989-1991 and 2000-2002 changes and 19 months for the change from March 1993 to

October 1994. The resulting estimate, -1.88 (0.89), is a little more procyclical than the

previous estimates.

        In the fourth row, we revert to the analysis in the first row except that, as a simple

check for dynamics, we include the 12-month lag of the unemployment rate as an

additional regressor. 10 The estimated coefficient of the lagged term, -0.15 (0.78), is small

and statistically insignificant, and the estimated coefficient of the contemporaneous term,

-1.84 (0.73), is significantly procyclical. Combining the estimates, the implied wage

response to a one-point increase in the unemployment rate in both periods is -1.99.

        In the fifth row, we redo the regression from row 1 except that we control for a

quadratic time trend.        The estimated coefficient of the squared trend variable is

statistically insignificant, and the estimated coefficient of the unemployment rate, -1.54

(0.54), becomes a little less procyclical.

        The next five rows repeat the analysis from row 1 but with alternative approaches

to the first-stage estimation of the β̂ t series. In the sixth row, instead of representing the

“typical” job/year wage w jt with the modal wage of new hires, we use their average

wage. In the second-stage regression, this results in a slightly more procyclical estimate

of -1.83 (0.46). This analysis still uses the individual wage measure described in section

IV.A – the worker’s monthly base pay (“corresponding to the normal hours of work”)

divided by the worker’s normal monthly hours. In the seventh and eighth rows, we use

alternative wage measures. In the seventh row, we use the average of a wage measure


10
   The analysis of Portuguese wage cyclicality in Carneiro, Guimarães, and Portugal (2009) uses only a
one-year lag of the unemployment rate and does not report results for the contemporaneous unemployment
rate.


                                                 17
that adds in supplements “with a regular monthly nature, on account of subsistence, job

transport, tenured-related or productivity, punctuality, hard-working/dangerous or dirty

tasks, night shifts.” In the eighth row, we go further by measuring the worker’s wage as

the ratio of all the worker’s pay in the census month (including overtime, bonuses, etc.) to

all the worker’s hours in the census month. The estimates based on these alternative

wage measures, -1.89 (0.46) and -1.79 (0.51), are similar to those using our original base

pay measure.

        In the ninth row, we revert to using modal base pay, but we use a more inclusive

sample of entry jobs in the first stage. Instead of requiring that the firms employ at least

50 workers in at least five years, we require that they employ at least 25. And instead of

requiring that the job involves at least three new hires and at least 10 percent of the firm’s

new hires in at least half the years the firm is in the data base, we require at least two new

hires and at least 10 percent of the firm’s new hires in at least a quarter of the years. In

the second stage, this results in a slightly more procyclical estimate of -1.89 (0.39). In

the tenth row, we repeat the analysis in the first row except that we define newly hired

workers as those with tenure of no more than three months instead of four. The resulting

estimate, -1.80 (0.41), is almost identical to the one based on the four-month threshold.

        Finally, because some analyses later in this section will involve only the years

1986-2007, in the last row we redo the analysis of row 1 with only those years. The

resulting coefficient estimate, -1.61 (0.37), is a little less procyclical.

        In general, throughout table 2, the estimated coefficients of the unemployment

rate stay fairly close to -1.8. Recognizing that, with procyclical labor force participation,

the negative of the change in the unemployment rate is an attenuated version of




                                               18
proportional changes in employment, these estimates imply that the cyclical elasticity of

entry wages and the cyclical elasticity of employment are of similar magnitudes. 11 In

that sense, our estimates of the procyclicality of entry wages are substantial. The result

becomes more striking when one considers that the “cyclical upgrading” discussed in

section III.A suggests that we may be underestimating the true procyclicality of entry

wages. If, in a recession, employers are able to recruit a higher quality of workers at any

given wage, the effective wage they pay per efficiency unit of labor is that much lower. 12

In section V, we will discuss further the macroeconomic implications of the magnitude of

our estimates.

         Another perspective on the estimates is that they are similar to the estimates of the

overall cyclicality of workers’ real wages in the U.S. literature that uses longitudinal data

to relate workers’ year-to-year changes in log wages to changes in the unemployment

rate. 13 This similarity is surprising for two reasons. First, the estimates are for different

countries. Second, they are measuring different facets of wage cyclicality. As discussed

in section II, wage smoothing in long-term employment relationships could cause overall

wages to be less procyclical than the hiring wages in entry jobs. On the other hand, as

discussed in section III.A, workers’ procyclical opportunities to move to higher-paying

jobs (both within and across firms) contribute to estimates of workers’ overall wage


11
   We have estimated Okun’s Law-style regressions for Portugal over our sample period and found that a
one-point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a 1.75 percent reduction in the
employment/population ratio. This procyclicality of employment is almost identical to the procyclicality
we have estimated for real entry wages.
12
   So far, our only empirical exploration of this possibility with the Portuguese data has been to re-estimate
some of the regressions in table 2 with average years of education of newly hired workers, instead of their
log hiring wage, as the dependent variable. In accordance with the cyclical upgrading story, these estimates
do show countercyclicality in the education of new hires, but the statistical significance of the estimates is
sensitive to the specification of secular trends.
13
   See Bils (1985), Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994), and the literature review in Solon, Barsky, and Parker
(1992).


                                                     19
procyclicality, while our estimates of entry-wage cyclicality are designed to hold jobs

constant.

        To address the first issue of between-country differences, in table 3 we use

longitudinal worker data from the Portuguese census of employers to replicate the

analyses in the U.S. longitudinal literature. In the tradition of Bils (1985), we estimate

the regression of workers’ year-to-year change in log real wages on change in the

unemployment rate.          Following Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994), we break the

estimation into two steps. In the first stage, we apply ordinary least squares to the

regression of the worker’s change in log real wages on year dummy variables and change

in the worker’s squared age, which belongs in the regression if the log wage/age profile is

quadratic in levels. In the second stage, much as in the third row of table 2, we apply

ordinary least squares to the regression of the estimated year effects on change in the

unemployment rate and the length of the time interval between the adjacent censuses. 14

The estimates are based on the period 1986-2007 because worker identifiers are not

available before 1986.

        The resulting coefficient estimate for the unemployment rate, shown in the first

row of table 3, is -1.47 (with estimated standard error 0.42). This estimate is slightly less

procyclical than the entry-wage counterpart for 1986-2007 shown in the last row of table

2. This suggests that, between the two factors that cause wage cyclicality from the

workers’ perspective to differ from cyclicality of job-specific entry wages, the wage-

smoothing factor is at least as important as the cyclical-upgrading factor. The estimate of

14
  We apply ordinary instead of weighted least squares in the second stage for reasons discussed in Dickens
(1990). In our worker-level analysis, as opposed to the entry-job analysis in table 2, our first-stage
estimation involves millions of observations. As a result, sampling error in the estimated year effects is
inconsequential, and the error term in the second-stage regression is dominated by unobserved time effects
common to all workers.


                                                   20
-1.47, which is based on both male and female workers, is similar to the estimates for

male workers in the U.S. longitudinal literature and higher than those for female workers.

Furthermore, it is based on the same measure of workers’ wages used in most of our

entry-wage analyses – the ratio of the worker’s monthly base pay to the worker’s normal

monthly hours. This measure leaves out overtime pay and other such non-base payments,

which typically are included in the wage measures used in the U.S. longitudinal literature.

In the second row of table 3, as in the eighth row of table 2, we include such pay by

measuring the wage as the ratio of the worker’s total monthly pay to the worker’s total

monthly hours. The resulting coefficient estimate for the unemployment rate, -1.72

(0.41), is even more procyclical. The substantial procyclicality of real wages in Portugal

accords with the conclusion of Cardoso and Portugal (2005), mentioned at the beginning

of section IV.A, that “wage cushions” above the wage floors prescribed in collective

bargaining enable flexible wages in Portugal.

        As discussed in sections II and III.A, the wage cyclicality literature based on

longitudinal worker data has estimated particularly strong wage procyclicality for

workers who change employers and more moderate procyclicality for workers who stay

with the same employer. In the third row of table 3, we redo the estimation in row 1 with

a sample restricted to workers who change employers between censuses. As in the

previous literature, we find particularly procyclical wages for changers, with an estimated

unemployment rate coefficient of -2.64 (0.41). 15 Of course, the wage procyclicality for



15
  The closest counterpart to this estimate in the analysis of the 1986-2005 Portuguese data by Carneiro,
Guimarães, and Portugal (2009) pertains to male “accessions,” i.e., men with employer tenure of less than a
year (who may or may not have been employed with another firm a year earlier). Carneiro et al. apply
ordinary least squares in one stage to a levels regression of the worker’s log wage (deflated by a lagged
version of the consumer price index) on the one-year lag of the unemployment rate, a quadratic in time, a
quadratic in age, and controls for worker fixed effects. The estimated coefficient of their unemployment


                                                    21
workers who change employers is expected to exceed other measures of wage

procyclicality because, for this group of workers, cyclical upgrading/downgrading is

especially salient and wage smoothing is not a factor.

         In the last row of table 3, we redo the row 1 analysis for a sample restricted to

workers who stay with the same employer from one census to the next. In the first-stage

regression, we control for changes in the squares of both age and tenure with employer.

The second-stage estimate of the unemployment rate coefficient, -1.43 (0.44), is almost

as procyclical as our estimate of overall wage cyclicality and somewhat less procyclical

than most of our estimates of entry-wage cyclicality. 16 The former comparison is a little

surprising because, in the U.S. literature, the estimates of stayers’ wage cyclicality

usually are noticeably less than the estimates of overall wage cyclicality. 17 With respect

to the latter comparison, the wage-smoothing factor for stayers may be partly offset by

cyclical upgrading of stayers across jobs within firms.

         To summarize, longitudinal worker-based estimates of real wage cyclicality in

Portugal are fairly similar to those in the U.S. literature, with the Portuguese estimates

appearing a little more procyclical. In Portugal, however, unlike the United States at

present, it is possible to use detailed employer/employee longitudinal data to conduct a

direct and transparent analysis of the cyclical behavior of wages paid to newly hired

workers in a large number of entry jobs. As discussed in section III, these data are better

suited for assessing recent theories of firms’ practices vis-à-vis setting hiring wages. Our


variable is -2.73. See our footnote 5 for a discussion of our concerns about the way in which Carneiro et al.
pool their estimation of the cyclicality in accession wages with the cyclicality of other wages.
16
   In the study described in the preceding footnote, Carneiro, Guimarães, and Portugal (2009) also report
results for male stayers, for whom the estimated coefficient of the one-year lag of the unemployment rate is
-1.50.
17
   But some studies – such as Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994) and Shin and Solon (2007) – report only
moderate differences.


                                                    22
analyses of the Portuguese data have produced a robust finding that real entry wages by

job tend to be about 1.8 percent lower when the unemployment rate is one percentage

point higher.



                               V. Summary and Discussion

       Using longitudinally matched data from Portugal’s annual census of employers,

we have tracked the cyclical behavior of the real wages paid to newly hired employees in

over a thousand jobs. We hope that eventually our methodology will be applied to

additional countries as the requisite data become available.

       Our estimates suggest that real entry wages in Portugal tend to be about 1.8

percent lower when the unemployment rate is one percentage point higher. As noted in

section IV.B, this procyclicality in entry wages is substantial in the sense that the cyclical

elasticity of this price variable is of approximately the same magnitude as the cyclical

elasticity of employment. This finding, like practically all the longitudinal evidence on

workers’ wage cyclicality, counters a view often stated by influential macroeconomists

that wages are much less cyclical than employment and unemployment.

       One reason this finding matters is that some recent (as discussed in section II) and

older attempts at theoretically explaining large cyclical changes in unemployment have

emphasized rigidity of wages.       Like most recent studies of other aspects of wage

cyclicality, our study of real entry wages in Portugal has found that wages are not rigid,

but rather respond considerably to business cycle conditions. Of course, this finding does

not preclude that, in some sense, wages are “insufficiently” variable. Pursuing that idea,

however, will require not a theory of wage rigidity, but a theory of why wages are not




                                             23
even more variable than they are. 18 Putting the point another way, the very existence of

large cyclical fluctuations in employment and unemployment indicates that wages do not

vary enough to prevent those fluctuations. The continuing challenge to macroeconomic

theorists is to develop a logically coherent and empirically relevant explanation of why

employment, unemployment, and wages vary over the business cycle in the ways that

they actually do.

        Finally, returning to the question posed in section II, can the Mortensen-Pissarides

model in particular account for the cyclical variability of unemployment in light of the

magnitude of the entry-wage cyclicality that we have found? As discussed in section II,

the answer depends not only on the cyclicality in hiring wages, but also on the persistence

of those wages as the worker/employer match continues. At one extreme, if workers

hired at a low wage during a recession are somehow locked into a permanent

employment relationship at a perpetually low wage, the labor cost relevant to employers’

recruiting decisions could be as cyclical as, or even more cyclical than, the initial hiring

wage. At the other extreme, if the shortfall in hiring wages during a recession vaporizes

soon after the employment relationship is initiated (either because the cheaply-hired

workers quit or because retaining them requires substantial raises once the recession

eases), cyclicality in the initial hiring wage might have only trivial impact on hiring

decisions.    Thus, assessing the allocative importance of initial hiring wages in the

Mortensen-Pissarides model (or, for that matter, any model that recognizes the

prevalence of long-term employment relationships) will require a deeper understanding

of the durability of employment relationships, the evolution of wages and productivity in


18
  Hall and Milgrom (2008), Kennan (forthcoming), Snell and Thomas (forthcoming), and Perry and Solon
(1985) are examples of steps in that direction.


                                                 24
those relationships, and the dependence of both on current, past, and anticipated business

cycle conditions. The empirical literature pioneered by Beaudry and DiNardo (1991),

which is summarized in Thomas and Worrall (2007), has begun to explore these issues,

and we believe further research in that area could be highly productive.




                                            25
                                      References

Baker, George, Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom. 1994. “The Internal Economics

       of the Firm: Evidence from Personnel Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

       109(4): 881-919.

Barro, Robert J. 1977. “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy.”

       Journal of Monetary Economics, 3(3): 305-16.

Beaudry, Paul, and John DiNardo. 1991. “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the

       Movement of Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data.”

       Journal of Political Economy, 99(4): 665-88.

Becker, Gary S. 1962. “Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis.” Journal

       of Political Economy, 70(5): S9-49.

Bewley, Truman F. 1999. Why Wages Don’t Fall during a Recession. Cambridge, MA:

       Harvard University Press.

Bils, Mark J. 1985. “Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data.”

       Journal of Political Economy, 93(4): 666-89.

Boldrin, Michele, and Michael Horvath. 1995. “Labor Contracts and Business Cycles.”

       Journal of Political Economy, 103(5): 972-1004.

Cardoso, Ana Rute, and Pedro Portugal. 2005. “Contractual Wages and the Wage

       Cushion under Different Bargaining Settings.” Journal of Labor Economics,

       23(4): 875-902.

Carneiro, Anabela, Paulo Guimarães, and Pedro Portugal. 2009. “Real Wages and the

       Business Cycle: Accounting for Worker and Firm Heterogeneity.” Unpublished.

Devereux, Paul J. 2001. “The Cyclicality of Real Wages within Employer-Employee




                                             26
       Matches.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(4): 835-50.

Devereux, Paul J. 2004. “Cyclical Quality Adjustment in the Labor Market.” Southern

       Economic Journal, 70(3): 600-15.

Devereux, Paul J., and Robert A. Hart. 2006. “Real Wage Cyclicality of Job Stayers,

       Within-Company Job Movers, and Between-Company Job Movers.” Industrial

       and Labor Relations Review, 60(1): 105-19.

Dickens, William T. 1990. “Error Components in Grouped Data: Is It Ever Worth

       Weighting?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(2): 328-33.

Doeringer, Peter B., and Michael J. Piore. 1971. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower

       Analysis. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath.

Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari. 2009. “Unemployment Fluctuations with

       Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1): 38-86.

Haefke, Christian, Marcus Sonntag, and Thijs van Rens. 2008. “Wage Rigidity and Job

       Creation.” Discussion Paper No. 3714, IZA.

Hall, Robert E. 1980. “Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity.” Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activity, 1980(1): 91-123.

Hall, Robert E. 2005. “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.”

       American Economic Review, 95(1): 50-65.

Hall, Robert E., and Paul R. Milgrom. 2008. “The Limited Influence of Unemployment

       on the Wage Bargain.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1653-74.

Kennan, John. Forthcoming. “Private Information, Wage Bargaining and Employment

       Fluctuations.” Review of Economic Studies.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.




                                          27
       London: Macmillan.

Kudlyak, Marianna. 2007. “The Cyclicality of the User Cost of Labor with Search and

       Matching.” Unpublished.

Kudlyak, Marianna. 2009. “The Cyclical Price of Labor When Wages Are Smoothed.”

       Unpublished.

Martins, Pedro S. 2007. “Heterogeneity in Real Wage Cyclicality.” Scottish Journal of

       Political Economy, 54(5): 684-98.

McLaughlin, Kenneth J., and Mark Bils. 2001. “Interindustry Mobility and the Cyclical

       Upgrading of Labor.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1): 94-135.

Mortensen, Dale T., and Christopher A. Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job

       Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies,

       61(3): 397-415.

Okun, Arthur M. 1973. “Upward Mobility in a High-Pressure Economy.” Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activity, 1973(1): 207-52.

Perry, Motty, and Gary Solon. 1985. “Wage Bargaining, Labor Turnover, and the

       Business Cycle: A Model with Asymmetric Information.” Journal of Labor

       Economics, 3(4): 421-33.

Pissarides, Christopher A. 2009. “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage

       Stickiness the Answer?” Econometrica, 77(5): 1339-69.

Reder, Melvin W. 1955. “The Theory of Occupational Wage Differentials.” American

       Economic Review, 45(5): 833-52.

Reynolds, Lloyd G. 1951. The Structure of Labor Markets. New York: Harper &

       Brothers.




                                           28
Rudanko, Leena. 2009. “Labor Market Dynamics under Long-Term Wage Contracting.”

       Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(2): 170-83.

Shimer, Robert. 2004. “The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models.” Journal

       of the European Economic Association, 2(2-3): 469-79.

Shimer, Robert. 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and

       Vacancies.” American Economic Review, 95(1): 25-49.

Shin, Donggyun. 1994. “Cyclicality of Real Wages among Young Men.” Economics

       Letters, 46(2): 137-42.

Shin, Donggyun, and Gary Solon. 2007. “New Evidence on Real Wage Cyclicality

       within Employer-Employee Matches.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy,

       54(5): 648-60.

Snell, Andy, and Jonathan P. Thomas. Forthcoming. “Labor Contracts, Equal

       Treatment, and Wage-Unemployment Dynamics.” American Economic Journal:

       Macroeconomics.

Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A. Parker. 1992. “Measuring the Cyclicality

       of Real Wages: How Important Is Composition Bias?” Working Paper No. 4202,

       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A. Parker. 1994. “Measuring the Cyclicality

       of Real Wages: How Important Is Composition Bias?” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 109(1): 1-25.

Solon, Gary, Warren Whatley, and Ann Huff Stevens. 1997. “Wage Changes and

       Intrafirm Job Mobility over the Business Cycle: Two Case Studies.” Industrial

       and Labor Relations Review, 50(3): 402-15.




                                          29
Thomas, Jonathan P., and Tim Worrall. 1988. “Self-Enforcing Wage Contracts.”

       Review of Economic Studies, 55(4): 541-54.

Thomas, Jonathan P., and Tim Worrall. 2007. “Limited Commitment Models of the

       Labour Market.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 54(5): 750-73.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.

       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                         30
Figure 1. Annual Unemployment Rates in Portugal, 1982-2007




                        31
Figure 2. Sample Distribution of Difference between Individual Worker’s Log Wage
                    and Modal Log Hiring Wage in Job/Year




                                      32
Figure 3. Estimated Period Effects for Log Entry Wages in Available Months and
        Corresponding Unemployment Rates, March 1982-October 2007




                                     33
           Table 1. Sample Sizes by Year

Year    Number of Entry        Number of Newly   Seasonally Adjusted
             Jobs               Hired Workers    Unemployment Rate
                                                  in Census Month
1982         136                    2,745               7.32
1983         160                    3,831               7.67
1984         138                    2,876               8.85
1985         178                    2,838               9.05
1986         211                    3,185               9.31
1987         218                    4,144               7.71
1988         226                    4,033               6.14
1989         248                    6,385               5.35
1991         239                    6,680               4.20
1992         258                    8,412               3.91
1993         266                    7,261               5.06
1994         302                    9,065               7.01
1995         339                    9,711               7.15
1996         351                   10,296               7.15
1997         371                   11,763               6.68
1998         448                   15,100               4.78
1999         467                   14,510               4.26
2000         506                   18,731               3.87
2002         539                   18,389               5.67
2003         675                   26,641               6.48
2004         652                   21,328               7.04
2005         657                   24,361               7.99
2006         637                   22,004               8.00
2007         582                   26,525               7.84
Total        8,804                 280,814




                          34
     Table 2. Estimates of Cyclicality of Log Entry Wages in Portugal, 1982-2007

Estimation Method                                  Estimated Coefficient of Unemployment
                                                     Rate (and Estimated Standard Error)
1. Weighted least squares for regression of                         -1.79
log modal entry wage year effects on                                (0.39)
unemployment rate and linear time trend
2. Same as (1) but ordinary least squares                       -1.66
                                                               (0.49)
3. Ordinary least squares for first                             -1.88
differences                                                    (0.89)
4. Same as (1) with one-year lag of            Contemporaneous: -1.84
unemployment rate as additional regressor                      (0.73)
                                               Lagged:          -0.15
                                                               (0.78)
5. Same as (1) with quadratic time trend                        -1.54
                                                               (0.54)
6. Same as (1) with log average wage                            -1.83
                                                               (0.46)
7. Same as (6) with wage measure                                -1.89
combining base wage with regular                               (0.48)
supplements
8. Same as (6) with wage measure                                  -1.79
including all non-base pay                                        (0.51)
9. Same as (1) with more inclusive                                -1.89
definition of entry jobs                                          (0.39)
10. Same as (1) with new-hire criterion                           -1.80
reduced to three months of tenure                                 (0.41)
11. Same as (1) for 1986-2007                                     -1.61
                                                                  (0.37)




                                              35
 Table 3. Estimates from Regressions of Portuguese Workers’ Change in Log Wages on
               Change in Unemployment Rate, 1986-1987 to 2006-2007

Estimation Method                                  Estimated Coefficient of Change in
                                                   Unemployment Rate (and Estimated
                                                            Standard Error)
1. All longitudinally matched workers,                           -1.47
with controls for age and time                                  (0.42)
2. Same as (1) but with wage measure                             -1.72
including non-base pay                                          (0.41)
3. Same as (1) but for sample restricted to                      -2.64
workers changing employers                                      (0.41)
4. Same as (1) but for sample restricted to                      -1.43
workers staying with same employer (with                        (0.44)
additional control for tenure with
employer)




                                              36
