                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         STUDENTS CHOOSING COLLEGES:
UNDERSTANDING THE MATRICULATION DECISION AT A HIGHLY SELECTIVE PRIVATE INSTITUTION

                                               Peter Nurnberg
                                               Morton Schapiro
                                              David Zimmerman

                                              Working Paper 15772
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w15772


                            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           February 2010




       The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
       National Bureau of Economic Research.

       NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
       reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
       NBER publications.

       © 2010 by Peter Nurnberg, Morton Schapiro, and David Zimmerman. All rights reserved. Short sections
       of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
       credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Students Choosing Colleges: Understanding the Matriculation Decision at a Highly Selective
Private Institution
Peter Nurnberg, Morton Schapiro, and David Zimmerman
NBER Working Paper No. 15772
February 2010, Revised March 2010
JEL No. I21

                                             ABSTRACT

The college choice process can be reduced to three questions:

1)Where does a student apply?

2)Which schools accept the students?

3)Which offer of admission does the student accept?

7his paper addresses question three. Specifically, we offer an econometric analysis of the matriculation
decisions made by students accepted to Williams College, one of the nation’s most highly selective
colleges and universities. We use data for the Williams classes of 2008 through 2012 to estimate a
yield model. We find that—conditional on the student applying to and being accepted by Williams—applicant
quality as measured by standardized tests, high school GPA and the like, the net price a particular
student faces (the sticker price minus institutional financial aid), the applicant’s race and geographic
origin, plus the student’s artistic, athletic and academic interests, are strong predictors of whether or
not the student will matriculate.


Peter Nurnberg                                      David Zimmerman
Williams Project on the Economics                   Department of Economics
 of Higher Education                                Williams College
Mears West, Williams College                        South Academic Building
Williamstown, MA 01267                              24 Hopkins Hall Drive
peter.s.nurnberg@gmail.com                          Williamstown, MA 01267
                                                    and NBER
Morton Schapiro                                     David.J.Zimmerman@williams.edu
Office of the President
Northwestern University
633 Clark Street
Evanston, IL 60208
nu-president@northwestern.edu
                                           DRAFT


   Students Choosing Colleges: Understanding the Matriculation Decision at a Highly
                             Selective Private Institution

      Peter Nurnberg                Morton Schapiro                 David Zimmerman
     Williams College           Northwestern University              Williams College

                                        August 2009



I. Introduction

       The college choice process can be reduced to three questions:

   1) Where does a student apply?

   2) Which schools accept the students?

   3) Which offer of admission does the student accept?

   This paper addresses question three. Specifically, we offer an econometric analysis

of the matriculation decisions made by students accepted to Williams College, one of the

nation’s most highly selective colleges and universities. We use data for the Williams

classes of 2008 through 2012 to estimate a yield model. We find that—conditional on the

student applying to and being accepted by Williams—applicant quality as measured by

standardized tests, high school GPA and the like, the net price a particular student faces

(the sticker price minus institutional financial aid), the applicant’s race and geographic

origin, plus the student’s artistic, athletic and academic interests, are strong predictors of

whether or not the student will matriculate.

       While getting accepted into a selective college seems to be a public obsession,

there is less focus (except by the colleges themselves) on the matriculation decision. Yet,

while colleges choose students, students also select colleges. The tables turn when,
                                                                                                     2

around April 1st, students, parents, guidance counselors and their friends relax their

efforts at proving an applicant is worth a bulky envelope (or increasingly these days a

cheerful e-mail message), and colleges and universities, regardless of how selective, go

on the offensive through their myriad “conversion” activities.

        While the economics literature on the matriculation decision is sparse, the college

choices made by prospective students significantly impact individuals, colleges, and

society in general.1 On a personal level, a student’s matriculation decision likely impacts

his or her development during college as well as post-college opportunities. On the

college level, matriculation decisions impact financial aid expenditures and the academic

and demographic composition of the student body. On a societal level, different

concentration levels of specific types of students likely lead to different social outcomes.

        The analysis presented here is most salient to selective institutions of higher

education. Yield management is a central responsibility of all selective institutions.

Schools can only accommodate a relatively fixed number of freshmen and selective

institutions are eager to enroll the “best” possible freshman class. The competition for

talented students is intense, and even the most selective colleges and universities must

admit a substantially larger number of students than the number of available slots in order

to fill their freshman classes. But there is an asymmetric risk for these institutions.

Small, moderate or even substantial under-yields can typically be remedied by admitting

students from the waitlist. However, since these schools typically have tight limitations

on the number of students they can accommodate, even moderate over-yields are

problematic and capable of generating significant expenses and/or embarrassment for a


1
 The main components of the literature include Avery and Hoxby (2003), Chapman (1981), Linsenmeier
(2006), Perry and Rumpf (1984), and Weiler (1996).
                                                                                             3

college. Thus, it would be especially beneficial for selective colleges to have a rigorous

way of predicting which admitted students will matriculate and which will not.

       The results presented here identify the predictive power of different parts of an

accepted student’s application, casting light on which of these personal characteristics

indicate that an applicant intends or does not intend to come to Williams. These findings

are then used to calculate the probability that a given student will matriculate at Williams,

thereby allowing us to estimate the overall yield from a given batch of accepted students.

While this analysis is based on Williams-specific variables and data, the general

theoretical framework presented in this paper can be applied to all institutions and a

researcher with access to data from other selective institutions can engage in an

analogous examination based on that institution’s admission and financial aid variables.

       The paper proceeds as follows: section II lays out a simple model of the

matriculation decision, section III discusses the data used in the analysis, section IV

presents the empirical results, section V discusses applications of the model, and section

VI concludes.




II. A Model of the Matriculation Decision

       Figure 1 illustrates and provides a structural framework for the matriculation

decision.
                                                                                               4

Figure 1: The Matriculation Decision Schematic




       The matriculation decision is influenced by many factors. A college education is

an unusual type of good; it is simultaneously a consumption good—similar to a country

club membership—and an investment product—similar to an annuity. Both of these

aspects of a college impact the utility a student derives from a particular institution. For

an individual applicant, the consumption utility of a school is determined by the quality

of the match between the applicant’s preferences and the school’s fundamental

characteristics. For example, an art history-loving student might derive a large

consumption benefit from a school with a first-rate art history department, and a city life

enthusiast could derive a big consumption benefit from a school located in a major

metropolitan area. Alternatively, the investment utility derived from a particular school

is determined by the quality of the career options—in terms of expected lifetime financial

remuneration, prestige and occupational satisfaction—available to a student upon

graduation from the institution. The investment utility of a college is difficult to properly
                                                                                                5

conceptualize and specify. Since the vast majority of students in this analysis were likely

bound for other “top” colleges, this component of utility is best described in relative

terms. It is the lifetime earnings and non-financial occupational benefit increase that

stems from going to the given institution instead of taking the next best option in the

student’s college choice set. Thus, the magnitude of this benefit is related to the quality

of the applicant’s choice set. The better—however the individual student defines

better—the student’s choice set, the lower this relative value of investment utility will be.

        Direct and indirect costs are also important factors in the matriculation decision.

In addition to evaluating the potential utility provided by different institutions, students

must also consider the relative costs of different institutions and other options—i.e. direct

entry into the workforce. These financial and opportunity costs differ from institution to

institution and are highly influenced by the student’s college choice set. Under this

framework, the costs and utility associated with a given institution—for a particular

student—combine to generate the indirect utility value that the student derives from

attending that institution. If that indirect utility value exceeds the indirect utility of all of

the other options available to the student, the student should matriculate at the school. If

that indirect utility is exceeded by the indirect utility of at least one of the student’s other

options, the student should not matriculate at the school.

        This theoretical framework suggests the following empirical model of a student’s

decision to matriculate at a specific institution.

                              Probability(Matriculation) = F(X)

Under this construction, X is a vector of student characteristics. Since this model is for a

particular institution, the college’s characteristics are not included in the specification.
                                                                                               6

Rather, the student’s attributes capture the quality of the match between the applicant and

the institution and proxy for the student’s opportunity set. The X vector contains

variables representing the applicant’s academic achievements, extra-curricular

achievements, high-school activities, academic interests, extra-curricular interests,

demographic characteristics, contact with the institution, and relationship to the

institution or its officers. The vector also includes direct cost variables specific to the

student.



III. The Data

           The model presented above is applied to the group of students admitted during the

regular decision process to the Williams College classes of 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and

2012. All of the data used in this analysis were provided by the Williams College

admissions and financial aid offices.

           Williams is a highly selective liberal arts college in western Massachusetts with

an enrollment of around 2,000 undergraduate students. A perennially top-ranked

institution, Williams generally accepts between 15% and 20% of its applicants.

However, due to intense competition from other elite institutions and a policy of

admitting the “best” applicants regardless of whether or not they are likely to matriculate,

Williams’ matriculation rate for students admitted regular decision has recently hovered

around 35%.2

           In order to generate a model that can be used to predict admissions yield in future

years, this analysis only uses information available to the school at the time of the


2
    Williams’ early admissions program is binding.
                                                                                                         7

admissions decision. These data include race, gender, geographic origin, high school

type, extra-curricular activities and interests, athlete status, connections to the institution,

potential future donations to the school, legacy connections, academic interests, overall

academic rating, overall non-academic rating, contact between the applicant and the

school, net price of the institution, financial aid status, and subjective variables designed

to capture desirable applicant qualities that appear in recommendation letters or essays

but are not sufficiently measured by traditional applicant characteristics. The primary

variables of interest are discussed below.



III.1 Average Academic and Average Non-Academic Reader Ratings

        Academic and non-academic ratings are subjective measures determined by the

college’s admissions officers. After evaluating the applicant’s SAT scores, high school

grades, essays, class rank, high school academic program, support from the high school

administration, AP test score—or IB test scores—and teacher recommendations,

admissions readers assign the applicant an academic rating from the scale 1 – 9, with 1

being the best.3 Similarly, after evaluating the applicant’s extra-curricular activities, non-

academic awards, community service work, non-academic skills—i.e. special musical,

athletic, acting, or other ability—and other non-academic activities, admissions readers

3
  While the academic reader ratings are somewhat subjective, they are strongly influenced by the following
guidelines. Academic 1: at top or close to top of HS class / A record / exceptional academic program /
1520 – 1600 composite SAT I score; Academic 2: top 5% of HS class / mostly A record / extremely
demanding academic program / 1450 – 1520 composite SAT I score; Academic 3: top 10% of HS class /
many A grades / very demanding academic program / 1390 – 1450 composite SAT I score; Academic 4:
top 15% of HS class / A – B record / very demanding academic program / 1310 – 1400 composite SAT I
score; Academic 5: top 20% of HS class / B record / demanding academic program / 1260 – 1320
composite SAT I score; Academic 6: top 20% of HS class / B record / average academic program / 1210 –
1280 composite SAT I score; Academic 7: top 25% of HS class / mostly B record / less than demanding
program / 1140 – 1220 composite SAT I score; Academic 8: top 33% of HS class / mostly B record or
below / concern about academic program / 1000 – 1180 composite SAT I score; Academic 9: everyone
else.
                                                                                                               8

assign the applicant a non-academic rating from the scale 1 – 5, with 1 again being the

best.4 Around 60% of the admitted students in the data set had academic ratings of one or

two. Roughly 75% of the admitted students had non-academic ratings of two or three.



III.2 Attributes

         Recorded and assigned by the admissions office, the attributes proxy for qualities

that are in some way desirable to the Williams community. This analysis uses the

following attributes: alumni grandparent, alumni other, alumni parent, alumni sibling,

studio art, development or future fundraising potential, dance, institutional connection,

intellectual vitality, local, music, politically active, religious, research science,

economically disadvantaged, social service, theater, top athlete, tier 2 athlete, and tier 3

athlete. Strong candidates have many attributes—they are well rounded—or are

especially talented with regard to a specific attribute. Unfortunately, the admissions

office does not record the strength of the attributes assigned to each applicant. All of the

attributes except for the intellectual vitality attribute are relatively self-explanatory. The

intellectual vitality attribute is given to an applicant that demonstrates “extraordinary

academic depth / talent as usually revealed in the recommendations” or a student who

admissions officers believe will be “a classroom catalyst who would have a significant



4
  While the non-academic reader ratings are somewhat subjective, they are strongly influenced by the
following guidelines. Non-academic 1: at least two activities / at least 3 consecutive years of involvement
in one activity / top regional or national standing in an activity / student exhibits a rare level of leadership
and engagement; Non-academic 2: at least two activities / at least 3 consecutive years of involvement in
one activity / top local standing in two activities / student exhibits high-level work in differeing activities;
Non-Academic 3: at least two activities / at least 3 consecutive years of involvement in one activity / top
local standing in one activity / student exhibits high-level work in one area and long-term commitment to
activities; Non-Academic 4: at least two activities / at least 2 consecutive years of involvement in one
activity / moderate level of achievement in two activities / the student participates in a few activities for
less than two years; Non-Acemic 5: everyone else.
                                                                                                          9

impact in labs or class discussion.”5 Recommendation letters with phrases such as “the

smartest kid I have taught in 30 years” or “learns for the sake of learning” or “goes above

and beyond expectations” or “drives the conversation in the classroom” or “challenges

peers to more deeply engage the material” commonly lead to a student being given the

intellectual vitality tag. Of the 2,901 admitted students in the data set, 27% received the

intellectual vitality attribute.



III.3 Financial Aid

        Sticker prices at selective private colleges are not cheap. Thus it is reasonable to

assume that financial aid packages significantly influence matriculation decisions.

Williams meets the total demonstrated need of all admitted students. The Williams

grant—the amount by which Williams reduces the sticker price—is used as the measure

of financial aid. This analysis takes net price to be the difference between the average,

over the five year sample period, of Williams’ annual comprehensive fees and the

individual student’s Williams grant.6 Just under half of the admitted students in the data

set were offered grant aid. Within the subgroup of students who were offered grants, the

majority of grants fell between 50% and 75% of the sticker price.



III.4 Geography

        The data set includes each applicant’s zip code, home state, and country.

Williams’ applicants come from around the world, but the majority of Williams’ admitted


5
  From the Williams Admissions Office’s Attributes Long Descriptions Class of 2010 spreadsheet. This
reference document is used to train new admissions officers.
6
  The comprehensive fee for each student equals the average of the comprehensive fees from fiscal years
2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007. The average comprehensive fee for that period was $43,442.
                                                                                          10

and matriculating domestic students come from the northeast and the east and west coast

of the United States. Matriculation rates range from 28% for students from the West to

41% for students from the Northeast. Outside of the United States, matriculation rates

range from 16% in South and Central America to 44% in East Asia and 46% in non-USA

North America.



III.5 Contact Between the Student and the School

       The admissions office records all contact between applicants and admissions

officers. Such contact ranges from the applicant visiting campus and signing up at the

admissions office (walk in) before a campus tour, to the student attending a local evening

information session, to an admissions officer traveling to the student’s high school, to the

student attending a summer open house, to the applicant attending a college fair manned

by either a Williams alumnus or a Williams staff member. An individual applicant can

have multiple points of contact with the school. The data show that fewer than 15% of

admitted students signed up at the admissions office and only around 5% attended a

Williams-run information session at their high school.



III.6 Early Write Notification

       Not all students who apply regular decision are notified of the admissions office’s

decision at the same time. Most accepted students are notified of their acceptance at the

end of March. However, some students receive what the admissions office calls “early

write” acceptances. These students receive personalized letters between the beginning of

February and the end of March. The early write notifications tend to be sent to students
                                                                                                          11

who have two qualities: they are very attractive to the admissions officers and the

admissions officers think there is a significant chance they might matriculate somewhere

else.



III.7 Denied Aid

         This dummy variable equals one if the student applied for financial aid but was

not offered any grant aid.




IV. Empirical Results

         The fully specified model generates the following probit results.7 To illustrate the

main implications of the model, the results of a single regression are presented in two

tables. In the specification presented here, the reader ratings enter the model as dummy

variables—with a rating of one as the omitted category—in order to allow for a non-

linear relationship between the reader ratings and the probability of matriculation. The

coefficients on these reader rating variables are reported first.8 The tables report the

marginal effects—calculated at the means—of the explanatory variables.



Table 1: The Reader Rating Dummy Variables




7
  This paper only includes one specification of the model. The results from additional specifications are
available upon request.
8
  Other specifications of this model include terms interacting the reader rating dummy variables with race
and gender variables. In those models, only the terms interacting the African American variable and the
academic reader ratings were significant. Including those interaction terms did not meaningfully impact the
coefficients on the other variables in the model. Those results are not presented here, but they are available
upon request.
                                                                                         12




Except for the small decline between the ACAD3 and ACAD4 coefficients, the

magnitude of the reader rating coefficients increases monotonically as the numerical

reader rating score increases—for both the academic and the non-academic reader

ratings. Recall that numerically higher reader ratings are associated with worse applicant

quality. Thus, this result implies that applicants with worse—numerically larger—reader

ratings are more likely to matriculate than their peers. By construction, these coefficients

represent the percentage point difference in the probability of matriculation when a

student moves from the base case—reader ratings of 1—to the category represented by

the dummy variable. The following figure displays these coefficients.



Figure 2: The Academic Reader Rating Coefficients
                                                                                          13




       This plot shows the impact of moving between reader ratings on the probability of

matriculation. The matriculation probability jump from moving between ACAD1 and

ACAD2 is almost identical to the jump from moving between ACAD2 and ACAD3, as

moving to the numerically higher reader rating increases the probability of matriculation

by around 20 percentage points. These results imply that there are substantial differences

in the opportunity sets available to students with ACAD1, ACAD2, and ACAD3 ratings.

Moving from an ACAD3 to an ACAD4 does not meaningfully alter the probability of

matriculation. Thus, the model indicates that—ceteris paribus—students with ACAD3

and ACAD4 ratings have similar opportunity sets. Finally, moving from an ACAD4

rating to an ACAD5 rating increases the probability of matriculation by 7 percentage

points, moving from an ACAD5 to an ACAD6 increases the probability of matriculation

by 9 percentage points, and moving from an ACAD6 to an ACAD7, ACAD8 or ACAD9

increases the probability of matriculation by 6 percentage points. Thus, there appears to

be a substantial change in opportunity sets as students move along the worse portion of
                                                                                        14

the reader rating scale—though less than the change in opportunity sets as applicants

move from being ACAD1s to ACAD2s or ACAD2s to ACAD3s. The results are similar

for the non-academic reader ratings.   The coefficients on the other variables in the

model are reported below.



Table 2: The Remaining Variables
15
                                                                                           16




       This specification explains just under 20% of the variation in the matriculation

variable. The race variables are among the strongest predictors of matriculation. When

all other applicant characteristics are controlled for, minority applicants are substantially

less likely than their white counterparts to enroll at Williams if accepted. The probability

of matriculation for an African American student is over 32 percentage points lower than

the probability of matriculation for a white student. The probability of matriculation for a

Hispanic student is over 23 percentage points lower than the probability of matriculation

for a white student.

       The studio art attribute variable is statistically significant with a sizable

coefficient. Applicants with strong studio art backgrounds are 13 percentage points less

likely to come to Williams than applicants without that attribute. At the other extreme,

the coefficients on top and middle athlete are positive, significant, and quite large (11 and
                                                                                            17

20 percentage points). Self-reported pre-enrollment academic interests are also very

important. Students determined to pursue research science interests are less interested in

coming to Williams than their peers—their probability of matriculation is 6 percentage

points lower than that of students without this interest. Alternatively, students who do

not know what academic interests they want to pursue are 10 percentage points more

likely than students with social science interests to matriculate.

       The impact of net price on the probability of matriculation is also significant, but

the magnitude of the impact—and implicitly the elasticity of demand for a Williams

education—is small. A $5,000 increase in net price only reduces the probability of

matriculation by only 1.3 percentage points, 20% of the impact, for example, of a

research science interest. This result may simply be picking up the fact that, for a given

student, while differences in net price may be important, the limited spread in aid offers

among highly selective institutions might make it difficult to pick up the full impact of

this variable. However, students who are denied aid altogether are substantially less

likely to matriculate at Williams—the probability of matriculation falls by 12 percentage

points. The admissions office’s recruiting efforts also seem to have important influences

on the probability of matriculation. A student who visits the admissions office is 12

percentage points more likely to attend Williams than a student who does not. The

distance between Williams and the student’s home also has a key impact on the

matriculation decision. The adverse matriculation impact of living in an urban area is

equivalent to the impact of moving an additional 2205 kilometers away from Williams.

       The proxy variables for unquantifiable applicant quality are also highly

significant. Students who receive the intellectual vitality tag are 9 percentage points less
                                                                                            18

likely than their peers to matriculate, which is equal to the effect of early write

notification. On the other hand, legacy status increases the probability of matriculation

by 6 percentage points.

       The results presented here provide no evidence of causal relationships between

the explanatory variables in the model and the probability of matriculation. For example,

the positive impact of signing up in the admissions office before a campus tour could

either indicate the presence of a compelling tour guide, an otherwise unmeasured interest

in attending Williams, or some combination of the two. However, these results identify a

range of powerful predictors of the probability of matriculation.


V. Applications of the Model and Empirical Results

       The work presented here has numerous practical applications. Admissions and

financial aid officers from selective institutions can use this approach with their own

institutions’ data to perform the following analyses.



V.1 Assigning Matriculation Probabilities to Individual Applicants

       Using this model to assign estimated matriculation probabilities to individual

applicants is a straightforward application of the results presented above. The

coefficients reported above are the marginal effects at the mean. However, with the

model given above, the same statistical package—in this case STATA version 10—will

also compute the probit regression coefficients. With those regression coefficients, the

probit value for a given applicant can be computed by multiplying each coefficient by the

corresponding variable value for the applicant, and summing across all of the variables.

When input into the standard normal cumulative distribution function, this probit value is
                                                                                        19

uniquely mapped to an estimated probability of matriculation between zero and one.

Table 3 presents some sample estimated probabilities computed from the results of the

above model and hypothetical applicant variable values.



Table 3: Hypothetical Predicted Probabilities
20
                                                                                               21

V.2 Forecasting the Total Number of Matriculants

           This application is an extension of the previous application. The technique

described in the prior subsection can be used to compute an estimated probability of

matriculation for each applicant in a pool of admitted students. Once all of those

probabilities have been computed, the forecast can be made in two ways. Under the first

method, the model is calibrated by selecting a cutoff probability such that for a base data

set the number of students with estimated probabilities above the cutoff equals the

number of students in the base data set who actually matriculated. The forecast is then

made by predicting that all students in the new data set with an estimated probability of

matriculation greater than or equal to the cutoff will matriculate and all others will not

matriculate. The number of students with predicted probabilities greater than or equal to

the cutoff is the predicted yield. Alternatively, the yield can be computed by simply

summing all of the estimated probabilities and rounding to the nearest whole number.

The two methods generate very similar predictions.9 Under the first method, the

applicant by applicant predictions can also be used to predict the composition of the class

along demographic, gender or any other lines.



V.3 Forecasting the Financial Aid Budget

           Finally, the analysis in the previous subsection can be further extended to predict

the financial aid budget needed to cover the grants offered to a pool of admitted students.

This analysis is performed by transforming the applicant by applicant predictions

generated from the first technique in the previous subsection into a dummy variable that

takes on the value one if the applicant is predicted to matriculate and zero otherwise. For
9
    These methods were both highly accurate when applied to the Williams class of 2013 data.
                                                                                              22

each applicant, this new dummy variable is then multiplied by the grant offered to the

student.10 The predicted aid budget from the applicant pool is computed by summing

these products across all of the applicants in the data set.

           Finally, with the explosion of merit aid over the past two decades, this type of

analysis could go a long way in minimizing economic rents, as smaller merit aid

packages could be offered to students whose characteristics indicate that they are likely to

matriculate regardless of the net price they face.



VI. Conclusion

           The empirical analysis described above, while based on Williams College, can be

easily applied elsewhere. However, if Williams is representative of other selective

schools, it should be noted that even with the presence of an extensive range of

explanatory variables, much of the total variation in matriculation decisions remains

unexplained. Perhaps it is the weather on preview day, or the attractiveness of the tour

guide that attracts or repels a prospective student. Or perhaps the analysis might benefit

from nuanced measures of college name brand recognition—and the connotations

associated with different names.

           The analysis of college yield could provide fertile ground for future researchers.

The paucity of empirical studies, and the overall importance of the subject, suggest that

further work is warranted.




10
     An identical analysis can be performed with loan or any other type of aid offers.
References
Avery, C., & Hoxby, C. (2003). Do and should financial aid packages affect students'
     college choices? NBER Working Paper No. W9482.
     Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=379801

Chapman, D. (1981). A model of student college choice. The Journal of Higher
     Education, 52 (5), 490-505.

Hossler, Don. (1999). Effective Admissions Recruitment. New Directions for Higher
      Education, Volume 1999, Issue 108, 15-30.

In a Shifting Era of Admissions, Colleges Are Sweating, New York Times (3/7/2009).
      http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/08/education/08yield.html?_r=1&hp.

Linsenmeier, D. et al. (2006). Financial aid packages and college enrollment decisions:
      an econometric case study. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88 (1), 126-
      145.

Monks, J. (2009). The impact of merit-based financial aid on college enrollment: A field
    experiment. Economics of Education Review, 28, 99-106.

Perry, R., & Rumpf, D. (1984). Predicting the likelihood of matriculation for college
      applicants. Research in Higher Education, 21 (3), 317-328.

Weiler, W. (1996). Factors influencing the matriculation choices of high ability students.
     Economics of Education Review, 15 (1), 23-36.
