                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE AS A
                    TOOL OF COMMERCIAL POLICY


                          Michael Mussa



                      Working Paper No. 1511




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1985




The original version of this paper was presented at the T'TBER/WorTd
Bank Conference on Structural Adjustment and the Real Exchange Rate
in Developing Countries, held in Washington, D.C. on November 27 to
December 1, l98L. The research reported here is part of the NRERs
research program in International Studies and project in
Productivity and Industrial Change in the World Economy. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1577
                                              March 1985




                     The Real Exchange Rate as a
                      Tool of Commercial Policy



                                ABSTRACT




     This paper develops a dynamic, rational expectations model that generalizes

both the standard, two—country, two—commodity model of real trade theory and

the "dependent economy" model of open economy macroeconomics. This model is

used to show how a variety of government policies can affect the real exchange

rate (defined as the relative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods)

and thereby replicate some of the effects of commercial policy. The policies

considered include temporary and expected future shifts in the distribution of

government spending, temporary general tax reductions financed by the issuance

of government debt, controls on international capital movements, and policies

that combine a fixed path of the nominal exchange rate and a fixed path of

the nominal money supply (supported by sterilized official intervention in the

foreign exchange market).


                                             Michael Mussa
                                             Graduate School of Business
                                             University of Chicago
                                             1101 East 58th. Street
                                             Chicago, EL 60637

                                             (312) 962—7143
             The Real Exchange Rate as a Tool of Commercial Policy

                                 Michael Mussa



1.   Introduction and Summary

     Adjustments of nominal exchange rates provide a mechanism through which

the general level of prices in one country may be adjusted relative to the

general level of prices in other countries so as to neutralize the real

effects of differential monetary disturbances in different countries.     Tin



contrast, the principal effect of commercial policies is on the relative

prices of goods entering into international trade and hence on the allocation

of real resources among sectors of the economy. Despite this fundamental

difference in the prime mission and basic purpose of nominal exchange rate

adjustments and commercial policies, it has long been recognized that exchange

rates can, in some circumstances, be manipulated so as to affect relative

commodity prices and thereby replicate many of the effects of commerical

policies.

     In the past, three important channels have been recognized through wbLch

policies directed at affecting exchange rates can influence relative commdiuv

prices in a manner similar to that achieved by commerical policies. Firs,

systems of multiple exchange rates in which different nominal exchange retes

are applied to different categories of imports and exports are known to be

essentially equivalent to a system of import and export taxes and subsid.es.

(The standard reference on this subject is Bhagwati (1968); see also Corden

(1971, chp. L, and 1967).) Second, in the presence of rigidities or

sitckyness in the nominal prices of domestic goods or of goods entering into

international trade or in the wages of factors employed in producing these

goods, movements in the nominal exchange rate, even in a unified exchange rate
                                              2



regime, clearly have the capacity to affect relative commodity prices and

influence the allocation of resources. This assumption is explicitly or

implicitly employed in many of the earlier analyses of the effects of

devaluation, including the classic contributions of Meade (1951), Harberger

(1950), Machlup (1955) and Tsiang (1961). It is also the fundamental source

of real effects of nominal exchange rate changes in more modern analyses that

assume only temporary stickyness of nominal wages or prices, such as Dornbusch

(1976    and   1980), Buiter and Miller (1983) and Mussa (1977, 1982a, and 1984).

Third, even with a unified exchange rate and without nominal price or wage

stickyness, government policies that affect either the distribution of

expenditure among goods or the level of spending relative to income are known

to have some capacity to affect the "real exchange rate," defined as the

relative price of one country's output in terms of another country's output.

This    idea   is clearly present in the work of Meade (1951), Pearce (1961), and

Corden (1960), as well as in more modern contributions such as Dornbusch

(i'75) and the literature on the "Dutch disease."

       The   purpose    of this paper is to explore in a more explicitly dynamic

ameork the         third of these channels.       In section 2, the model of the real

           of the economy that is used as the basis for this exploration is

 eerhed and discussed. This model is consistent both with the two—country,

twc-ccmmodity model of real trade theory (modified to allow for differences

bet:icen     spending   and income in the home country) and with the "dependent

eecnomy"     model.     The basic equations of this model are specified in a log

linear     form that permits easier manipulation of the dynamic version of the
model in subsequent sections of the paper. In this model, as in the standard

trade theory model, there is an equilibrium value of the (logarithm of the)

relative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods that is consistent
                                       3



 with any given value of the trade balance of the home country, for given

 values of the exogenous parameters and policy variables that influence

domestic and foreign demands for domestic and foreign goods. This relative

price is identified with the concept of the "real exchange rate." It is shown

that the standard results of real trade theory apply with respect to the

comparative statics effects of various government policies on this relative

price. In particular, imposition of a tariff by the home country on imports

of foreign goods lowers the relative price of domestic goods in terms of

foreign goods in the home country. This result is taken as representative of

the effects of commercial policy on the real exchange rate.   A shift of

spending by either domestic or foreign residents toward foreign goods at the

expense of domestic goods (perhaps induced by government policy) has a similar

qualitative effect on the real exchange rate. So too does a transfer of

purchasing power from home residents to foreign residents which results in a

trade balance surplus for the home country. This result reflects the

assumption that home residents have a positive marginal propensity to spend on

domestic goods while foreign residents have a zero marginal propensity to

spend on such goods.

     In section 3, the model is extended to allow for endogenous determination

of differences between income and spending by domestic residents as a function

of their net asset holdings and of the domestic real interest rate. Equi-

librium in the balance of payments requires that this difference between

income and spending by domestic residents equal the current account balance

which is the trade balance determined by the real sector model of section 2

augmented by real interest income on net foreign asset holdings. This balance

of payments equilibrium condition provides the basis for a comparative statics

analysis of the effects of a variety of government policies on the real
exchange rate. This comparative statics analysis, however, ignores the

dynamic repercussions of expected changes in the real exchange rate and in the

path of private net asset holdings.

     In section , these dynamic considerations are taken into account and

solution is provided for the complete dynamic version of the model developed

in sections 2 and 3. This solution reveals that the equilibrium value of the

real exchange rate at any moment depends on expectations concerning the

exogenous factors that will influence the trade balance in all future periods

(including government commercial policies) and on expectations concerning the

exogenous factors that will influence the desired relationship between income

and spending in all future periods. For constant values of these exogenous

forcing variables, the dynamic behavior of the real exchange rate is driven by

the process of adjustment of the private stock of' net foreign assets in a

manner similar to that described by several recent models of the relationship

between the exchange rate and the current account.

     In section 5, this dynamic model is applied to an analysis of government

fiscal policies. A temporary shift in government spending toward domestic

goods at the expense of government spending on foreign goods initially

appreciates the real exchange rate (raises the relative price of domestic

goods), but to a smaller extent than a permanent spending shift of the same

magnitude. This temporary spending shift also induces a temporary current

account surplus and an increase in private net asset holdings which moderate

the immediate effect of the spending shift on the real exchange rate by

spreading some of its effect into periods after the spending shift itself has

ended. A similar mechanism operates in the case of a permanent spending shift

that is expected to occur at some future date. Because private agents

anticipate the effect of this future spending shift on the real exchange rate,
                                         5




 the actual real exchange rate and the level of private net asset holding react

 in advance of the actual start of the spending shift. A temporary general

 fiscal expansion, financed by an increase in government debt, is also shown to

appreciate the real exchange rate in the short run, even though private agents

correctly forecast the future taxes that will be necessary to pay the interest

on the expanded government debt. As with the temporary spending shift, this

temporary fiscal expansion induces a temporary increase in private net asset

holdings which assists in spreading out over time the effects of this fiscal

expansion on the real exchange rate. In the long run, the temporary fiscal

expansion depresses the real exchange rate because the higher taxes necessary

to finance the interest on the expanded government debt depress demand for

domestic goods.

        In section 6, the effects of capital controls are considered. Such

controls can influence the real exchange rate by affecting the permissible

difference between spending and income and hence the level of the current

account balance. it is argued, however, that such controls have only limited

capacity to affect the long-run average level of the real exchange rate.

Their   principal effect is to influence the responsiveness of the real exchange

rate to various forms of economic disturbances. In general, a capital contro

that fixes the permissible value of the current account balance increases the

sensitivity   of the real exchange rate to disturbances (like changes in

commercial policies) that shift spending between domestic and foreign goods,

but reduces the sensitivity of the real exchange rate to disturbances that

affect the general level of spending relative to income.

     In section 7, there is an analysis of how monetary policy and nominal

exchange rate policy can interact to influence the behavior of the real

exchange rate, In the present model which assumes full flexibility of all
                                        6




nominal prices, monetary policy cannot influence the real exchange rate when

the nominal exchange rate is fully flexible. Similarly, nominal exchange rate

policy cannot influence the real exchange rate when the domestic money supply

is allowed full flexibility to adjust to official settlements surpluses and

deficits. The combination of a policy that fixes a path for the nominal money

supply and for the nominal exchange rate, however, can influence the real

exchange rate and other real variables because such a policy affects the

behavior of the real money supply. To support such a combination of monetary

policy and exchange rate policy it is generally necessary for a government to

intervene in the foreign exchange market on a sterilized basis. Such inter-

vention necessarily implies differences between government spending and

government revenue which are the fiscal effect of sterilized intervention. In

the absence of full Ricardian equivalence between debt finance and tax finance

of government expenditure, this fiscal effect to sterilized intervention

provides a channel through which the combination of monetary policy and

nominal exchange rate policy can affect the real sector of the economy and, in

ticular, the real exchange rate.

     One example of such a combination of monetary and exchange rate policy is

  policy that simultaneously fixes a level of the domestic money supply and

     a value of the nominal exchange rate. In general, such a policy

cc'rnbination is dynamically unstable because the stock of government debt

reputred to finance official intervention in support of such a policy expands

exponcntially. This dynamic instability implies that continued belief in the

viability of such a policy combination by private economic agents is

Loc onsistent with rational expectations-—an assumption that is employed in the

dynamic model developed in section 4. To deal with this difficulty, it is

assumed that private agents foresee the possibility of a change in the nominal
                                        7




 exchange rate and relate the probability of such a change and its expected

 magnitude to the cumulative extent of official intervention in support of the

 current nominal exchange rate. Under this assumption, it is shown that so

 long as the assessed probability of an immediate parity change remains

 negligible, the real exchange rate is influenced by the combination of fixed

 nominal money supply and the pegged nominal exchange rate in exactly the same

 way as if private agents never foresaw any prospect of an exchange rate

 change. When the cumulative extent of official intervention reaches the point

 where people begin to suspect a significant probability of a parity change in

 the near future, the nature of the dynamic system is modified. The flow of

 intervention required to support the existing nominal exchange rate begins to

accelerate. The real exchange that was previously held constant by a constant

money supply and nominal exchange rate begins to rise in the case of a

prospective devaluation (or fall in the case of a prospective appreciation).

Ultimately, there is a change in the nominal exchange rate and an adjustment

of the real exchange rate to the level that is appropriate for the new nominal

exchange rate and the size of the domestic money supply.

     With slight modifications, this analysis also applies to a policy that

fixes the rate of' growth of the domestic money supply and the rate of crawl of

the nominal exchange rate, with occasional maxi—changes in the nominal

exchange rate used to correct persistent payments imbalances. The pattern of

behavior of the real exchange rate, of the current account balance, and of

other related variables under this combination of policies is reminiscent of

the experiences of some developing countries.

     The paper concludes with a brief restatement of its main contribution and

a discussion of the broader range of issues to which its analytical framework

might be applied.
                                        8



2.    Goods Market Equilibrium, the Trade Balance and the Real Exchange Rate

      Consider a moderate size country that produces and consumes two goods: a

domestic good that is different from goods produced in the rest of the world,

and a traded good (sometimes referred to as the imported good or foreign good)

that is identical to goods produced in the rest of the world. This country

exports some of its domestic good to the rest of the world and imports some of

the traded good it consumes from the rest of the world.    [n addition, this

country trades securities denominated in units of traded goods with the rest

of the world.

      The country under consideration is assumed to be small with respect to

world trade in traded goods and securities, in the sense that it takes real

interest rate in the world securities market for securities denominated in

traded goods, r*, as given, independent of the flow or stock amount of the

borrowing and lending that it does to finance the difference between the value

of its exports of domestic goods and the cost of its imports of traded

goods. This country is not small, however, with respect to the market for its

domestic good. Rather, it faces a foreign demand for this good that is less

than infinitely elastic with respect to the relative price of this good in

terms of traded goods. Specifically the value of foreign excess demand for

domestic goods (measured in units of traded goods) is given by


(1)      d*     *.q*   +   x*

where q* is the logarithm of the relative price of domestic goods in terms

of traded goods that faces foreign purchasers,     > 0 measures the

sensitivity of foreign demand for domestic goods to variations in q*, and

x* summarizes exogenous factors affecting foreign demand for domestic
                                                          9




 goods.       Since 1 is         >   0,        the relative price elasticity of foreign demand

 for domestic goods, n d(log(d*fl/dq*                          -   (*/d*)    -1,    is negative.

      Production possibilities in the home country are described by a smooth,

 convex transformation curve, with the implication that the supply of the

 domestic good is an increasing function of its relative price, while the

 supply of the traded good is a decreasing function of this relative price.

 Domestic demand for the domestic good is a decreasing function of its relative

price, and domestic demand for the traded good is an increasing function of

this relative price. Domestic demand for each good is an increasing function

of total domestic spending. This standard specification of supply and demand

conditions in the home country is consistent with the following log-linear

specification of domestic excess demand for traded goods,                          f,   and of the

value (in terms of traded goods) of domestic excess demand for domestic

goods, d:


(2)       f         —   x ÷ (1 —


(3)       d     -       ÷ x ÷


in these excess demand functions, q denotes the logarithm of the relative

price of domestic goods in terms of' traded goods that faces domestic                        pro Hrr
and consumers,          >   0   measures the sensitivity of these excess demands to

changes in q, a and              1 — a         are the shares of domestic goods and traded

goods in domestic spending,               ii    is   the excess of domestic spending over the

value of domestic product, and x summarizes the exogenous factors affeccing

domestic excess demands for domestic and traded goods (including tastes

production possibilities and government policies), Note that the total value

of domestic excess demand for both goods, d +                      f,   must equal the excess of

domestic spending over the value of domestic product,                       iD.    Note also that
                                                                                 10




changes in q or x,                                  holding                   constant, must have offsetting effects on

d and V. Note finally that since                                                      is assumed positive, the relative

price elasticity of domestic demand for imports of traded goods, n                                                 -


is   negativeS

       The relative price of domestic goods confronting domestic residents

differs from the relative price confronting foreign residents when the

government of the home country imposes an ad valorem tariff on imports of

traded goods or, equivalently, an ad valorem export tax on exports of domestic

goods. Formally the effects of such commercial policies indicated by the

relationship,


                      z       q - -r


here       -r        is       the logarithm of one plus the ad valorem tax rate on either

trnports        of    traded goods or exports of domestic goods.

       With          this       commercial policy in force, the condition for equilibrium in

rLe market            for       domestic goods which must be satisfied at every moment of time

     ozp'essed by the requirement that


                0         d      d* z       —
                                                            - )q          +   (x +    x         *T)   + a,.
     rtr, at every moment of time, the trade balance of the home country is the
oes of the                     value of home exports of domestic goods, d*, over the value of

rome imports of traded goods; that is,


                T         —    (+      s*).q            +   (x   +   x*        *T)     —
                                                                                           (1   —




Jring(i)            and        (6), we arrive at the conclusion that


                T (z —                 q)       z   —
                                            11




 where v (     +   *)/a and z          (x + x + *T)/( + *).     This result
 expresses the equivalence between the absorption and elasticities approaches

 to analysis of the trade balance. In accord with the elasticities approach,

 the trade balance depends on the terms of trade (represented by q) through

 the relationship T     v.(z -   q).    In accord with the absorption approach, the

 trade balance equals the excess of the value of domestic product over domestic

 expenditure; i.e., T    — p.

      It is worthwhile emphasizing that this result concerning the trade

 balance and the equations that underlie it are consistent with several

possible specifications of the production structure of the economy. One

specification is that of the standard two-country, two-commodity model of the

pure theory of international trade (summarized, for instance, by Mundell

(1968, chps. 1-3)). In this specification, both the domestic good and the

foreign good are produced (as well as consumed) in the home country, and the

domestic good is distinguished only by the fact that it is exported by the

home country. Another specification that is more commonly used in two-country

macroeconomic models (see Mussa (1979) and the references cited therein) is

that the home country produces only its domestic good and the rest of the

world produces only the foreign good. A third specification is that of the

udependent economy7' model developed by Salter(1959) and Swan (1960) and widely

applied in both trade theory and open economy macroeconomics.      In this

specification, the domestic good is a nontraded good that is produced and

consumed exclusively within the home country (d* therefore is equal to zero),

while the foreign good is an internationally traded good that is produced and

consumed in the home country and may be either imported or exported depending

on whether the home country has a trade deficit or a trade surplus. All of

the analysis in this paper is consistent with any one of these three
                                                12




specifications of production structure, though the interpretation of some

results depends on the particular specification that one has in mind.

       The standard results of the real theory of international trade concerning

the effects import tariffs or export taxes and transfers paid to residents of

the home country (usually derived in the standard two—country, two-commodity

model) are obtained by applying implicitly differentiation to (7) and

evaluating the results where T             0:



(8)      dq/dT     —   */(B   +   *);     dq*/dT /( ÷

(9)      dq/d(—)       dq*/d(_)         o/( +


The positive value of the denominator in (8) and (9),                  ÷ , reflects    the

fact that the Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfied; that is, the sum of' the

import demand elasticities plus one in negative,


(10)     r +     +1    =   (—s/f)   +   ((.*/d*)   — 1) +   1   —( +   *)/f   < 0.



Equation (8) expresses the standard result that a tariff on imports of traded

goods imported into the home country reduces the home relative price of

domestic goods (increase the home relative price of traded goods) and

increases the foreign relative price of domestic goods.                (See, for example,

Mundell 1968, chp. 3.) Equation (9) says that a transfer received by

residents of the home country (which allows an excess of domestic spending

over domestic income, represented by a positive value of -) pushes up the

relative price of domestic goods. This positive effect of a transfer received

(and spent) by domestic residents on the relative price of domestic goods

reflects a determinate sign of the transfer problem criterion (see again

Mundell 1968, chp, 2) that arises because the marginal propensity of domestic

residents to spend on domestic goods is positive, while the marginal
                                            13




 propensity of foreign residents (who pay the transfer) to spend on domestic

 goods is zero.

       For the purposes of the present discussion, (8)          is   a key result that

 summarizes the essential mechanism through which commercial policy works its

effects on the economy. Specifically, changes in commercial policy,

represented by changes in T,       affect   the relative price of domestic goods and

thereby affect all of the production and consumption decisions that are

influenced by this relative price. Defining the relative price of domestic

goods as "the real exchange rate,'t it follows that other policies can

replicate the effects of commercial policy to the extent that they have

similar effects on the real exchange rate.

       There are two general mechanisms through which economic policies may have

such effects on the real exchange rate. First, economic policies can affect

the exogenous shift variable x that appears in the domestic excess demand

functions and perhaps also the exogenous shift variable x that appears in

the foreign excess demand function for domestic goods. Formally, the effects

of changes in x and x on q are obtained by implicit differentiation of

the trade balance equilibrium condition, T z          (z   -   q)     0;



(11)     dq/dx    dq*/dx   1/( +             dq/dx'    dq/dx*          i/( +

For example, a shift of domestic government spending away from domestic goods

and toward domestically produced traded goods induces a decrease in x and

implies a decrease in q that is similar to that induced by an increase 1n

the tariff rate. Alternatively, a tax-financed increase in domestic

government spending directed toward traded goods induces a decrease in x

because the reduction in private sector spending due to the tax increase is

spread over both domestic and traded goods. Second, as indicated by (9),
                                         14




economic policies can affect the real exchange rate by affecting the

difference between domestic spending and domestic income. Specifically, any

policy that reduces domestic spending relative to domestic income (holding

x, s and t constant) will reduce q and replicate the effects of an

increase in the tariff rate on imports of traded goods. Further investigation

of this mechanism through which economic policies can affect the real exchange

rate and thereby replicate many of the effects of commercial policy is the

principal subject of this paper.

3.     Balance of Payments Equilibrium and Comparative Statics

        In order to analyze policies that affect the real exchange rate by

influencing the difference between spending and income, it is necessary to

specify the determinants of differences between spending and income and to

describe the condition of balance of payments equilibrium. This equilibrium

condition may then be employed to provide an initial comparative statics

analysis of effects of a variety of policies on the real exchange rate.

       Suppose that the desired excess of private spending over private income

for the country under consideration is given by


(12)      h       —   cr   + u


where h measures the excess of spending over income in terms of traded

goods, A is the net stock of privately held assets denominated in traded

goods, r is the real rate of return that domestic residents expect to earn

on their net asset holdings, u summarizes exogenous factors affecting h

(including some government policies), and      > 0 and a > 0 are parameters

indicating the responsiveness of h to variations in A and r, Since

privately issued securities net out against privately held securities, net

private securities holdings must consist of securities issued by foreigners
                                                   15




 (or debts owed to foreigners if A is < 0) or holdings of bonds issued by the

 domestic government. Since real interest income earned on private net asset

 holdings is included in private sector income, the positive value of the

 parameter          implies that an increase in A increases desired private

 spending by more than it increases private income. Further, since excesses of

private spending over private income must be financed at the expense of

private net asset holdings, it follows that


(13)        D(A)        — h


where D(A(t))           A(t + 1) —      A(t)   is the forward difference in the level of A.

        The excess of spending over income for the home country includes the

excess of government spending over government revenue, g,                as well as the

excess of private spending over private income, h. Government spending

includes the real interest that the government must pay on its outstanding

stock of government debt, G. The excess of government spending over

government revenue is financed by issuing (or retiring) government debt,


(1)4)      0(G)      g.



The net asset position of the home country as a whole,             'J,   is equal to the

excess of privately held net assets over the outstanding stock of government

debt,


(15)              A — G.



The change in this net asset position corresponds to the total excess of

income over spending,


(16)       0(N)     —     (h   +   g)
                                                 16




       The desired change in net assets implied by (16) may be thought of as the

desired capital outflow of the home country. In order for the economic system

to be in equilibrium, this desired capital outflow must correspond to the

current account balance which is the sum of the trade balance and the service

account balance. The trade balance is given by (7) as T           v•(z -   q).   The

service account balance is the real interest income that the home country

earns on its net asset position, which is equal to the real interest rate

prevailing in the world securities market, r*, multiplied by         t'J    A — G.

Substituting (12) into (16), it follows that the critical requirement for

momentary equilibrium in the economic system may be expressed as the balance

of payments equilibrium condition,


(17)      'J•(z -   q) +   r*.(A   — G)   •r —        —u —   g.

In this condition, the expected real rate of return on private asset holdings

is not identified with r* because some government policies induce diver—

gences between r and r* and because expected changes in the relative price

of domestic goods also imply such divergences.

       Preliminary conclusions concerning the capacity of various policies to

replicate the effects of commercial policy by influencing the real exchange

rate may be obtained by applying implicit differentiation to the balance of

payments equilibrium condition (17). These conclusions are only preliminary

because they neglect dynamic effects arising from induced changes in asset

stocks and from changes in anticipations of future policies that are examined

in later sections. Many of the conclusions of the present analysis, however,

do apply (under appropriate assumptions and specifications) to the long run

effects of permanent changes in government policies when account is taken of

these dynamic complications.
                                           17




        First, consider an increase in the outstanding stock of government

 debt. Holding z,      A,   r,    u and g constant, the change in q necessary

 to maintain balance of payments equilibrium in the face of an increase in G

 is given by


 (18)     dq/DG   —   r*/        or*/( +


The explanation of this result is that a larger stock of government debt

requires a higher flow of net interest payments to foreigners who must be the

holders of this debt if net assets of the private sector are constant. With a

constant desired capital outflow (or inflow), this increase in net interest

payments requires an improvement in the trade balance which, in turn, requires

a lower relative price of domestic goods. This conclusion, it should be

emphasized, does not depend on the assumption that the increased taxes

necessary to finance the interest on the expanded government debt are ignored

by the private sector. Since g is defined as the excess of government

spending (including interest payments on government debt) over government

revenue and g     is held constant, the implicit assumption is that taxes are

raised sufficiently to pay the increased interest on the expanded government

debt. Private sector income falls by the amount of this increase in taxes.

Since h is the excess of private sector spending over private sector income

and h is held constant in the derivation of (18), it follows that this

result embodies the assumption that private sector spending falls by the

amount of increased taxes necessary to finance interest payments on the

expanded government debt. Indeed, the decline in the relative price of

domestic goods in response to an increase in the outstanding stock of

government debt is precisely the appropriate relative price response to a

transfer of spending from domestic residents who have a positive marginal
                                                  18




propensity to spend on domestic goods to foreign residents (the recipients of

the interest paid on the net government debt) who have a zero marginal

propensity to spend on domestic goods.

        An implicit assumption that is essential to (18) is the assumption that

government debt is not viewed as a liability by the private sector in the

sense that the stock of such debt exerts a negative effect on the desired

excess of private spending over private income that is equivalent to the

positive effect, p•A, exerted by privately held net assets. This is

consistent with the notion of Metzler (1951) and Mundell (1960) that

marketable assets exert a positive effect on desired spending beyond the

effect of their yield on income, but that future tax liabilities associated

with government debt are not regarded as marketable liabilities that offset

this effect of marketable assets. (An alternative approach to eliminating

Ricardian equivalence between debt and tax finance of government expenditures

is to assume an overlapping generations model with no bequest motive. For a

recent and elegant version of such a model, see Blanchard (19811); see Frenkel

and Razin (19811) for an application of this model in a open economy

context.) Were this not the case, then a term -        •G   would have to be

included among the factors affecting the desired excess of private spending

over private income so that (12) would become


(12')      h      i•(A — C) -      a'r   +   u.


This modification would add a term iG to the right hand side of the balance

of payments equilibrium condition (17) and would modify the result (18) to


(18')     dq/dG      —   (r*   +
                                         19




 This result, however, would not represent the long run equilibrium effect of

 an increase in the stock of government debt because with (12') an increase

 in G implies a reduction in h and hence an increase in the rate of

accumulation of privately held net assets. The long run cumulative effect of

 this change in private asset accumulation is that privately held net assets

would rise by exactly the amount of the increase in the stock of government

debt. In the long run, therefore, there would be no reduction in domestic

spending and increase in foreign spending because increased interest and

associated taxes on the expanded government debt would be exactly offset by

the increased interest received on privately held net assets. Under these

conditions, therefore, an increase in the stock of government debt would have

no long run effect on the relative price of domestic goods. (In Barro's

(197J4) terminology, there would be no long run net wealth effect from changes

in the stock of' government debt because they would be fully offset by changes

in private security holdings.)

       Second, consider a temporary reduction in the general level of

taxation. The short run effect of this policy is a temporary increase in

government expenditure relative to government revenue, that is, a temporary

increase in g. Maintenance of balance of payments equilibrium in the face of

this increase in g, with given values of z,      A, G,   r and U, requires
an increase in the relative price of domestic goods;


(19)      dq/dg z 1/u   o/( ÷


This result embodies the assumption that the private sector does not forecast

the future tax liability implicit in flow of government debt which finances

the current tax reduction. Of consequence, the excess of private spending

over private income does not decline in response to the increase in government
                                        20




expenditure relative to government revenue; rather private spending rises to

the extent of the tax reduction. This increase in private spending falls

partly on domestic goods and forces an increase in the relative price of these

goods to maintain equilibrium in the domestic goods market. Over time, the

temporary reduction in taxes enlarges the stock of government debt and (under

the assumptions of the present analysis) this increase in the stock of

government debt tends to offset the direct effect of the tax reduction in

reducing q. Ultimately, when taxes are raised sufficiently to eliminate the

government deficit, the long run effect of the temporary tax reduction is to

raise the long run stock of government debt and the long run level of' taxes

required to finance the interest on this debt. The long run effect of the

temporary tax reduction (under the assumptions of the present analysis),

therefore, is to reduce the long run equilibrium value of the real exchange

rate for precisely the reasons discussed in connection with the effects of an

increase in the outstanding stock of government debt.

       Third, consider a policy that permanently raises the expected real rate

of' return for private asset holders. Such a policy might be a permanent

reduction in the tax rate on interest income. At given values of A, G,

g, u and z, an increase in r reduces the desired excess of private

spending over private income and requires a reduction in q in order to

maintain balance of payments equilibrium;


(20)      dq/dr   -



Over time, however, the reduction in h implied by an increase in r

generates a higher net stock of private held assets, and the effect of an

increase in A on the relative price of domestic goods is given by


(21)      dq/dA   (i +
                                            21




The cumulative change in A necessary to offset the increase in r and

return h to the zero value consistent with no further changes in A is

given by AA       (a/w)Ar where iXr      is the policy induced change in r.   It is

easily shown that the combined long run effect of the increase in r and the

induced increase in A on the relative price of domestic goods is given by


(22)             (-c&/v)Ar +   ((ii ÷ r*)/v).AA   (r*/).AA   (cxr*/).Ar.


The reason for this increase in the long run equilibrium value of q in

reponse to a policy induced increase in r is that the long run level of

income of domestic residents rises due to the increase in A and domestic

residents spend a fraction of this increased income on domestic goods, thereby

forcing an increase in their relative price. This example points to the

importance of distinguishing between short run and long run effects when

considering the consequences of government policies that affect the real

exchange rate.

Lt.    A Dynamic Model of the Real Exchange Rate

        In order to provide a complete, dynamic analysis of government policies

that affect the real exchange rate, it is necessary to take account of

endogenously determined changes in the net stock of privately held assets that

occur as the counterpart of current account imbalances and also to take

account of the influence of expected changes in relative price of domestic

goods on economic behavior. To provide a benchmark for dynamic analysis of

the effects of government policies, it is useful first to examine the dynamic

interactions among the real exchange rate, the net stock of privately held

assets and the current account balance in the absence of any government

interventions. For this purpose, it is assumed that the stock of government
                                              22




debt is constant at zero and that government expenditure and government

revenue are also zero.

        Since no tax is imposed on private security holdings, the interest rate

earned on such holdings is the real interest rate r* that prevails in the

world securities market. The real rate of return that influences private

spending and saving decisions, r, however, is equal to r* only when no

capital gains or losses are anticipated on private security holdings. More

generally, the expected real rate of return for private security holders is

given by


(23)        r   r* -      a.De(q)

where De(q) denotes the expected rate of change of the relative price of

domestic goods. The rationale for this relationship is that the real yield

relevant for the spending and saving decisions of domestic residents is

measured relative to a consumption basket that contains both domestic and

traded goods. This real yield on a security with a fixed price and fixed

interest rate in terms of traded goods is less than r* to the extent of the

expected rate of increase of the relative price of domestic goods, multiplied

by the share of domestic goods in the consumption basket. This assumption

concerning the domestic real interest rate is a common feature of models that

allow for changes in the real exchange rate; in particular, see Dornbusch

(1983), Mussa (1982a and 1984), and Obstfeld (1981 and 1983).

        This specification of the domestic real interest rate together with the

assumptions that G            0 and g    0 imply that the balance of payments

equilibrium condition (17) can be written as


(224)       '.(z —   q)   +   r A w — cxoDe (q)    —
                                                     23




where w       cz.r* - u    summarizes all of the exogenous factors (including the

world real interest rate) that influence the desired excess of private income

over private spending. Equation (26) is a dynamic equation because it

involves the expected rate of change of the relative price of domestic goods

and because it involves the net stock of privately held assets which is

changing whenever private income differs from private spending, specifically,


(25)        D(A)   -   h   w -   a.De(q)

        Under the assumption of rationality of expectations, equations (24) and

(25) constitute a dynamic system that constrains the expected evolution of the

relative price of domestic goods and the net stock of privately held assets,

conditional on the information available at a given date. In matrix form,

this dynamic system may be written as




(26)
           re
            cwD    —                r   1 + p

                                                 I
                                                          q       j w


                                    P    +
           Laa.                              DeJ          AJ      L


The economically appropriate solution of this dynamic system yields the

following expression for the current expected equilibrium value or the real

exchange rate, qe(t)         E(q(t); t):


(27)       qe(t)    (t) +        (Ae()   -



where    (t) is the current expected long run equilibrium value of the real

exchange rate, Ae(t)         E(A(t); t)         is the current expected level of net

private asset holdings, ,          is    the current expected long run equilibrium

level of net private asset holdings, and y > 0 is a parameter that
                                                       24




determines the responsiveness of qe(t) to deviations between Ae(t) and

(t). The values of (t), (t) and y are determined by


(28)            (t) z     (t)    +    (r*/v).(t)

(29)            (t)       (1 - o)           8E(z(t + j);    t)
                                       j0


(30)            (t)       (1 -   8)     z e•E(w(t +
                                       j0
                                                       j)/;      t)




(31)           y       (X/v) —   (1/ac)

where the discount factor e                  involved in the definitions of A(t) and (t)

is given by


(32)           e       1/(1 + X)


and where X             is the positive characteristic root associated with the dynamic

          (91Y
..j.—"-,'—." \'-,, ,


(33)           x       (1/2).{(r* +     (/aa))   +   /r* + (/aa))2    +



        The results (28) through (33) may be interpreted as follows. (For

further discussion, see Mussa (1984).) Equation (16) says that the current

expected long run equilibrium real exchange rate, (t), is the real exchange

rate expected to make the present discounted value (using the discount factor

0) of trade imbalances equal to zero, namely a(t) as defined by (29),

adjusted for the effect of expected net interest income on the current

expected long run equilibrium level of privately held net assets, Pccording

to (30), this expected long run equilibrium level of privately held net assets
                                           25




is the expected present discounted value (using the discount factor e)             of
the exogenous factors affecting the desired excess of private spending over

private income, divided by the sensitivity of this excess of private income

over private spending to the actual level of privately held net assets.

Equation (31) defines the reduced form parameter y that appears in (27) in

terms of the more basic parameters that appear in the balance of payments

equilibrium condition (24). Using (33),         it   is easily established that

y   is   >   r*/v   which is necessarily positive. Equation (32) indicates that

the positive characteristic root X plays the role of "the discount rate" in

the expressions that define (t) and (t). Equation (33)               relates   the value

of this discount rate to the parameters that appear in the balance of payments

equilibrium condition (24).

     Because no restriction has been placed on the expected behavior of'          the
exogeous factors affecting the trade balance (the z's) or on the exogenous

factors affecting the desired excess of private income over private spending

(the w's), these results provide a description of the determinants of the

current expected equilibrium real exchange rate under a wide variety of

possible assumptions about how economic conditions are expected to change over

time. This generality has a cost in terms of increased complexity of the

required analysis. It also has important benefits in terms of a capacity to

analyze expected changes in government policies and other exogenous variables,

to deal with a variety of notions of permanent and transitory changes in

government policies and other exogenous variables, and to distinguish between

the expected effects of expected changes in these exogenous variables and the

unexpected effects attributable to new information about present and future

government policies and other exogenous disturbances,
                                                 26



     When the exogenous factors affecting the trade balance and the desired

excess of private spending are known to have constant values (say z(s)

for all s and w(s)                for all s), the dynamic process governing the

expected evolution of the real exchange rate and the net stock of privately

held assets can be described quite simply. Since there is no good reason to

distinguish between expected and actual values of q and A when the z's

and w's are equal to known constants, this description applies equally well

to the actual evolution of q and A, and is illustrated in those terms in

figure 1. The dynamic process that is described. in this figure embodies the

essential features of a number of recent analyses of the dynamic interactions

among the current account balance, the level of net foreign assets, and the

real exchange rate, in particular, those of Kouri (1976), Calvo and Rodriquez

(1977), Dornbusch and Fischer (1980) and Obstfeld (1981a).

     Suppose that the initial net level of privately held assets, A(0), is

greater than the long run equilibrium level, A z w/1i.                     Then, as illustrated
in panel a, the initial equilibrium real exchange rate, q(0)                             +

          — ), must     be above the long run equilibrium real exchange rate,

      +   (r*/v)..     As illustrated in panel b, this initial real exchange

implies an initial current account deficit, b(0) v( —                       q(0))   i-



r*.A(O)   = (vy —   r*).(   —   A(0)) < 0. This current account deficit implies a
decline in the net stock of privately held assets between period 0 and period

1, D(A(0)) = b(0) = (y —         r*).(A   —   A(0))   <   0.     This decline in net assets

implies that real exchange rate in period 1,                   q(1)    +   y(A(1)   —    ), as
determined in panel a, must be below its previous value but still above its

long run equilibrium value. The fact that this decline in the real exchange

rate, D(q(0))        y•D(A(0))     y.b(0), was anticipated in period 0 implies that

the domestic real interest rate in that period, r(0) = r* —                   aD(q(0)),      must
       C'
                                                                                      q


                                                                  +       —
                                                              q               A)




                                                                                          z +   (r*/3) .K   =




ci11
                                 —              —   —   -   --        —       --—
C'U                                      —I.-                                       -
                                                                                                                1(z—q)      +
                                                                                                                                (r*/Ifl.A1
                                                                                                                  (z—q) +       (r*/f)   A


                                                                                                  ((r*/y)). (c.    -   q)

                                                                                                                                I)

                             A            A
                         U




            Liq.-—1:   t)ynamic Tnterdction   beLwn the     Exchange Rate, Asset Stocks, and the Current Account.
                                       27



have been above its long run equilibrium value, r*. In period 1, this

process repeats, starting with a net stock of privately held assets A(1)

that is between A(O) and .      Over time, the net stock of privately held

assets, the real exchange rate and the domestic real interest rate all

gradually decline toward their respective long run equilibrium values, and the

current account deficit is gradually eliminated.

     The dynamic process illustrated in figure 1 is the process of convergence

of the economic system toward the fixed long run equilibrium position deter-.

mined by known constant values of the exogenous forcing variables z and

w. The essential driving force in this adjustment process is the gradual

adjustment of the net stock of privately held assets toward its long run

equilibrium level. There are limited circumstances in which this single

element of a more complex dynamic system provides an essentially complete

description of the dynamic response of the economic system to some change in

economic conditions. In particular, consider a permanent (constant) increase

in the tariff rate applied to imports of traded goods, T > 0.       Such a tariff

increase reduces the value of the exogenous forcing variable affecting the

trade balance, z z x + x - 8*T,     by a known constant amount           This

implies that the real exchange rate consistent with long run equilibrium in

the trade balance, ,   falls   by an amount             Assuming that the tariff

increase does not affect the exogenous factor that influences the desired

excess of private spending over private income, it follows that there is no

change in     /ji and hence that the real exchange rate consistent with long

run equilibrium in the current account, ,     falls   by the same amount as

In terms of figure 1, this means that the schedule showing q(t) as a

function of A(t) in panel a and the schedule showing b(t) as a function

of q(t) in panel b both shift downwards to the extent of the reduction in
                                              28



    and .    Whatever the net stock of privately held assets at the time of the

permanent tariff increase, therefore, the immediate effect of the tariff'

increase is to reduce q(t) by the same amount as the reductions in t and

.   Depending on whether A(t) is greater or less than A, q will

subsequently fall or rise toward its new long run equilibrium value as A

converges to .       At each moment, q will be below the value it would have

had in the absence of the tariff increase by precisely the amount that

measures the long run equilibrium effect of the tariff increase.

     The dynamic system (26) and its solution given by (28) through (33) may

also be used to analyze changes in the tariff rate that are expected to be

temporary or permanent changes that are expected to occur at some future

date. Such commercial policy changes imply either a temporary change in the

level of the forcing varible z during some finite interval or a permanent

change in the level of z that occurs at some specific future date. Such

commercial policy changes may also imply changes in the exogenous forcing

variable w which takes account of the desired spending and saving behavior

of the private sector. The reason why w may be affected is that temporary

changes in commercial policy or changes that are expected to occur at a future

date affect the expected time path of the real exchange rate and hence private

incentives for spending and saving. This is a point that has recently been

emphasized by Razin and Svennsson (1983) (see also Svennsson and Razin (1983))

and is represented formally in the present model by allowing for changes in

the path of w as well as in the path of z. Given the prescribed changes in

the paths of these exogenous forcing variables, the general solution of the

model provides a description of how the real exchange rate responds to

temporary or future expected changes in commercial policy.
                                             29



    5. Fiscal Policy and the Real Exchange Rate

           The dynamic model of section 4 may be applied immediately to analyze the

    effect on the real exchange rate of shifts of government spending between

domestic and foreign goods. Going back to section 2, an increase in govern-

ment spending on domestic goods at the expense of government spending on

foreign goods is represented by an increase in the exogenous factor x that

enters positively into the value of excess demand for domestic goods and

negatively into the excess demand for foreign goods. In the dynamic model of

section 4, such an increase in x translates into a corresponding increase in

the exogneous forcing variable z.         It follows that an unexpected permanent

shift in government spending away from foreign goods and toward domestic

goods, Ax > 0, will increase the equilibrium real exchange rate given by

(27) by a constant amount Aq           (a/)ix at every moment of time, relative to

the value it would have had in the absence of this government spending

shift. This, of course, is the same result that was obtained in the initial

comparative statics analysis of a government spending shift described in

section 2.

           The virtue of the dynamic model of section 4 is that it permits analysis

of any more complicated shift in the actual or expected distribution of

Eovernment spending between domestic and foreign goods. In particular,

consider an unexpected shift of government spending toward domestic goods Ax

at time t that is expected to last only T periods. The impact effect of

this unexpected temporary spending shift on the real exchange rate in period

t     is    Aq(t)   (o/u).Ax(1 - 8T)    which is smaller than the effect of a

permanent spending shift of the same magnitude. As the period of termination

of the spending shift approaches, the effect of the shift on the real exchange

rate consistent with long—run trade balance equilibrium diminishes, with
                                            30




(s) (o/v).x.(1           BT+t_5) for t < s < T +     t.   The effect on ,

however,is not the only effect of'    the   temporary spending shift on the real

exchange rate. In addition, because private agents know that the spending

shift is temporary, they anticipate that q will change in period t + T

when the temporary spending shifts ends. This anticipated change in q

affects the expected real interest rate for domestic residents who consume

both domestic and foreign goods and thereby affects their spending and savings

behavior. Between period t and period t ÷ T, domestic residents expect

future declines in q and therefore save more than would otherwise be the

case. This implies that the private net stock of foreign assets, A(s),

rises above the level it would otherwise have for t < s < t + T.          It follows

that tq(s) is       > (s) for t < s K t ÷ T.        Moreover, since A(t ÷ T)      is

greater than the value it would have in the absence of the temporary spending

shift, it follows that q(s) remains somewhat above the level it would have

in the absence of the temporary spending shift for s        T +   t,   and only

gradually converges back toward its previous path as the increase in A built

up between t and t ÷ T        is gradually run down.

        another application of the dynamic model of section 14 is to the analysis

of a shift in government spending that is expected to occur at date s

t + T    that lies T periods in the future. Suppose that private agents first

learn of this spending shift in period t and that they expect it will be

permanent once it starts in period t + T.        Even though this expected future

spending shift has no immediate direct effect on excess demands for domestic

and foreign goods, it does have an immediate effect on the real exchange rate

equal to q(t) (a/4Ax8T where Ax is the size of the permanent

spending shift that is expected to occur at t ÷ T.        The source of this change

in q(t) is the change in the real exchange rate anticipated to be consistent
                                               31




with long run equilibrium in the trade balance, A(t). As time progresses

between t and       t. +   T,    the real exchange rate is also affected by induced

changes in private net asset holdings which are reduced relative to their

previously expected path because private agents anticipate increases in q as

the moment of the spending shift approaches. The decrease in A(t + T)

relative to the level it would have had in the absence of anticipations of the

spending shift implies that q(t + T)            as determined by (27) is below the

level it would have if the spending shift suddenly became known at T ÷                    t.
Thus, the effect of spending shift being anticipated in period t, rather

than becoming known in period t + T,            is that the adjustment of the real

exchange rate to this spending shift is spread out over time, rather than

occuring all at once in period t + T.            Some of the adjustment of q occurs

immediately when the spending shift is first anticipated in period t. Some

more adjustment q takes place between t and t + T.                         Some adjustment takes

place after t ÷ T         as private net asset holdings are raised back to the path

they would have followed in the absence of anticipations of the spending

shift.

       With slight modification, the dynamic model of section                  may also be used

to analyze the effects on the real exchange rate of general fiscal policy,

defined as variations in the debt-financed difference between government

expenditure and government revenue, g. To deal with general fiscal policy,

the balance of payments equilibrium condition must be modified from (24) to


(34)       'J•(z   q) +    r   •(A — G)   w—   ca'De(q)   —   jA   —   g


where G is the stock of government debt and g is the excess of government

spending (including interest payments on outstanding debt) over government

revenue, With this modification, the dynamic system determining the expected
                                                           32




future evolution of q and A is given by



                   aaD e                      +            r
                                                                q
                                                                          r-          -g       r*.G

(35)
                                 e
                             D                                  A
               L

The only difference between this dynamic system and the dynamic system (26) is

that the exogenous forcing variable in the top equation is now w -                                      -
g +    r*.G,       whereas before it was simply w                     u-z. The additional term

r*.G - g       in this forcing variable takes account of the effects of general

fiscal policy. The solution of the dynamic system (35) is the same as the

solution of the dynamic system (26), as given by (27) through (33), except

that the expression for the real exchange rate consistent with long run

equilibrium in the trade balance, (t), given by (29) must be modified by

replacing the forcing variable z(t +                       j)       with y(t +   j)    z(t ÷   j)   +

(1/)(g(t       ÷    j)   -   r.G(t     ÷    jfl.
       With this modification in mind, consider an unexpected temporary fiscal

expansion in which lump sum taxes are cut by a constant amount for T

periods, starting in the current period t, without any tax increases to

finance the increased interest paynments on the expanding government debt

until period t + T, when taxes are raised sufficiently to eliminate the

deficit. This policy translates into a constant unexpected increase y(s)

for t     s < t + T,                 and a constant unexpected decrease in y(s) for

s     t + T        equal to the interest on the increase in the government debt

between t and t + T.                    The impact effect of this fiscal policy on the real

exchange rate at time t is given by


(36)           q(t) (t)                    (1 -    e)[1   9T.(1 +     r*)T].(K/)      > 0,
                                          33




where AK > 0 is the amount of the reduction in lump sum taxes (relative to

their previously expected path) between t and t + T.                 This impact effect on

the real exchange rate is positive because the discount rate X used in

calculating (t), as given by (33), is larger than r* and therefore

implies that 0T.(1 +    r*)T   [(1 +   r*)/(1    +    x)]T    is less than 1.   As time

progresses, the size of the increase in (s) for t < s < t ÷ T                   diminishes

and ultimately turns negative because the number of future periods in which

taxes will be lower is diminishing and the date at which taxes will be raised

to cover the deficit is approahing. After time t + T,                (s) is reduced

permanently by an amount (AK/)[(1 ÷       r*)T    -   1]     which represents the long run

equilibrium effect on      of the increased taxes that are imposed to finance

the increased interest on the expanded stock of government debt.

        Except in period t, the response of q(s) to the fiscal policy does

not mirror exactly the response of (s) because the expectations of changes

in q induced by the policy influence private savings behavior and hence the

path of the private net stock of foreign assets. Specifically, since q                 is

expected to decline subsequent to its initial upward jump in period t,

A(s) rises above its level in the absence of the fiscal policy for t K s K

t ÷ T    and gradually falls back to its previous path for s             t ÷ T.   In

accord with (27), this increase in A(s) relative to its previous path

results in an increase in q(s) relative to (s). The overall result, as

illustrated in figure 2, is that during the interval between t and t + T,

Aq(s) remains positive even after A(s) has become negative. By period

t + T,    Aq(s) is negative, but smaller in absolute value than A(s). Only

as the increased net stock of private asset holdings built up between t

and t + T     is run down does Aq(s) fall to the long run equilibrium level of'
                           3 3A




   Aq Ac




                                  (5)

     Aq(t) =

                                                                    time




                                                                   time
                 t                       t+T


Fig.—-2 The Effects of a Temporary Fiscal Expansion on the Real Exchange
        Rate and on Private Net Holdings of Foreign Assets.
                                      3L



     This analysis of the effects of general fiscal policy can be extended to

other examples embodying alternative specifications of the paths of g and

G and hence of the exogenous forcing variable y     z ÷   (1/v)(g   -   r*.G).
Rather than pursuing such examples, however, it is more useful to investigate

the elements of the specification of the present model that allow general

fiscal policy to influence the behavior of the real exchange rate.

     The short run effect of expansionary fiscal policy in raising the real

exchange rate does not rely on the failure of private agents to forecast

future tax liabilities correctly or on the failure of the government to impose

taxes sufficient to pay the interest on the government debt, but does depend

on the absence of full Ricardian equivalence between debt-financed and tax—

financed government spending. In the example just considered (as should be

the case in any well specified example of fiscal policy), the government's

intertemporal budget constraint is satisfied because the government ultimately

(starting in period t + T) raises taxes sufficiently to pay the interest on

the expanded stock of government debt. Private agents foresee this tax

increase starting in period t when the policy is introduced, and the

reaction of the real exchange rate to the new policy, as given by (36),

reflects the anticipation of these future taxes. The effect of the

anticipated increase in future taxes reduces but does not eliminate the

expansionary effect of the government deficit because the discount rate X

that is applied to determine the effect of future taxes on the current real

exchange rate is greater than the interest rate r* on government debt. If

private saving responded immediately to the government deficit, in the manner

required to maintain Ricardian equivalence between debt and tax finance of

government spending, there would be no such expansionary effect of fiscal

policy. In this case, the exogenous variable u which takes account of
                                               35




 exogenous factors affecting the desired excess of private income over private

 spending would rise immediately to offset any increase in g and leave no

 room for government deficits to affect the aggregate level of desired

spending. The present analysis which excludes such an offset effect of

private saving implicitly assumes that general fiscal policy operates in the

same way as shifts in the desired intertemporal distribution of private

spending. This would be an entirely appropriate assumption, even under the

conditions of Ricardian equivalence, if the government always acted in the

interests of private agents, with its budget deficits and surpluses reflecting

private preferences with respect to the intertemporal distribution of spending

relative to income.

6.   Capital   Controls and the Real Exchange Rate

      In the preceding analysis of the behavior of the real exchange rate, it

has been assumed that private agents can borrow or lend whatever amount they

want (denominated in terms of foreign goods> in the world capital market at

the prevailing real interest rate r*. Capital controls are a policy by which

a government may limit the extent of such private credit flows and thereby

influence the behavior of the real exchange rate. Specifically, looking back

at the expression for the trade balance given in equation (7), T
     —   q)    -
                   ip,   it   follows that any policy that affects -   p   (the excess of

domestic income over the value of domestic output> by controlling inter-

national capital flows must, for a given value of z, affect the level of q.

     Formally, there are a variety of ways in which capital controls might be

introduced into the model used to determine the behavior of the real exchange

rate. By far the simplest is to specify that the internatioriai flow of net

private capital (the change in the net private stock for foreign securities)

is controlled directly each period by the government. The policy determined
                                               36



net outflow of capital (i.e., the increase in private net holdings of foreign

assets) in period t is denoted by a(t). Returning to the base case

assumptions that government revenue is equal to government expenditure

(g     0) and that there is no outstanding government debt (G           0), the

condition for balance of payments equilibrium in the presence of capital

controls is expressed by the requirement that


(37)       v(z(t) -   q(t))   +   r*.A(t)    a(t).


Solving this condition for q(t),            it follows that the (logarithm of the) real

exchange rate is given by


(38)       q(t)   z(t) +   (i/v)[r*.A(t)       a(t)}.


It is apparent that a higher permissible capital outflow or lower permissible

capital inflow in the current period (i.e. a lower value of a(t)) implies a

lower current real exchange rate (a lower value of q(t)). However, since

greater current capital outflows or smaller current capital inflows mean

larger future private net holdings of foreign assets (i.e., higher future

values of A(s) for s > t), a higher current value of a(t) implies lower

future values of q(s) for s > t.

       In considering the effects of capital controls on the real exchange rate,

it is useful to distinguish between persistent effects on the level of the

real exchange rate and effects on the variability of the real exchange rate in

response to different types of economic disturbances. The capacity of capital

controls to maintain a long run average value of the real exchange rate

different from the long run average that would prevail in the absence of such

controls is limited to the ability of such controls to maintain a long run

average value of A that differs from its long run equilibrium value in the
                                                    37




absence of controls. Specifically, comparing the long-run average value of

q determined by (38) (denoted by q                   for the average with controls) with the

long-run average value of q determined by (27) (denoted by q                   for the

average with no control), under the assumption that the processes generating

the z's and the w's are stationary, we find that


(39)          qc —   qn       (r*/)[A —
                                        c
                                            A
                                                n


where A        and A          are the long-run average values of'    A with and without
          c               n
controls. This result reflects the fact that interest income earned on

private net foreign asset holdings is spent partly on domestic goods, thereby

implying that a higher long-run average level of private net foreign asset

holdings requires a higher long—run average level of q to maintain

equilibrium in the market for domestic goods. For relevant sizes of the

parameters r* and ,                it    is apparent that in order for capital controls to

have a substantial long-run effect on the average value of the real exchange

rate, they must have a large effect on the long-run average level of private

net holdings of foreign assets.

       ifl contrast to their limited capacity to affect the long-run average

level of the real exchange rate, capital controls can substantially affect the

responsiveness of the real exchange rate to temporary disturbances, Again

comparing (38) and (27), it is apparent that under capital controls, with a

fixed value of a(t), the current value of q(t) responds one-for-one with

variations in z(t); whereas in the absence of controls, q(t) depends on

the discounted present value of the current z and all expected future

Z'S. It follows that a temporary, one-period disturbance to z(t) will have

a much stronger effect on q(t) under controls (with a(t) fixed) than In

the absence of capital controls. This is because in the absence of controls
                                        38




the capital flow will adjust to accommodate part of the current disturbance

to z(t) and thereby spread the effect of this disturbance over time. More

generally, this principle applies to any form of temporary disturbance to

the z's: capital controls (with a fixed path of a(t)) tend to accentuate

the effects of such disturbances on the real exchange rate.

     The other side of the coin is that capital controls reduce the

sensitivity of the real exchange rate to disturbances in the w's, that. is,

to disturbances that affect the desired excess of income over spending.

Looking at (27), it is apparent that disturbances to the w's affect q(t)

in the absence of capital controls because q(t) depends on (t) and (t)

depends on a discounted sum present and expected future values of w. Looking

at (38), however, we find that neither the current w nor any expected future

value of w affects the current value of q(t). Thus, capital controls, with

a fixed value of a(t), insulate q(t) from disturbances to the w's.

     There is no necessity, of course, for capital controls to maintain a

fixed value of a(t) in the face of all forms of economic disturbances. In

particular, if a government wanted to stabilize the behavior of' the real

exchange rate (over and above the stability resulting from the absence of

capital controls) it would seek to increase or reduce the value of a(t) in

order to offset positive on negative disturbances to z(t), while holding

a(t) constant in the face of disturbances to the W5,

     A   special circumstance in which a government may wish to manipulate the

international flow of capital is when it is pursuing other policies in an

effort to affect the real exchange rate.     In particular, consider the

unexpected temporary shift of government spending toward domestic goods and

away from domestic goods discussed at the beginning of section 5. Because

private agents anticipate declining values of q subsequent to the impact
                                         39



 effect   of this spending shift, in the absence of capital controls there is an

 increase the rate of accumulation of net foreign assets by private agents.

 Later on, especially after perood t + T      when the spending shift ends, the

 increase in private net holding of' foreign assets keeps   q somewhat higher
 than it would otherwise be. But, in period t and in the periods immediately

 following, the increase in private saving diminishes the effect of the

 spending shift in raising the relative price of domestic goods.    If the

government wished to maximize the impact effect of the spending shift in

raising q(t), it would limit the extent of the capital outflow (purchase of

foreign assets by domestic residents) in order to bottle up the effect of the

spending shift toward domestic goods. A similar capital controls policy would

also be pursued by a government that wished to maximize the impact effect on

the real exchange rate of the unexpected temporary fiscal expansion discussed

at the end of section 5.

     Much of this analysis of capital controls carries over to the analysis of

dual exchange rate systems in which governments maintain separate nominal

exchange rates for current account transactions and for capital account

transactions. (See Dornbusch (198L) and the references cited therein for an

analysis of such systems.) The, usual arrangement in such systems is that the

current account rate is fixed or determined by a crawling peg while the

capital account rate is allowed to be determined by market forces, The

effect, indeed the purpose, of such a system is to control the extent of

private international capital flows, with the differential between the capital

account and the current account exchange rates measuring the effective

rationing price of whatever net amount of foreign exchange is allowed to

become available to finance private capital flows.
                                              40



7. The Combined Effects of Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy

       An especially important mechanism through which economic policies affect

the real exchange rate and thereby replicate some of the effects of commercial

policies is through the interaction of monetary policies and policies directed

at influencing the nominal exchange rate. To analyze the implications of this

combination of policies, it is necessary to broaden the model of earlier

sections by introducing appropriate monetary elements. The condition for

equilibrium in the domestic money market is expressed by the requirement


(40)      m k + p*   + e   +.
                                zq   —   .De(e)

where m denotes the logarithm of the nominal money supply, k summarizes

the exogenous factors affecting the logarithm of the demand for domestic

money, e denotes the logarithm of the nominal exchange rate (defined as the

price of a unit of world money in terms of domestic money), p denotes the

logarithm of the world money price of traded goods,   9. >   0   is the elasticity

of money demand with respect to the relative price of domestic goods, and

  >0    is the semi-elasticity of money demand with respect to the expected

rate of change of the nominal exchange rate. The unitary coefficients on

p and e in (40) are justified by the assumption that the demand for

domestic money is unit elastic with respect to the general level of domestic

prices. The positive coefficient of q in (40) reflects the effect of

increases in q in increasing demand for domestic money both by increasing

the general level of domestic prices (given p* and e) and by increasing

the real value of domestic output measured in terms of traded goods. The

negative coefficient of De(e) in (40) reflects the negative effect on

domestic money demand of an increase in the domestic nominal interest rate

which will result from an increase in the expected rate of depreciation of the

foreign exchange value of domestic money.
                                       41




      1hen the nominal exchange rate is freely flexible and when goods prices

 adjust instantaneously to maintain equilibrium in the goods markets, monetary

 policy exerts no influence on the real exchange rate, q, or on any other

 variable in the real sector of the economy. (See Mussa (1984) for further

 discussion.) This conclusion is based on the assumption that the behavioral

 equations and equilibrium conditions for the real sector of the economy that

 were described and analyzed in preceding sections of this paper require no

modifications to accommodate the condition of domestic money market equi-

librium given in (40). Specifically, this means that we abstract from any

real balance effect through which the real value of domestic money balances

might affect the desired excess of domestic real spending over domestic real

income. We also assume that under a freely flexible exchange rate, the real

sector of the economy is not affected by the fiscal effects of money creation

and destruction. The revenue that the government derives from money creation

is redistributed to the private sector through lump sum transfers. The

private sector uses these transfers to pay the inflation tax on their real

money balances that results from domestic money creation under a flexible

exchange rate. Private sector spending on domestic and foreign goods,

therefore, is assumed to be unaffected by the fiscal effects of money creation

under a flexible exchange rate.

     Given the conclusion that the real sector of the economy is not affected

by monetary policy under a flexible exchange rate, the money market

equilibrium condition (10) may be used to determine the behavior of the

nominal exchange rate, treating the behavior of the money supply and of the

determinants of money demand as exogenous. Specifically, treating (40) as a

forward looking difference equation in the expected level of e (and ruling

out "bubbles" in the solution) it follows that
                                                      L2




(141)       E(e(s);   t)        (1 -          x   E{m(s +      j)        K(s   + j); t]
                                          jO
where         /(1 +    )        and    K(u)       k(u) +   p*(u)    ÷   9.q(u).    This result, which

is familiar from monetary models of exchange rate determination (see Mussa

1976, 1982a, 1982b, or 19814), says that the logarithm of the expected nominal

exchange rate is a discounted sum of expected present and future differences

between the logarithm of the nominal money supply and the logarithm of the

component of money demand that does not depend on the exchange rate. Included

in this component of money demand is the influence of the behavior of the

logarithm of the relative price of domestic goods, which is determined

independently of the behavior of the domestic money supply;

        The real exchange rate and other real sector variables are not influenced

by the behavior of' the money supply or the nominal exchange rate under a

flexible exchange rate regime because under this regime the nominal exchange

rate always adjusts to offset variations in the money supply and preserve

monetary neutrality. This neutrality breaks down, even in the absence of real

balance effects or nominal price stickynss, when the exchange rate is not

freely flexible. To see why this is so and how monetary policy and nominal

exchange rate policy may interact to influence the real exchange rate, it is

useful to consider the specific case where (the logarithm of) the money supply

is held constant at        ñi    and (the logarithm of) the nominal exchange rate is
pegged at e. Similar analysis applies to the case where the rate of growth

of the money supply is held constant and the rate of change of the nominal

exchange rate is fixed by some predetePmined rate of crawl.

        With e pegged at e and m fixed at r, and assuming that no change

in the nominal exchange rate is expected by private agents (so that De(e)

0), the only variable that is free to adjust to satisfy the money market
                                                43



 equilibrium (40) is (the logarithm of) the real exchange rate.
                                                                         Specifically,
 the value of q that is consistent with (140) is given by


 (42)       q   (1/)[t -         — p*   Ic]




 This relationship indicates that for given value of k            and p, the greater
 is       the greater is the level of q required to maintain money market

 equilibrium, and the greater is              the lower is the level of q required to

 maintain money market equilibrium. It follows that with a pegged exchange

 rate, the real exchange rate is not independent of the policy determined level

of the money supply, and with a policy determined level of the money supply,

the real exchange rate is not independent of the policy determined value of

the nominal exchange rate.

        To maintain e at           and simultaneously keep m at        the government
of the home country will generally need to intervene in the foreign exchange

market and sterilize the effects of such interventions on the domestic money

supply. Analytically, it is simplest to deal with such sterilized

intervention by assuming that the government keeps the domestic credit

component of the money supply constant and finances necessary interventions in

the foreign exchange market by borrowing and lending on the world capital

market. The required extent of government borrowing is determired by the

balance of payments equilibrium condition


(43)       u(z - q) +   r * (A   - G)   w-    aaDe (q)   -   -g

where G represents the outstanding stock of government debt and g

represents the flow of government borrowing to finance intervention,         Interest
in G is assumed to be financed by lump sum taxes.
                                      )44




     The flow of government intervention is represented by the same

variable, g, as was previously used to denote the excess of government

spending over government revenue. This is appropriate because when the

government borrows in the world capital market to finance its foreign exchange

intervention, it is necessarily financing an excess of spending over

revenue. This is the fiscal effect of sterilized intervention in the foreign

exchange market. Specifically, if government spending on goods and services

is constant (as will be assumed throughout this discussion), then there must

be a reduction in lump sum taxes to correspond to government borrowing to

finance intervention in the support of the foreign exchange value of domestic

money, and there must be an increase in lump sum taxes to correspond to

government lending (or repayment of past borrowings) that occurs when the

government intervenes to prevent appreciation of the foreign exchange value of

domestic money.

     The fiscal effect of foreign exchange market intervention has important

implications for the spending behavior of the private sector. In a situation

where the government must intervene to support the foreign exchange value of

domestic money, the domestic money market is in Tquasi_equilibrium! in the

sense that the current demand for the stock of domestic money is equal to the

current supply but domestic money holders wish to run down their money balance

over time. This running down of money balances over time implies an incipient

excess of private sector spending over private sector income that is planned

to be financed at the expense of money holdings, without any effect on the

rate of change of net foreign asset holdings of the private sector. Under a

flexible exchange rate, this incipient excess of private spending over private

income financed out of money balances would not emerge because the exchange

rate would adjust to the level at which the stock of money is willingly held
                                         145




 and the planned rate of money accumulation corresponds to the expected rate of

 monetary expansion (both of which are zero when m is held constant at ri).

 When the exchange rate is pegged at a value that necessitates intervention in

 support of the foreign exchange value of domestic money, the incipient excess

 of private sector spending over income corresponding to the planned rate of

 reduction in money balances is offset by the reduction in lump sum taxes

 associated with the fiscal effect of government intervention in the foreign

 exchange market. This must be so because with sterilized intervention, the

 actual level of domestic money balances does not decline, implying that the

 private sector does not succeed in spending in excess of its actual income

 (taking account of reduced lump sum taxes) at the expense of its money

balances. The actual excess of private sector spending over private sector

income, therefore, corresponds to the desired rate of decumulation of private

net holdings of foreign assets, - D(A)         - w   aa.De(q) +   which   is

determined by exactly the same factors as in the analysis of earlier sections

of this paper.

     It should be emphasized that this analysis of interaction between private

sector spending behavior and the fiscal effect of sterilized intervention in

the foreign exchange market does not rely on a traditional real balance effect

in which the level of real money balances influences the desired level of

private spending. With a given nominal money supply, incipient differences

between spending and income that the private sector plans to finance out of

money balances arise only when the government pegs the nominal exchange rate

at a value different from that which would prevail with exchange rate

flexibility.

     It should also be emphasized that this analysis of the interaction

between private sector spending behavior and the fiscal effect of sterilized
                                                         )46




 intervention       does rely on an assumed failure of the private sector to foresee

 the effect of current government borrowing and lending (carried out in support

 of foreign exchange market intervention) on future tax liabilities of' the

 private sector. If there were a full Ricardian offset private sector saving

 for government borrowing, there would be no mechanism through which the flow

to government borrowing or the stock of government debt would influence the

real sector of the economy. It follows that there would be no way (at least

in the context of the present model) for a policy of sterilized intervention

to maintain the real exchange rate at the level determined by (42) if the

pegged value of the nominal exchange rate differs from the nominal exchange

rate that would prevail under exchange rate flexibility. (In a portfolio

balance model where asset holders have distinct demands for securities

denominated in different national monies, however, there is some latitude for

sterilized intervention to affect the exchange rate; see for example, Kenen

(1981) and Henderson (198)4).)

        Assuming that the conditions for the fiscal effect of sterilized

intervention to influence the real exchange rate are satisfied, the behavior

of the real exchange rate becomes sensitive to monetary policy and exchange

rate policy. Specifically, a fixed nominal money supply, ,           and a fixed

nominal exchange rate, e, maintained by a policy of sterilized intervention,

determine the level of the real exchange rate through the relationship (L2).

Given this value of the real exchange rate, the balance of payments

equilibrium condition (43) determines the extent of official intervention

(financed by government borrowing in the world capital market) that is

required to maintain this value of the real exchange rate;


(4)4)     g z   r*G    —   (r*   +   ii)A   -   aaDe (q)       + w


                +    (/)[m-      — e -   p      -   K ÷ D e (e)j
                                                     47




  Recognizing that D(G)             g, and assuming that no change is expected in the

  nominal exchange rate or in the real exchange rate, it follows that the

  dynamic law governing the evolution of the stock of government debt is given

  by


  (145)       D(G) z   r*.G   —   (r*     p).A ÷ w —   vz   +   ('/z)[ —   -p   —   k].

 The dynamic law governing the evolution of the stock of privately held foreign

 assets (again assuming no expected change in q) is given by


 (146)        D(A)     w —


Together, (45) and (46) constitute the dynamic system that determines the
 joint evolution of' G and A with fixed money supply and a pegged nominal

exchange rate, under the assumption that no change is expected in either the

nominal or the real exchange rate.

          This dynamic system has two characteristic roots: a stable

characteristic root A1              —.i   K   0, and an unstable characteristic root

          r*. The stable characteristic root is associated with the dynamic
A2

process that governs the evolution of the private stock of net foreign

assets. With a fixed value of the forcing variable w which measures

exogenous influences on private sector desired saving, the stock of' privately

held foreign assets necessarily converges to a long run equilibrium level of

wILL. The unstable characteristic root is associated with the dynamic process

governing the evolution of the stock of government debt. With fixed values of

the forcing variables w, z, p* and k and the policy variables

ff1    and ,    there   is for each initial stock of private net foreign assets a

unique initial stock of government debt for which the subsequent stock of

government debt converges to a finite steady state level. Specifically, if
                                                   48



 A is initially at its long run equilibrium level w/i, the stock of

 government debt must be


 (147)             (w/p) +   (v/r*)[z   -   qJ


where q is given by (42). At this level of G, and only at this level of

G, will the flow of government intervention required to maintain the pegged

nominal exchange rate and the fixed nominal money supply be zero, implying

that the outstanding stock of government debt will not be changing. If G is

>        (with A     wiLl), the required flow of intervention will be positive,

implying an explosively expanding stock of government debt. If G is                  <


(with A        w/p), the required flow of intervention will be negative, implying

an explosively contracting stock of government debt (or expanding stock of

government lending).

         This dynamic instability in the behavior of the stock of government debt

applies for any assumed behavior of the exogenous forcing variables. It

reflects the fundamental economic instability of a policy that seeks to

maintain a constant nominal exchange rate and a constant nominal money stock

by means of sterilized intervention. For any path of the exogenous forcing

variables z, w, p* and k, and for any policy determined value of                    rn,


there is only one fixed value of                 which can be sustained by sterilized

intervention (with a finite bound on government borrowing and lending).                 In

general, therefore, a policy of fixing the nominal money supply and pegging

the nominal exchange rate is not viable and cannot permanently sustain an

arbitrary value of the real exchange rate.

         Rationality of expectations presumably implies that private agents

recognize the long-run nonviability of a policy that fixes the nominal money

supply and pegs the nominal exchange rate. If intervention is persistently
                                         49



 required to support the foreign exchange value of domestic money, private

 agents will suspect that at some point the money supply will need to be

 contracted or domestic money will need to be devalued (an increase in

). Conversely, if intervention is persistently required to prevent

appreciation of the foreign exchange value of domestic money, private agents

will suspect either a money supply Increase or an exchange rate appreciation

(a reduction in ). For purposes of' the present discussion which deals with

the real exchange rate, it is useful to focus on the case of persistent

intervention in support of the foreign exchange value of domestic money, where

adjustment is expected to come through a nominal exchange rate devaluation (an

increase in ). This has been a common pattern of economic policy in a

number of developing countries.

     There are several possible ways to model expectations of a devaluation,

each of which will yield somewhat different implications. The approach

adopted here will be to assume that expectations of a devaluation are related

to the cumulative extent of past intervention in support of the current

nominal exchange rate. Specifically, assuming that G was zero when the

current exchange rate was established, suppose that G must reach some

critical level G before private agents begin to expect any significant

probability of a parity change in the near future. This implies that DC(e)

o so long as G is K G. It follows that so long as C is K G, q will

be determined by (42). Thus, so long as cumulative intervention in support of'

the current nominal exchange rate remains below the critical level G, the

real exchange rate will be at the level dictated by money market equilibrium

for the policy determined values of ñi   and . Under this assumption about

expectations of devaluation, therefore, the combination of monetary policy and
                                                 50



nominal exchange rate policy has the capacity to influence the real exchange

rate, at least over some finite time period.

        When G rises above G, the expected rate of devaluation is assumed to

be given by


(8)         De(e)      p.(G - G).


The factor p reflects both the expected probability of devaluation (during

the next brief interval of time) and the expected extent of devaluation if a

parity change occurs (during this brief interval). Given this assumption

about De(e), it follows that the level of q consistent with money market

equilibrium is still given by (142) when G < G,                   while when G is   >   G,   the

level of q is given by


(9)         q (1/)[ -          - p*   -   k ÷   p.(G   -   G)].

When G < G,         the expected rate of change of q, De(q), is zero. When

G > G,     the expected rate of change of q is given by


(50)        0e(q)       €(G G) + (p/Z)D(G)

where         (1 +   1)-p/9. > 0 and where D(G)             g is the flow of intervention

when no devaluation takes place. This result reflects the assumption that if

a devaluation occurs during the next brief interval of time, the expectation

of a further devaluation during the following brief interval of time falls to

zero.

        With these assumptions, it follows that during the period between

devaluations, when G is         <   G,    q is constant at the level q determined by

(142) and the evolution of A and G are determined by the dynamic system

consisting of (145) and (L6). The comments previously made about this dynamic
                                                    51




system continue to apply, except that now we are focusing on the case where

 intervention tends to be in support of the foreign exchange value of' domestic

money and where G is generally growing over time. When G reaches G and

before devaluation actually occurs, q is determined by (149) and the

evolution of A and G are determined by the dynamic system


(51)       D(A)   w -   iA ÷                - G)    -    (ap/)•D(G)


           D(G)   r*.G —   (r*   +   i).A     + w —      vz   + czcic•(G — G) —   (aap/9).D(G)
(52)


                  +   (u/Z)[         -   p*   -    k +   p(G     -   C)].


       This dynamic system has one negative characteristic root,                        >   - i,   and

one positive characteristic root, X2 >                  r.     As in the previous case, the

negative root is associated with the process of convergence of' the private

stock of' net foreign assets toward its steady state level and the positive

root is associated with the explosive behavior of the stock of government

debt. The fact that the positive characteristic root is now greater than its

previous value of r indicates that the anticipation of devaluation by

private agents contributes to the explosive tendency of the dynamic system.

The economic explanation of this result is the following. As private agents

come to expect a significant probability of devaluation of the nominal

exchange rate, the domestic nominal interest rate must rise and the demand for'

domestic money declines. To offset this factor tending to reduce the demand

for domestic money and maintain money market equilibrium, q must rise. This

rise in q implies an increase in the flow of intervention required to

maintain the nominal exchange rate and the nominal money supply and sustain

balance of payments equilibrium. This larger flow of intervention accelerates
                                           52



 the growth of the outstanding stock of government debt and thereby accelerates

 the explosive tendency of the dynamic system. In addition, as De(e) rises

due to increases in the assessed probability of devaluation and in the

expected magnitude of devaluation, private agents no longer expect a zero rate

of   change of the real exchange rate. Initially, when G is near G, De(q)
is negative because the expected effect of the growth of G (conditional on

no devaluation), (p/j•D(G), outweighs the expected effect of devaluation

(conditional on its occurence), -      €(G      G). This initial negative value

of De(q) tends to reduce the extent of intervention required to maintain

balance of payments equilibrium and partially offsets the acceleration of the

growth of G induced by the higher level of q. Later, when G grows large

relative to G, De(q) will become positive and thus become an additional

factor contributing to the explosive tendency of the dynamic system.

      The behavior of the real exchange rate and the nominal and real interest

rates in this dynamic process are the following. So long as G remains below

G, q is constant at the level determined by (142) which is above the value

that q would have if the nominal exchange rate was not sustained by

intervention in support of the pegged foreign exchange value of domestic

money. Indeed, returning to the analysis of section 2, the excess of spending

over income that is financed by the fiscal effect of intervention in the

foreign exchange market may be thought of as the proximate cause of the higher

level of q. Since De(e)          0   and De(q)     0 while G remains below G,

the domestic nominal interest rate remains at the level of the world nominal

interest   rate,   i, and the domestic real interest rate remains at the level

of the world real interest rate, r*. As G rises above G, the level of

q determined by (249)   is   forced higher and higher by rising assessments of the

probability and likely extent of devaluation, as summarized by the increasing
                                          53




value of De(e)      p(G - G).          De(e) rises the domestic nominal interest

rate rises further and further above the world nominal interest rate. The

domestic real interest rate follows a somewhat different pattern. Initially

when G rises just above G, the expected real domestic interest rate, r

r* -   G.De(q),   falls below r* because the positive effect of expected growth

in G (conditional on no devaluation) on De(q), (/.)D(G), outweighs the

negative effect associated with the expectation of devaluation, -              - G).
Later on, the factor -          - G)   tending to induce a negative value of

De(q) outweighs the positive factor (p/)D(G) tending to induce a

positive value of De(q) and De(q) becomes negative. At this point the

domestic real interest rate r* — G.De(q)       rises above the world real interest

rate r* and it continues to rise until the moment of devaluation.

       The general features of this description of the behavior of the real

exchange rate and of the domestic nominal and real interest rates apply under

broader range of assumptions about the conduct of monetary policy and exchange

rate policy. Specifically, consider a policy under which the nominal exchange

rate is depreciated at a predetermined rate of crawl, supplemented by

occasional maxi-devaluations, and the money supply is made to grow at a rate

greater than the growth of the demand for money at the predetermined rate of

crawl of the exchange rate. Suppose that when maxi-devaluations occur under

this general policy regime, they are of sufficient magnitude that for some

time afterward private agents do not expect another maxi-devaluation and,

moreover, the extent of the maxi-devaluation is such that for sometime

afterward there is a balance of payments surplus (on official settlements

basis) which allows the government to repay borrowings used to finance

intervention in support of the exchange rate prior to the last maxi-

devaluation. Under these assumptions, the path of the real exchange rate and of

other relevant variables will be something like the following.
                                                            54



       During the initial period following a maxi-devaluation, while private

agents do not perceive a serious prospect of another immediate rnaxi—

devaluation, the level of q is determined by the money market equilibrium

condition to be


(53)      q      (1/)[m -   e -   p*   -   k]

where rn and e are the policy determined (but not constant) values of the

logarithm of the money supply and logarithm of the price of foreign exchange

and where (for simplicity) p* and k are assumed constant. By assumption,

the rate of growth of the money supply, D(m), is greater than the rate of

crawl of the nominal exchange rate, D(e). Thus, the level of q determined

by (53) will be rising over time at the rate


(54)      D(q)     (1/)[D(m) -        D(e)I.

The extent of the maxi—devaluation is assumed to be such that the level of

q for some period after this maxi-devaluation is consistent with an official

settlements surplus, the magnitude of which is given by




          D(G)     r*.G -   (r*   +   p)A      -       (ao/)[D(m)     -   D(e)J
(55)


                   ÷   (v/)[m   — e —      p       —   k].

The dynamic behavior of the private stock of net foreign assets during this

period is given by


(56)     D(A)     w —       — (aa/Z)[D(m)               —    D(e)].
Assuming that the increase in q determined by (5L) is correctly anticipated,

the domestic real interest rate, r* —   a.De(q),       remains below the world real

interest rate during this period.

     With the passage of time, the level of q determined by (53) rises

sufficiently that the official settlements balance shifts from surplus to

deficit. The repayment of government debt during the period of surplus,

however, is assumed to restore confidence that there will not be an immediate

maxi—devaluation. Accordingly, the level of q, its rate of change, the

extent of' intervention required to maintain balance of payments equilibrium,

and the rate of change of private net holdings of foreign assets continue to

be determined by (53) through (56). When the cumulative effect of official

settlements deficits pushes government borrowings above the critical level

G at which private agents begin to suspect a significant probability of a

maxi—devaluation, these equations need to be modified along the lines

previously discussed. The rate of increase of q is accelerated by rising

expectations of the probability and likely magnitude of a maxi-devaluation.

The cx ante domestic real interest rate r =   r*   —   G.De(q)   initially declines

relative to the value it would have in the absence of anticipations of a maxi—

devaluation, but later r rise.s as G rises significantly above G. The

official settlements deficit and the rate of government borrowing to finance

this deficit rise more rapidly as a consequence of anticipations of a maxi—

devaluation, thereby contributing to the explosive tendency of the dynamic

system.

     When the maxi-devaluation occurs, there is a jump up in the nominal price

of foreign exchange (an increase in e) and a jump down in the real exchange

rate (a reduction in q). Subsequently, the just described pattern of

behavior of the real exchange rate, the domestic real interest rate, and the
                                       56



official   settlements balance all repeat themselves until the next maxi

devaluation.

     Alternative assumptions about the conduct of monetary policy and exchange

rate policy will yield different conclusions concerning the behavior of the

real exchange rate and other related variables. From the perspective of the

general purpose of this paper, the important general conclusion is that the

combination of a policy that controls the nominal money supply and a policy

that controls the nominal exchange rate, supported by a policy of official

intervention in the foreign exchange market, has some capacity to influence

the behavior of the real exchange rate and other real economic variables.

This capacity arises from two sources. First, the combination of a policy

that controls the nominal money supply and a policy that controls the nominal

exchange rate inevitably influences the behavior of the real value of the

money supply, and the behavior of this real variable should be expected to

influence the behavior of other real variables, including the real exchange

rate. Second, so long as the private sector does not adjust its spending

relative to its income to fully offset debt financed differences between

government spending and government revenue, the fiscal effect of sterilized

intervention in the foreign exchange market will affect the aggregate

difference between spending and income for the economy as a whole, and through

this channel will affect the relative prices which sustain equilibrium in the

goods markets. For this effect to be present, it is not essential that

private agents totally disregard the future tax liabilities implicit in the

current flow of government borrowing. It [s essential that private agents not

reduce their own spending relative to their income to fully offset government

borrowing used to finance intervention in the foreign exchange market. In

order for this effect to be substantial, of course, the flow of borrowing to
                                       57




 finance intervention must be large, and the offset of private sector spending

 in response to government borrowing must not be too great.

8. Conclusion

     This paper has developed a general analytical framework that may be used

to analyze how a variety of government policies and other exogenous

disturbances can affect the real exchange rate and thereby influence the

allocation of resources in ways similar to the effects of commercial policy.

Two broad classes of government policies and exogenous disturbances can have

such effects: policies and disturbances that affect the distribution of

domestic spending between domestic goods and foreign (or traded) goods; and

policies and disturbances that affect the level of domestic spending relative

to domestic income. In some cases, the effects of such policies and

disturbances on the real exchange rate and on the allocation of resources may

be quite transparent, as would be the case, for instance, when a government

shifts its own spending from purchasing military equipment in the world arms

market to pursuing domestic development projects that employ primarily

domestic labor.   In other cases, the mechanisms through which the real

exchange rate is affected may be more obscure. This may be the case, for

example, with capital controls that depress the relative price of domestic

goods in terms of' foreign goods by limiting the excess of domestic spending

over domestic income that can be financed by an inflow of foreign capital. It

may also be the case with a combined policy of pegging the path of the nominal

exchange rate and fixing the path of the domestic nominal money supply, where

the excess of government spending over government revenue appears under the

guise of reserve losses or foreign official borrowing to support sterilized

intervention in the foreign exchange market.
                                      58



     The model developed in this paper has essentially the same static

structure as the two basic models that have traditionally been applied in the

theory of international trade and in the analysis of the effects of commercial

policies. These are the standard two-country, two-commodity model summarized

by Mundell (1968, chps. 1-3) and the dependent economy model of Salter (1959)

and Swan (1960). The key innovation of the present analysis is that these

models are made dynamic by taking account both of changes in net foreign asset

positions occuring as a consequence of current account imbalances and of the

effects of changes in net asset positions and of anticipated changes in

relative prices on the relationship between spending and income. This

innovation allows for the analysis of policies and disturbances whose effects

cannot fully be appreciated within the context of a wholly static model. This

is true, for example, of temporary changes in commercial policies or changes

in commercial policies that are anticipated to occur at a future date. It is

also true of temporary or anticipated future changes in either the level or

distribution of government spending, of capital controls, and of nonsus—

tamable policies that fix for some period of time both the path of the

nominal exchange rate and the path of the nominal money supply.

     Finally, it is worthwhile emphasizing that the analytical framework

developed in this paper can be applied to a wider set of issues than those

that have been examined here. For example, it is frequently suggested that

some Latin American countries suffered severe economic disturbances in the

late 1970's and early 1980's as a consequence first of a sudden influx of

foreign capital and then from an even more sudden curtailment of capacity to

borrow in the world capital market. This type of disturbnce can easily be

analyzed in the framework developed in this paper by specifying an appropriate

path for the actual and expected evolution of the exogenous forcing
                                      59



variable, w, that influences the difference between income and spending.

The influx of foreign capital would be represented by a downward shift in the

actual and expected future values of w. This implies an increase in the real

exchange rate (the relative price of domestic goods in terms of foreign goods)

and a current account deficit which is financed by the inflow of foreign

capital. The sudden, unanticipated curtailment of access to foreign credit

corresponds to an upward shift in the actual and expected future value of w

to above the level it had prior to the influx of foreign credit. This induces

a decline in the real exchange rate to below its level prior to the influx of

foreign credit and an improvement in the trade balance of sufficient magnitude

to allow the country to pay the interest on its expanded stock of foreign

debt. From the analysis carried out in this paper, it follows that a policy

which limits international capital flows would reduce the sensitivity of the

real exchange rate to this type of disturbance. The present framework is

capable of anlayzing any other form of disturbance that can be described as an

alteration in the actual and expected time paths of either the exogenous

variable that affects the desired distribution of spending or the exogenous

variable that affects the relationship between spending and income.
                                             60



                                                                      Michael Mussa

                                         References

Barro, Robert.      19714.    Are government bonds net wealth? Journal of Political

  Economy 82 (November/December): 1095—1117.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. 1968. The theory and practice of commercial policy:

  departures from unified exchange rates. Special Papers in International

  Economics, No. 8, International Finance Section, Princeton University.

Blanchard, Olivier.          19814. Debt, deficits and finite horizons. Unpublished

  manuscript, Department of Economics, MIT.

Buiter, Willem and Miller, Marcus. 1983. Real exchange rate overshooting and

  the cost of bringing down inflation. In Exchange Rates and International

  Macroeconomics, ed. J.A. Frenkel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

  pp. 317-58.

Calvo, Guillermo and Rodriquez, Carlos. 1977. A model of exchange rate

  determination under currency substitution and rational expectations.

  Journal of Political Economy 85 (June): 617-25.

Corden, W. Max.     1960. The geometric representation of policies to attain

  external and internal balance. Review of Economic Studies 28 (February): 1-22.

_________       1967.   The exchange rate system and the taxation of' trade. In

 Thailand: Social and Economic Studies in Development, ed. T.H. Silcock.

 Canberra: Australian National University Press.

_________       1971.   The Theory of Protection. London: Oxford University Press.

Dornbusch, Rudiger.       1975. Alternative price stabilization rules and the

 effects of exchange rate changes. Manchester School of Economic and Social

 Studies 143 (September): 275-92.

_________       1976.   Expectations and exchange rate dynamics. Journal of

 Political Economy 814 (November/December): 1161—76.
                                                 61




__________ •     1980.     Open Economy Macroeconomics. New York: Basic Books.

__________ •     1983.     Real interest rates, home goods and optimal external

  borrowing. Journal of Political Economy 91 (February):                1)41-53.


_________      198)4.     Exotic exchange rate arrangements. Paper presented to the

  MBER/World Bank Conference on Structural Adjustment and the Real Exchange

  Rate in Developing Countries. Washington, D.C., Nov. 29 - Dec.                   1.


Dornbusch, Rudiger and Fischer, Stanley. 1980. Exchange rates and the

  current account. American Economic Review 70 (December): 960—71.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Razin, Asaf.             19814.   Fiscal policies in the world

  economy. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, University of

  Chicago.

Harberger, Arnold C.         1950. Currency depreciation, income and the balance of

  payments. Journal of Political Economy 58 (February): 47-60.

Henderson, Dale W.         198)1.    Exchange market intervention operations: their

  effects and their role in financial policy. In Exchange Rate Theory and

  Policy, eds. J. Bilson and R. Marston. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kenen, Peter B.         1981. Effects of intervention and sterilization in the short

  run and the long run.             In The International Monetary System under Exchange

  Rates: Global, Regional and National, ed. R.M. Cooper. Cambridge, Mass.

  Ballinger.

Kouri, Pentti.     1976. The exchange rate and the balance of payments on the

  short run and the long run. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78 (May):

  280-304.

Machlup, Fritz. 1955. Relative prices and aggregate expenditure in the

 analysis of devaluation. American Economic Review l5 (June): 255-78.

Meade, James E.     1951. The Theory of International Economic Policy, Volume

  I: The Balance of Payments. London, New York, Toronto: Oxford University

  Press.
                                          62




 Metzler, Lloyd A.     1951. wealth, saving and the rate of interest. Journal of

   Political Economy 59 (April): 93—116.

Mundell, Robert A. 1960. The public debt, corporate income taxes and the

   rate of interest. Journal of Political Economy 68 (December): 622-26.

________      1968.    International Economics. New York: MacMillan.

Mussa, Michael. 1976. The exchange rate, the balance of payments and

  monetary and fiscal policy under a regime of controlled floating.

  Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78 (May): 229—J48.

__________     1977.    A dynamic theory of foreign exchange.   In Studies in

  Modern Economic Analysis: Proceedings of The University Teachers of

  Economics, eds. M. Artis and A.R. Nobay. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

_________     1979.    Macroeconomic interdependence and the exchange rate

  regime. In International Economic Policy: Theory and Evidence, eds. R.

  Dornbusch and J. Frenkel. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

_________     1982a.   A model of exchange rate dynamics. Journal of Political

  Economy 90 (February): 714_1014.

_________     1982b.   Exchange rate and price level dynamics in a simple

  monetary model.      In Exchange Rate Determination and Adjustment, J.S.

  Bhandari. New York: Preager.

              19814. The theory of exchange rate determination. In Exchange

  Rate Theory and Practice, eds. J. Bilson and R. Marston. Chicago:

  University of Chicago Press.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 1981a. Macroeconomic policy, exchange rate dynamics and

  optimal asset accumulation. Journal of' Political Economy 89 (December):

  11)42—61.


_________     1981b.   Transitory terms of trade shocks and the current

  account: the case of constant time preference. International Finance

  Discussion Paper No. 1914, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
                                             63



_________    1983.     Intertemporal price speculation and the optimal current-.

  account deficit. Journal of International Monetary Economics 12 (August):

  135—45.

Pearce, Ivor F.      1961. The problem of the balance of payments. International

  Economic Review 2 (February):      1-28.

Razin, Asaf and Svennsson, Lars.      1983. Trade taxes and the current

  account. Economic Letters 13: 55-57.

Salter, W.   1959. Internal and external balance: the role of price and

  expenditure effects. Economic Record 35 (August): 226—38.

Svennsson, Lars and Razin, Asaf. 1983. The terms of trade and the current

  account: the Harberger Laursen—Metzler effect. Journal of Political

  Economy 91 (February): 97—175.

Swan, Trevor. 1960. Economic control in a dependent economy. Economic

  Record 36 (March): 51-66.

Tsiang, S.c. 1961. The role of money in trade balance stability. American

  Economic Review 51 (December): 912-36.
