NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORRELATED DISTURBANCES AND U.S. BUSINESS CYCLES
Vasco Cúrdia
Ricardo Reis
Working Paper 15774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15774

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2010

We are especially grateful to Marco Del Negro, Juan Rubio-Ramirez and Frank Schorfheide for helping
us significantly improve our method and to Craig Burnside, Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum,
Alejandro Justiniano, Jonathan Parker, Giorgio Primiceri, Chris Sims, Bent Sorensen, and Mike Woodford
for useful comments and discussions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Vasco Cúrdia and Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Correlated Disturbances and U.S. Business Cycles
Vasco Cúrdia and Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 15774
February 2010, Revised March 2011
JEL No. E1,E3
ABSTRACT
The dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models that are used to study business cycles
typically assume that exogenous disturbances are independent autoregressions of order one. This paper
relaxes this tight and arbitrary restriction, by allowing for disturbances that have a rich contemporaneous
and dynamic correlation structure. Our first contribution is a new Bayesian econometric method that
uses conjugate conditionals and Gibbs sampling to make the estimation of DSGE models with correlated
disturbances feasible. This provides a useful check for model misspecification in the search for models
with structural disturbances. Our second contribution is a re-examination of U.S. business cycles.
We find that allowing for correlated disturbances resolves some conflicts between estimates from
DSGE models and those from vector autoregressions, and that treating government spending as exogenous
in spite of its clear countercyclicality in the data is the main source of misspecification. According
to our estimates, government spending and technology disturbances play a larger role in the business
cycle than previously ascribed, while changes in markups are less important.
Vasco Cúrdia
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street, 3rd Floor
New York, NY 10045
Vasco.Curdia@ny.frb.org
Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics, MC 3308
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York NY 10027
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

A typical macroeconomic model takes as given some exogenous disturbances, proposes a
model for the behavior of economic agents, and makes predictions for some endogenous
variables.

Because the disturbances are exogenous to the theory, by de…nition they are

unexplained and must be taken as given, so it would be desirable to impose on them as few
arbitrary restrictions as possible.

However, the common practice in dynamic stochastic

general-equilibrium (DSGE) models is the opposite, with very strict assumptions on the
processes driving disturbances. This paper develops new estimation techniques for models
with a rich correlation structure for the disturbance vector and applies them to study U.S.
business cycles.
Our …rst contribution is a new Bayesian econometric technique to estimate dynamic
macroeconomic models with potentially rich processes for the disturbances. We show that
the economic structure of the models implies that key conditional posterior distributions
belong either exactly or approximately to the family of conjugate distributions with known
analytical form.

We propose a new conjugate-conditionals algorithm that exploits this

knowledge to e¢ ciently characterize the posterior.

When applied to DSGE models that

assume that disturbances are independent …rst-order autoregressions, AR(1)s, our method
signi…cantly speeds up estimation. Because the parameters associated with the disturbances
are part of the conjugate conditional distributions, the e¢ ciency gains are even larger with
correlated disturbances. Our method makes feasible the estimation of DSGE models that
were previously prohibitively numerically costly by breaking a curse of dimensionality that
plagues existing algorithms.
Our second contribution is methodological. In the simultaneous-equation reduced-form
macroeconomic model tradition, there has long been a careful treatment of disturbances.
Researchers routinely allow for rich dynamic cross and auto-correlations across disturbances,
sometimes estimated non-parametrically. This literature has convincingly established that
arbitrary restrictions on the disturbances can severely bias the estimates of key parameters
and impulse responses and lead researchers astray in attempts to endogenize incorrectly-

2

identi…ed disturbances.1 However, DSGE macroeconometric models routinely assume that
disturbances are independent AR(1)s, which is arbitrary and potentially dangerous for inference. Moreover, from a Bayesian perspective, since researchers are typically uncertain
about the source and nature of the disturbances, generalizing the disturbance process ensures that this uncertainty is re‡ected in the posterior distribution.
We envision three possible uses for correlated disturbances.

First, allowing for more

‡exible speci…cations than the independent AR(1) should robustify inferences in DSGE
models, in the same way that good practice adjusts standard errors in linear regressions to
allow for unknown heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation in the disturbances (Stock, 2010).
It is even more important to be careful with the disturbances in the non-linear DSGE models
than in linear regressions, because correlations will lead to not just ine¢ cient but also biased
estimates.
Second, allowing for correlated disturbances lets the data speak freely on the dimensions
along which the model is inadequate.

Therefore, it provides a check or test for model

misspeci…cation, as previously argued by Del Negro and Schorfheide (2009). We suggest
that, after estimating a model with independent disturbances, a researcher should check
whether allowing for correlated disturbances signi…cantly a¤ects the inferences.

Ideally,

one would like to be con…dent that the model captures the relevant co-movements among
macroeconomic variables endogenously without needing to rely on exogenous correlated
disturbances.
Third, if there is a strong correlation between di¤erent elements of the disturbance vector, the pattern of the estimated correlations should provide useful information on where is
the model failing to endogenously match the data. Checking for correlated disturbances can
therefore suggest the path to improving the model in endogenize these correlations, towards
the ultimate aim of a model with truly “structural”disturbances that are uncorrelated with
each other.
To be clear, we are not proposing the use of models with correlated disturbances as an
end in it self. Rather, we see our method as (i) providing a useful speci…cation check, (ii)
1
See Cochrane and Orcutt (1949), Zellner (1962), and Newey and West (1987) for the evolution on dealing
with disturbances, and Fair (2004) for a recent careful application.

3

allowing a researcher to robustify inferences against the possibility that disturbances are
correlated, and (iii) highlighting directions for improving the endogenous propagation of
the model.
The third contribution of this paper is to study U.S. business cycles. Not only is this an
important …eld to which DSGEs have been applied, but also the assumption of uncorrelated
AR(1) disturbances is clearly incredible in medium-scale business-cycle models. Whenever
economists have measured disturbances directly, whether to total factor productivity (Solow,
1957), to government spending (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1992), to labor supply (Parkin,
1988, Hall, 1997), or to investment productivity (Jorgenson, 1966, Greenwood, Hercowitz
and Krusell, 1997), they have almost always found that these measures of disturbances are
cross and dynamically correlated in ways that are inconsistent with independent AR(1)s.
Two striking examples were provided by Evans (1992) and Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan
(2007).

Evans (1992) estimated vector autoregressions using military spending to mea-

sure government-spending disturbance and using Solow residuals to measure productivity
disturbances, and found that government spending Granger-causes productivity.

Chari,

Kehoe and McGrattan (2007) estimated a …rst-order vector autoregression, VAR(1), for
the disturbances of a business-cycle model and found that most cross-correlations are large
and statistically signi…cant.
After a brief literature review and discussion of some issues, the paper is organized
as follow. Section 2 introduces a simple real business-cycle model and uses it to present
the conjugate-conditionals estimation method.

The estimates of the model in the U.S.

data show that disturbances are correlated in a particular way: government spending tends
to strongly increase after a fall in productivity. This explains four long-standing puzzles
for full-information estimates of this model: why hours tend to fall after an increase in
productivity, why changes in productivity have a delayed and persistent e¤ect on output,
why productivity accounts for a large part of the business cycle, and why the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution is small.
Section 3 presents the estimation method more generally. We show that the conjugate
conditionals arise in a broad class of equilibrium macroeconomic models, and discuss how to
exploit the knowledge of this known slice of the posterior distribution in making inferences.

4

The model in section 2 is quite simple and its limitation at …tting the data are wellknown.

Section 4 therefore focuses on a richer business-cycle model, from Smets and

Wouters (2007), that provides a reasonably good …t to the data. Allowing for correlated
disturbances does not signi…cantly improve the …t of the model, nor does it a¤ect its main
qualitative predictions on the impact of policy changes in the economy.

However, with

correlated disturbances, wage markups are now less important sources of business cycles,
being replaced by productivity and government spending as key drivers.

Moreover, the

data suggest that endogenizing the changes in investment-speci…c productivity and in risk
premia, perhaps through …nancial frictions, is a promising way to improve the empirical
performance of the model.
Section 5 concludes with a brief review of the main results.

1.1

Literature review

The closest paper to this one is Ireland (2004). He adds measurement errors to the reducedform equations of a DSGE model and allows them to follow a VAR(1), proceeding to estimate the model by maximum likelihood and to statistically test for structural stability. We
di¤er in several respects. First, our focus is on the exogenous disturbances of the model,
not on measurement error (which we will even abstract from). A key distinction between
disturbances and measurement errors is that the properties of the disturbance process affect the behavioral responses of the agents in the model, whereas the properties of the
measurement error only a¤ect the job of the econometrician. For instance, if productivity disturbances are more persistent, agents in the model will engage in less intertemporal
substitution in consumption and hours worked, altering the response of all endogenous variables.

Instead, more persistent measurement errors only mechanically drive a di¤erence

between the endogenous variables and the observations. Second, from an econometric perspective, while both Ireland’s and our approaches exploit the state-space representation of
the model, Ireland’s focus is on dealing with the measurement equation, while ours is on
the state equation. Third, we take a Bayesian approach, we allow for VARs of higher order
than one, and we focus on implications for business cycles.
Del Negro and Schorfheide (2009) also emphasize the need for robustifying inferences

5

from DSGEs. Their preferred approach is to merge the versatility of a VAR with the tight
restrictions of a DSGE in an innovative method that uses the DSGE to provide priors for
the VAR. They also contrast their approach with the alternative of allowing for ‡exible
processes for the disturbances as we do. As they note, our approach …ts into their general
framework for dealing with misspeci…cation in policy analysis. Their empirical analysis is
constrained to independent AR(2) processes though, and part of their criticisms focus on
researchers judiciously picking which correlations to model. We instead allow for a more
‡exible and more general correlation structure for the disturbances. Finally, they emphasize
the di¢ cult issue of policy invariance, while we are more worried with the positive properties
of the models.
A third related paper is Chib and Ramamurthy (2010). Like us, they use the insight
of Gibbs sampling to propose an alternative to Metropolis estimation.

However, while

our blocks are suggested by the structure of the model, in their work it is the statistical
properties of the data that guides the blocking of parameters.

More concretely, at each

step they randomly cluster the parameters into arbitrary blocks to reduce the number of
draws that are necessary to characterize the posterior distribution. Instead, our algorithm
clusters the parameters into two groups, the economic parameters and those related to the
disturbance processes. While our clustering is not e¢ cient in the sense of minimizing the
number of draws, and there may be considerable correlation between the two groups, its
virtue is that one of the groups has exact or approximate conjugate distributions. Therefore,
while we may need more draws than Chib and Ramamurthy (2010), our algorithm is easier
to implement and much faster to execute.
A few papers have moved beyond the assumption of independent AR(1) disturbances,
but typically in only special ways.

Within closed-economy models, Chari, Kehoe, and

McGrattan (2007) allow for a restricted VAR(1) where the productivity disturbance is
special in that it Granger-causes all others, and Smets and Wouters (2007) allow two of
their seven disturbances to follow an ARMA(1,1) and two others to be contemporaneously
correlated.

Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2010) …nd that a common shock to total factor

productivity and investment-speci…c productivity explain an important share of the business
cycle.

6

In the open-economy literature, it is more common to assume that disturbances are
correlated across countries, starting with the work of Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992).
More recently, Justiniano and Preston (2010) estimate an open-economy DSGE model and
…nd that correlated cross-country disturbances can partially account for the exchange rate
disconnect puzzle.

Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez and Tuesta (2010) allow for cointegration

among technological disturbances and …nd they can explain the volatility of real exchange
rates.
As these papers on closed-economy and open-economy business cycles show, as models
grow larger, with more disturbances and more emphasis on accounting for the data beyond
just a few moments, there is a natural tendency to allow for correlated disturbances. We
take a step further than this literature and allow for a richer and more general correlation
between disturbances.

1.2

Three issues: simplicity, identi…cation and orthogonalization

A natural objection to allowing for correlated disturbances is that it is harder to give them
a structural interpretation than, say, AR(1) disturbances. While we are sympathetic with
this objection, we are uncomfortable with its implications.

Even though the estimates

from independent AR(1)s for a vector of variables are simpler to interpret than those from
a VAR, few (if any) researchers would argue in favor of the former instead of the latter. This
apparent simplicity comes with great estimation biases and incorrect inferences. Moreover,
as the two applications in this paper show, it is possible to interpret estimates with correlated
disturbances. Once this is done, what becomes hard to understand is what was captured by
estimates that assumed, for instance, that government spending was exogenous. Looking
forward, we would expect that once researchers become used to models with correlated
disturbances, this objection will become mute as it did just a few years after VARs became
popular. In any case, the contribution of this paper is to argue that even when researchers
prefer to assume independent disturbances, they should apply our speci…cation check on
whether their inferences are robust to allowing for correlated disturbances.
A second, more di¢ cult, issue is identi…cation.

As noted by Sargent (1978) in esti-

mating dynamic labor demands, it will often be di¢ cult to empirically distinguish between

7

endogenous sluggishness mechanisms, and exogenous persistent disturbances.2 More generally, the issue is similar to the old argument (Griliches, 1967) that it is di¢ cult to separately
identify a linear regression with both a lagged dependent variable and an autocorrelated
disturbance. Komunjer and Ng (2010) have provided a set of conditions for identi…cation
of DSGE models involving the rank of the information matrix, and which includes the case
of correlated disturbances. In all of the applications of this paper, we exhaustively checked
that their condition was satis…ed, and never found a problem. Looking forward, we …nd
compelling the argument that when there is an identi…cation problem, the disturbance parameter responsible for it is set to zero so that the endogenous mechanisms have primacy
in explaining the data.
Third, whenever disturbances are contemporaneously correlated, one must orthogonalize
them to produce impulse responses and variance decompositions. In our empirical study
of business cycles using the Smets and Wouters (2007) model, we consider the special case
where disturbances are dynamically but not contemporaneously correlated, so that this issue
does not arise. In the simple RBC model, di¤erent orthogonalizations give similar results
so the issue is empirically negligible.

Therefore, our applications are robust to di¤erent

orthogonalizations.
More generally, we think it is a virtue rather than a vice to bring attention to the need
for thinking hard about identi…cation and orthogonalization in estimating DSGE models.3
These are central issues in all empirical work, and should not be assumed away as the assumption of independent disturbances implicitly does. In any case, the particular methods
and results in this paper do not depend on which stand one takes on identi…cation and
orthogonalization more generally.
2

It is important to note that even if the exogenous disturbances could follow an arbitrary process, e.g.
an in…nite order VARMA, in many DSGE models, the economic and statistical parameters would still be
identi…ed. As noted by Sargent (1978) and many others, rational expectations models impose cross-equation
restrictions that both identify the models as well as give them testable predictions.
3
Reis (2008) discusses other identi…cation issues in DSGE modelling.

8

2

Correlated disturbances in a canonical DSGE model

The best-known and simplest DSGE model is due to Prescott (1986), and we extend it to
include government spending following Baxter and King (1993) and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992). This model has three merits for our purposes. First, it is su¢ ciently simple
that the e¤ect of correlated disturbances can be grasped intuitively. Second, it has generated some puzzles that we can re-examine.

And third, it only has a few parameters,

which makes the estimation method transparent and allows us to conduct Monte Carlo
experiments to gauge the e¢ ciency of the method.

2.1

The model of ‡uctuations

A social planner chooses sequences of consumption and hours, fCt ; Nt g1
t=0 , to maximize
2
1
6X
E0 4

>
:

i1

Nt )
1

1=

Yt = Ct + Kt

(1

Yt = (At Nt )1

Kt

t=0

subject to

t

8h
>
< Ct (1

1=

)Kt
1:

1

1

93
>
=
7
+ V (Gt ) 5 ;
>
;
+ Gt ;

(1)

(2)
(3)

The notation is standard.4 Utility increases with consumption and leisure and the bene…ts
of government spending enter additively through the function V (:), so they have no e¤ect on
the positive predictions of the model. Equation (2) states that output equals consumption
plus investment plus government spending, and equation (3) is a neoclassical production
function.

We use this DSGE model to explain the business cycle in output and hours

worked (Yt , Nt ) in response to disturbances to productivity and government spending (At ,
Gt ).
4

In particular: Ct is private consumption, Gt is government consumption, Nt is the fraction of hours in a
quarter spent at work, Kt is capital, Yt is output, At is total factor productivity, is the discount factor,
is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, determines the relative utility from leisure and consumption,
is the geometric depreciation rate, and is the labor share.

9

Some of the parameters are easily pinned down by steady-state relations.5 Two of the
parameters are not, and they are crucial to the model’s business-cycle predictions. First,
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, , determines the willingness of households to
shift resources over time. It is a key determinant of how strongly savings and labor supply
respond to persistent productivity changes, and thus of the model’s ability to generate
sizeable output ‡uctuations. Second, the parameter

pins down the steady-state elasticity

of labor supply with respect to wages. It is the key determinant of the size of the ‡uctuations
in hours worked. We collect these economic parameters in the vector " = ( ; ).
^ t ), they
(A^t ; G

Collecting the disturbances in the vector st = (ln (At ) ; ln Gt =G )
follow a vector autoregression of order k:
st =
where

(L) =

1

+ :: +

k 1,
kL

(L)st

1

+ et with et

N (0; );

the

i

are 2x2 matrices, and

(4)
is a positive-de…nite sym-

metric 2x2 matrix. This is a quite general representation; beyond assuming linearity and
covariance stationarity, it merely assumes that the order k is large enough to approximate
well an arbitrary Wold process. It nests three cases:
1) Independent AR(1) disturbances.

This is the typical assumption in the literature,

which in our notation maps into k being one and
assumptions are hard to accept in this context.

1

and

both being diagonal. These

Government spending is certainly not

an independent process in the data, and via the payment of unemployment bene…ts or
countercyclical …scal policy, Gt typically responds to At at least with a lag. In the other
direction, perhaps private productivity responds with a lag to some forms of government
spending like infrastructures or the enforcement of contracts.
2) Dynamically correlated disturbances. In this case, k
but

1 and the

i

are unrestricted,

is still diagonal. Because, in the model, Gt and At are exogenous, their correlations

cannot be explained but must be assumed. It is then desirable to assume as little as possible
5
In particular, the discount factor, , is set at 0:995, to generate a steady-state risk-free annual real interest
rate of 2%, the production parameter, , is 0:33; to match the capital income share, the depreciation rate, ,
is 0:015 to roughly match econometric estimates and the average U.S. capital-ouput ratio, the average level
of productivity, A, is normalized to 1, and the average government spending G equals its historical average
of 20% of GDP.

10

on these measures of our ignorance and focus instead on the tight restrictions imposed by
the model on the endogenous variables. Imposing the assumption that

is diagonal has the

virtue that we can still give a structural interpretation to the elements of et as innovations
to productivity and government spending.
3) Contemporaneously correlated disturbances.

Now

is not diagonal but it is left

unrestricted. The elements of et no longer have a structural interpretation, unless we add
orthogonalization assumptions as in the VAR literature.

However, the inferences on the

economic parameters " are invariant to these restrictions.
We model disturbances in the RBC model as being both dynamically and contemporaneously correlated, so that we impose as little structure on the general speci…cation in equation
(4) as possible. With only two variables and two disturbances, only one orthogonalization
condition is needed and it is easy to check alternatives and their implications for impulse
responses and variance decompositions. Inspired by the results of Evans (1992) discussed
in the introduction, in our baseline we use a Choleski decomposition with the innovations to
government spending ordered …rst. We discuss robustness to this orthogonalization later.
One argument for assuming independent AR(1) disturbances is that it reduces the number of parameters. Letting

denote the vector of statistical parameters in (L) and

describe the dynamics of the disturbances, with independent AR(1)s,

that

has four elements.

With unrestricted correlated disturbances, there are 3 + 4k statistical parameters. There is
a curse of dimensionality as k increases, since the computational complexity of most estimation algorithms explodes even for modest values of k. However, as we show next, this is
not a limitation of the theory, but rather of the particular algorithms being used.

2.2

Estimating the model

Log-linearizing the solution of the model around a non-stochastic steady state:
^

+

2 st ;

(5)

^

+

4 st ;

(6)

xt =

1 Kt 1

^t =
K

3 Kt 1

11

^ t ) are the observables, and a hat over a variable denotes its log-deviation.
where xt = (Y^t , L
The state vector of the problem includes the exogenous st and the endogenous capital stock
^ t , and the
K

i

are conformable matrices of coe¢ cients that are functions of both " and .

These functions can be complicated, but are nowadays easily computed by many algorithms.
Substituting out the unobserved capital stock, the reduced-form of the DSGE is:
xt =

3 xt 1

+

st =

(L)st

1

2 st

+(

1 4

+ et with et

3 2 )st 1 ;

N (0; );

(7)
(8)

together with initial conditions s0 , x0 , and a transversality condition.
While the model has a state-space form, the non-linear function mapping the structural
parameters to the reduced-form parameters, the cross-equation restrictions embedded in
this map, and the absence of errors in the measurement equation, make this class of problems quite di¤erent from the conventional problem in state-space estimation (Durbin and
Koopman, 2001). It is nowadays popular to take a Bayesian perspective to estimate models
like this one.6

Starting with a prior distribution for the parameters, q("; ), we can use

the reduced-form in equation (7)-(8) to compute the likelihood function L( xT "; ) for a
sample of data xT

fxt gTt=1 , and obtain the posterior distribution for the parameters via

Bayes rule:
p( "; j xT ) = L( xT "; )q("; )=p(xT ):

(9)

The marginal posterior density of the data p(xT ) is unknown, and there is no convenient
analytical form for the posterior distribution, so it must be characterized numerically. This
is usually done with Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, that draw a new
("; ) pair from an approximate distribution conditional on the last draw, in a way that
ensures convergence of the draws to the posterior distribution.
The typical algorithm used is a random-walk Metropolis. At step j, it draws a proposal
("; )(j) from a normal density with mean ("; )(j

1)

and some pre-de…ned covariance matrix,

accepting this draw with a probability that depends on the ratio p("; )(j) =p("; )(j
keeping ("; )(j
6

1)

1) ,

in case of rejection. This algorithm is robust in the sense that it usually

See Fernandez-Villaverde (2009) for a survey and a defense of the virtues of the Bayesian approach.

12

explores well the posterior distribution with minimal input from the researcher.

The

other side to this robustness is that, because it uses almost no knowledge of the shape of
the posterior, the algorithm can take many draws to converge.

Experience with DSGE

models has found that it takes millions of draws to converge if there are more than ten
parameters to estimate.

With correlated disturbances, this algorithm quickly hits the

curse of dimensionality and becomes infeasible.
We propose an alternative algorithm that avoids the curse of dimensionality by exploiting
the economic structure of the model. Because its central observation is to use knowledge
that some conditional posterior distributions are exactly or approximately conjugate, we
label it the conjugate-conditionals algorithm. It is based on three observations.
First, by the principle of Gibbs sampling, we can break the sampling from the joint posterior at step j into drawing

(j)

from the conditional p(

"(j) from the conditional p( "(j) xT ;

(j) ).

(j)

xT ; "(j

1) )

followed by drawing

This well-known alternative to the random-walk

Metropolis has here a natural application in separating statistical and economic parameters.
Second, note that while we are interested in the parameters, there is also uncertainty
on the realization of the innovations eT and thus the disturbances sT .

Focusing on

the …rst Gibbs step, note that by the de…nition of a marginal distribution p( j xT ; ") =
R
p( ; sT xT ; ")dsT , so drawing from the conditional for the statistical parameters is equiv-

alent to drawing from the joint distribution for

and sT , retaining only the

draws. This

is often referred to in the statistics literature as data augmentation.
Third, note that drawing from p( ; sT xT ; ") can be split by Gibbs sampling again
into drawing from p( sT xT ; "; ) and p( j xT ; "; sT ) in succession. But, conditional on the
parameters, the reduced-form in equations (7)-(8) is a state-space system and the uncertainty on the disturbances sT …ts into a standard signal extraction problem. Therefore, the
conditional distribution p( sT xT ; "; ) is normal with mean and variance given by variants
of the Kalman smoother.

Moreover, conditional on the disturbances sT , equation (8) is

a standard vector autoregression. If the prior distribution
the posterior distribution is also an inverse-Wishart.

is an inverse-Wishart, then

Moreover, if the variability in the

innovations et is much larger than the variability in the initial disturbances, then approximately all of the information about

in the system (7)-(8) is contained only in the second

13

equation, and a normal prior for

leads to a normal posterior distribution. Both for the

exact inverse-Wishart distribution and for the approximate normal distribution, we have
easily computable analytical expressions for their moments.
Combining these three observations provides our algorithm. It draws from the expanded
parameter vector "; ; sT in turn, exploiting the knowledge that the conditional distribution for sT is known, while we have a good guess for the conditional distribution for . Only
the conditional for " is unknown, but this involves just two parameters, regardless of the
assumptions on the disturbances. Allowing for correlated disturbances may dramatically
increase the number of parameters in , but because the conditional posterior distribution
for the covariance matrix is known analytically, and because we have a good approximating
distribution for the conditional posterior distribution for the correlation coe¢ cients, then
the curse of dimensionality is broken.

Estimating a DSGE with correlated disturbances

is not signi…cantly harder than one with independent AR(1) disturbances, because it is
not harder to draw from normals and inverse-Wishart distributions of higher dimension.
Because it uses our knowledge of particular slices of the posterior distribution that we are
trying to characterize, this algorithm should be more e¢ cient than the standard Metropolis
algorithm.7

2.3

Data, priors, and Monte Carlo evidence on the e¢ ciency of the algorithm

We now turn to the data to demonstrate the use of our method and its potential. Because
the model is so simple, and such a large literature in the last twenty years has identi…ed and
partly remedied its weaknesses, we do not want to take the estimates too seriously. Our
goal here is instead to show how some apparent puzzles when comparing likelihood-based
estimates of this DSGE with other estimates can be resolved by allowing for correlated
disturbances. Section 4 is more concerned with …tting the data. Here, we use U.S. data
for non-farm business sector hours and output per capita that is quarterly, HP-…ltered, and
goes from 1948:1 to 2008:2, although we use the data before 1960:1 only to calibrate the
7
The statement has to be quali…ed, because it is possible that the co-dependence between " and is so
strong that the Metropolis algorithm ends up dominating the Gibbs-sampler. In our experience, this is not
the typical case.

14

priors.
The priors are summarized in table 1. Following the convention in the literature, we
set the prior modes for the economic parameters at

= 2=3 and

= 4:85 (to generate a

steady-state value of 0.2 for N ) and they have a gamma distribution. For the statistical
parameters, the modes of the four AR(1) parameters (the diagonal terms of

0

and

0)

are

set to match four moments in the the data before 1960: the variances and serial correlations
of output and hours. For the remainder statistical parameters, we consider two cases. In
the …rst case, we follow the literature and assume independent AR(1)s. The priors for all
the correlated-disturbance terms are zero with zero variance.

We include this case both

because it provides the comparison point for the correlated-disturbances case, and because
it provides an illustration of the relative e¢ ciency of our new algorithm. Our focus is on the
correlated case, and we present results for an unrestricted VAR(1). The three non-diagonal
elements in

0

and

still have a prior mode of zero, but now have a non-zero variance

set according to the extension of the Minnesota prior discussed in Kadiyala and Karlsson
(1997), tighter around zero the further away we move from the diagonal.8

We estimated

VARs of orders 1 to 6 with very similar results. While the marginal likelihood is higher
for order 6, we focus on the VAR(1) case because the results are easier to interpret and the
di¤erence in marginal likelihood is less than 3 log points.9
We start by investigating the e¢ ciency of the conjugate-conditionals algorithm versus
the Metropolis random-walk through a Monte Carlo experiment We simulated data of the
same length as the sample using the priors for the independent AR(1), estimated the model
on the simulated data using the two algorithms with four parallel chains, and then compared
their relative e¢ ciency at converging to the posterior distribution.

The propositions in

section 4 will show that the estimates from both algorithms converge to the truth, and our
simulations con…rmed this.
We use four metrics to assess convergence. First, the R statistic of Gelman and Rubin
(1992), which compares the variance of each parameter estimate between and within chains,
8
Section 3 discusses these priors in more detail as well as alternatives within the conjugate-conditionals
family.
9
Here and everywhere, we calculated the marginal likelihood using a harmonic mean with the truncated
multivariate normal distribution as the weighting function, as described in Geweke (2005).

15

to estimate the factor by which these could be reduced by continuing to take draws. This
statistic is always larger or equal than one, and a cut-o¤ of 1.001 is often used. We report
the maximum of these statistics across all the parameters. Second, the number of e¤ective
draws, ne¤ , in each chain for each parameter, which corrects for the serial correlation across
draws following Geweke (1992). The larger this is, the more e¢ cient the algorithm, and
we again report the minimum of these statistics. Third, the number of e¤ective draws in
total, mne¤ , which combines the previous two corrections applied to the mixed simulations
from the four chains (Gelman et al, 1998: 298), where again we report the minimum across
parameters. Finally, the number of rejections at the 5% level of the z-test that the mean of
the parameter draws in two separated parts of the chain is the same. This is the separated
partial means test, SPM, of Geweke (1992) and fewer rejections implies being closer to
convergence.
Figure 1 shows the results.10

In the horizontal axis are the number of draws, and in

the vertical axes are the convergence metrics. The conjugate-conditionals algorithm clearly
dominates the Metropolis random-walk. The number of e¤ective draws is almost always
higher, and commonly used thresholds like 1.01 for R, or 300 for ne¤ , are reached earlier
while the SPM tests have always fewer rejections for the same number of draws.11
Recall that, in these simulations, disturbances are uncorrelated.

There are only four

statistical parameters, so this Monte Carlo experiment provides a conservative estimate on
the improvement to be had in switching to the conjugate-conditionals algorithm. When the
disturbances are a VAR of high order, the bene…ts from the conjugate-conditional approach
over a random-walk Metropolis are larger.
10

The proposal density for " in the conjugate-conditionals algorithm is a random-walk Metropolis. The
covariance matrix for the Metropolis algorithm is the Hessian at the mode of the posterior (found by
numerical maximization), multiplied by a scale factor to obtain approximately a 25% acceptance rate. This
is updated after 20,000 draws to the covariance matrix of these draws, and the algorithm is then re-started.
We report the draws in this second run, after discarding the initial 12,500 for burn-in, and average over 20
Monte Carlo simulations.
11
Closely related to ne¤ are e¢ ciency factors (Geweke, 2005), which just equal ne¤ divided by the number
of draws. In the Monte Carlo, the e¢ ciency factor of the conjugate conditionals algorithm is 0.0167, whereas
that of a Metropolis random walk is only 0.0076.

16

2.4

Estimates and inferences with correlated disturbances

Starting with the independent AR(1)s case, the …rst panel of table 2 reports moments of
the posterior distributions, and the top panel of …gure 2 plots the distribution of impulse
responses to one standard-deviation innovations to the two disturbances with the legend
showing the median unconditional variance decomposition between parentheses.

Four

features of the estimates show well-known problems with this model.
1) The IES disconnect.

The mean intertemporal elasticity of substitution is 1:4, not

just above the prior, but especially substantially higher than the usual value of 0:2 that
comes from Euler-equation estimates (Hall, 1988, Yogo, 2004).
2) The output persistence puzzle.

In response to an improvement in productivity,

output increases both because of the higher productivity, and also because the representative
household chooses to work longer today when the returns to working are higher. However,
as Cogley and Nason (1995) noted, the persistence of the output response closely mirrors
the persistence of the productivity disturbance, whereas most reduced-form estimates of
these responses are more gradual.
3) The hours-productivity puzzle. Gali (1999), Francis and Ramey (2005), and Basu,
Fernald and Kimball (2006) estimated that hours fall after improvements in productivity,
while Uhlig (2004) and Dedola and Neri (2007) …nd a response of hours close to zero. In
…gure 2 though, hours increase strongly after a productivity improvement.
4) The sources-of-business-cycles puzzle.

According to the variance decompositions,

government spending disturbances account for half of the variance of output and most of
the variance of hours, against the …ndings in typical VAR studies (e.g., Shapiro and Watson,
1986, Fisher 2006), which attribute a larger role to productivity.12
One other feature of the estimates is worth discussing. An increase in public spending
lowers resources inducing households to work harder, but because the shock is temporary
they borrow from the future, de-accumulating capital. The …rst e¤ect is stronger on impact
so output rises, but as capital falls, within a few periods, the second e¤ect becomes stronger
and output turns negative. The empirical size of the …scal multiplier is still under debate,
12

The 90% credible sets for the variance decompositions output are (17, 79) and (21, 83) and for hours
(3, 12) and (89, 97), for At and Gt respectively.

17

and the model predicts very di¤erent responses to transitory and permanent shocks (Baxter
and King, 1993) so it is hard to compare these estimates to other evidence.
We now turn to the unrestricted VAR(1). The second panels of table 2 and …gure 2
summarize the posterior distributions, impulse responses and variance decompositions. The
three non-diagonal terms of the

and

matrices do not include zero in their 90% credible

sets, unlike the assumption in the independent case. This is re‡ected in the log marginal
predictive density of the model, which is 26 points higher with correlated disturbances than
with independent AR(1)s, so the posterior odds ratio is an overwhelming e26 in favor of the
former.13

The largest correlated-disturbance term is the lagged productivity term in the

law of motion for government spending. According to these estimates, when productivity
falls, there is a lagged increase in government spending, matching what we would expect
from the automatic and discretionary stabilizers in U.S. …scal policy.
We can then re-examine the puzzles, now that we have allowed for this lagged response
of government spending to productivity that the data strongly favors. First, the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution is much lower, with a mean of 0.43 and a 5% bound of 0.29,
bringing the DSGE estimates in line with the single-equation Euler equation estimates.
Second, the response of output to a productivity disturbance is now signi…cantly more
delayed. An increase in productivity now leads to a subsequent fall in government spending.
While this initially makes the impact on output smaller, after a few periods, it boosts output
up partially solving the output persistence puzzle. Third, an improvement in productivity
lowers hours. While the improvement in productivity increases hours, the subsequent fall
in government spending lowers them and the net impact is close to zero, matching the
results from the literature that followed Gali (1999). Fourth, productivity now accounts
for a much larger fraction of the business cycle, and as much of the earlier predominance
of government spending was due to its response to productivity.14

In line with the VAR

evidence, productivity now accounts for three quarters of the variance of output and 64%
13

Note that because our prior was still centered around the independent-disturbances model, and had
shrinking variances as we moved towards the cross-correlations, the marginal likelihood would be, if anything,
biased against correlated distrubances.
14
The 90% credible sets for the variance decompositions output are (58, 83) and (17, 42) and for hours
(44, 75) and (25, 56), for At and Gt respectively.

18

of the variance of hours.15
Introducing correlated disturbances therefore solves four apparent puzzles with the real
business cycle model. By imposing the strict and unjusti…ed assumption that disturbances
are independent AR(1)s, researchers would face a discrepancy between the DSGE fullinformation estimate and those that come from independent VARs and limited-information
estimates. Allowing for correlated disturbances showed that the robust inference is instead
that the dynamics of the model are broadly consistent with these other facts. Moreover, the
estimates showed that the direction for improving the model is to account for countercyclical
…scal policy.

3

The general theory of the conjugate-conditionals method

Consider an economic model that relates the following vectors:
xt : observables, of dimension nx ;
yt : endogenous economic variables, of dimension ny ;
st : exogenous disturbances, of dimension ns ;
et : exogenous mean-zero innovations to the disturbances, of dimension ns ;
" : economic parameters, of dimension n" ,
: statistical parameters, of dimension n ,
in a sample t = 1; :::; T with the convention that a variable dated t is determined at that
date.
xj

The sample realization of a variable, say xt , from t = 1 to date j is denoted by
fxt gjt=1 . We use p(:) to denote a general posterior distribution, f (:) to denote a

sampling distribution, and q(:) to denote a prior distribution. The inference problem is the
following: given the observations xT , and a prior distribution q("; ), to characterize the
posterior distribution p( "; j xT ) / f xT ";

q("; ) numerically by simulating J draws.

15

These results identify the impulse responses and variance decompositions with a Choleski decomposition
ordering government spending …rst. We also tried ordering productivity …rst, as well as estimating a model
with dynamic but not contemporaneous correlation between the disturbances. The solution of the four
puzzles was robust to these alternatives. The results are also robust to the order of the VAR.

19

3.1

Two assumptions characterizing the problem

Two assumptions de…ne our problem, and we will return to them at the end of this section
to discuss whether they can be relaxed. The …rst assumption characterizes the economic
models to which our methods apply, which includes most DSGE models in the literature:16
Assumption 1. The economic model is:
xt = H1 (") + H2 (L)yt + H3 (L)st ;

( ) (L) =

yt =

1 (";

st =

( ) (L) st

Pk

j=1

H2 (L); H3 (L) and

j

( ) Lj

3 (";

)yt

1;

1

+
1

2 (";

)st +

(10)
3 (";

)(L)st

(11)

1

+ et ; with et i.i.d. and V ar(et ) = ( ):

(12)

is a matrix lag polynomial of order k, and similarly for

)(L). All matrices are conformable and their elements are func-

tions of the sub-set of parameters of ( "; ) that are indicated in brackets. Moreover:
a) The distributions p( "j xT ; ), p( j xT ; ") and p( sT xT ; "; ) are not point masses, that is
they are not degenerate in the sense of the random variables being almost surely constant.
b) The

j (";

) matrices depend on the parameters in

( ) but not on the parameters in

( ).
c) The statistical parameters

= vec( ; ); and the matrices

and

are unrestricted.

Equation (10) links observables to endogenous variables and disturbances in a general
linear way, including allowing for constant deviations between the two through H1 (").17 In
applications with de-meaned data, often xt = yt so the endogenous variables are observed,
as was the case in section 2. More usually, the data is not de-meaned and H1 (") includes
the steady-state of the model, which depends on the economic parameters, while H2 (L) and
H3 (L) are typically simple data transformations that adjust units.
We abstract from measurement error in these observations to avoid confusion with the
economic disturbances speci…ed in the model. Including measurement error does not change
16
Beyond the two models in this paper, a supplementary appendix available form the authors shows that
other popular DSGE models in the literature satisfy this assumption.
17
We will treat yt as deviations from a steady-state, so we omit constants from (11)-(12), but it is straightforward to include these.

20

our conclusions signi…cantly, although it requires a clear distinction between them and the
disturbances.
Assumption 1a) simply states that there is a statistical estimation problem. At the
most elementary level, this requires that, given the observed data, there is more than one
set of parameters that could have generated it with non-zero probability. The assumption
strengthens this basic requirement in two ways.

First, it requires that conditioning on

each of the two sub-sets of parameters, " or , again we still have a non-trivial statistical
estimation problem. If this was not the case, some of the steps would be trivial or redundant. Second, it requires that the observables are not enough to recover the disturbances.
Otherwise the statistical problem would boil down to estimating the VAR in (12).
The second equation in the assumption, equation (11), nests most linear (or linearized)
dynamic economic models that are described by a system of equations:

0 (")yt

=

1 (")yt 1

+

2 (")(L)st

+

3 (")wt ;

(13)

where the vector of endogenous disturbances wt has the property that Et
can capture terms involving Et (yt+1 ). The

i

1 wt

= 0 and

matrices typically have many zero elements

and have more elements than n" , embodying the cross-equation restrictions that come from
optimal behavior, technologies and other constraints and which are a¤ected by the economic
parameters ". As Blanchard and Khan (1982) and Sims (2002) among many others have
shown, equation (11) is the solution, or reduced-form, of these models.
The matrices
all parameters.

j (";

) in this solution are typically complicated non-linear functions of

Therefore, while the model has a state-space representation, estimating

it requires moving well beyond the standard techniques in state-space estimation (Durbin
and Koopman, 2001).18 In general, little can be said about the functions

j (";

), as their

form will depend on the model, but there is one exception stated as assumption 1b): the
principle of certainty equivalence, that the parameters in the reduced-form solution of the
model do not depend on the covariances in

.

18

There is another di¤erence relative to state-space models that one should not get confused about. In our
model and notation, yt are not the state variables. Rather, yt includes all of the variables in the economic
model, including states, controls, or any other variable.

21

The third equation requires that disturbances are linear processes that are well approximated by a vector autoregression of …nite order k. It implies that n = kns + ns (ns + 1)=2,
so the number of statistical parameters may be quite large.
Assumption 1c) clari…es that we are not imposing any restriction on the VAR. In many
cases, we may want to impose some restriction, such as stationarity. Section 3.4 will discuss
how this assumption can be relaxed.
The second assumption de…nes the distributions for the di¤erent propositions and variables:
Assumption 2. The prior and likelihood distributions are:
a) f ( et j "; ) is a normal distribution
b) f ( sk "; ) is a normal distribution.
c) q( ) is an inverse-Wishart distribution,
d) q( j ) is a normal distribution,
e) q(") is a non-degenerate distribution, that is " is not almost surely constant.
The …rst part of the assumption is standard in the literature: innovations are independent and identically normally distributed.

The second part assumes that the initial

unobserved states in the k lags of the VAR are also normal, so that the observations xT
are normally distributed. The third and fourth part set the priors for the statistical parameters. These are standard in the VAR literature, although not as common in the DSGE
literature.

Finally, the …fth part puts only the weakest restriction on the prior for the

economic parameters for our method to work.

3.2

Two results on which the method rests

The …rst result breaks the problem into several sub-problems using the powerful result on
Gibbs-sampling:
Proposition 1 Starting at step j with ("(j
a) drawing

(j)

from the conditional p(

ditional p( "(j) xT ;
b) drawing

(j)

(j) )

(j)

1) ;

(j 1) ),

xT ; "(j

1) )

then:
and then drawing "(j) from the con-

converges in distribution to a set of draws from p( "; j xT ).

and sT (j) from the joint distribution p(
22

(j) ; sT (j)

xT ; "(j

1) ),

and storing

only the

(j)

draws gives a set of draws from p(

(j)

c) drawing sT (j) from the conditional p( sT (j) xT ; "(j
the conditional p(
p(

(j) ; sT (j)

xT ; "(j

(j)

xT ; "(j

1) ; sT (j) )

xT ; "(j
1) ;

1) )

(j 1) )

and then drawing

(j)

from

converges in distribution to a set of draws from

1) ).

Proof: Result b) just states the de…nition of a marginal distribution in relation to the joint
distribution. Results a) and c) are applications of the convergence of the Gibbs sampler.
The proof follows the same steps as Tierney (1994), where the crucial assumptions are 1a
and 2e ensuring that the Markov chain de…ned by the Gibbs sampler is irreducible.
Focusing on result c) of the previous proposition, we can further show that there are
two conjugate families of priors-posteriors within our problem:
Proposition 2 The following two distributions belong to known families, with analytical
means and variances:
a) the posterior distribution for the disturbances, conditional on the data and the parameters,
p( sT xT ; "; ) is normal.
b) the posterior distribution for the variance of the innovations, conditional on the data, the
other parameters, and the disturbances p( j xT ; "; ; sT ) = p( j sT ); and it is an inverseWishart.
Proof: Equations (10)-(12) in assumption 1 de…ne a linear state-space system. Assumptions 2a and 2b state that innovations and initial conditions are normal.

Therefore, the

disturbances are normal, proving result a). To prove the second result, note that assumption 1b implies that only equation (12) involves the covariance matrix

. Moreover, no xT

or " appear in that equation. It therefore follows that p( j xT ; "; sT ; ) = p( j sT ). But
then, using assumption 1c) and 1d), it is a standard result from linear regression that, since
the prior is an inverse-Wishart, so is the posterior.
As a …nal remark on this second proposition, note that the parameters of these distributions are known analytically. The mean and covariance of the normal distribution of result
a) are the output of the Kalman smoother, and the parameter of the Wishart in result b)
can be found in most Bayesian statistics textbooks (e.g., Geweke, 2005).
23

3.3

The conjugate-conditionals method

Based on the two propositions, the output of the following hybrid, Metropolis-within-Gibbs
(or block-Metropolis) algorithm will converge to a set of draws from the posterior distribution of the parameters:
Algorithm At draw j:
Step 1) draw sT (j) from p( sT (j) xT ; "(j

1) ;

(j 1) ),

the known distribution in proposition 2;

Step 2) draw

(j)

from p( j sT (j) ), the known distribution in proposition 2;

Step 3) draw

(j)

from a proposal distribution that approximates p( j xT ; "(j

1) ; sT (j) ;

(j) )

and accept or reject this draw with some probability;
Step 4) draw "(j) from a proposal distribution that approximates p( "j xT ;

(j) )

and accept

or reject this draw with some probability.
The …rst two steps are easy even for a very large number of disturbances ns , number of
lags, k, and number of observations T . Most software programs can take draws from the
multivariate normal quickly and, while the Kalman …lter recursions can take some time,
they were required anyway in order to calculate the likelihood function of the problem.
The Kalman smoother provides the posterior means and variances recursively, although
as shown by Carter and Kohn (1994), sampling from the joint distribution is considerably
more e¢ cient. We use their approach as described in Chib’s (2001) algorithm 14.
As for the third step, while we do not have the exact distribution, we have a good guess.
The autocorrelation parameters

enter both the reduced-form solution of the model in (11),

as well as the VAR in (12). But, if the variance of the innovations eT is much smaller than
the variance of the prior for the initial states and endogenous variables, then this …ltering
problem has an approximate solution where only the information in the VAR is relevant.19
That is, in this limit case, p( j xT ; "; sT ; )

p( j sT ; ).

But then, we have another

conjugate conditional, since assumption 2c) implies that the posterior for

is also normal

and the formulae for the mean and variance are the standard linear regression formulae.
We have found that a particular implementation of this approximate proposal works
19

It is common practice to set the prior variance of the initial conditions equal to the unconditional
variance predicted by the system. If the economic system has signi…cant propagation and magni…cation,
then this variance should be considerably larger than the variance of the innovations.

24

remarkably well, converging quickly. Following Geweke (1989), we use an independenceMetropolis step sampling from a t-distribution instead of the normal in the previous paragraph, to allow for fatter tails.

To be clear, recall that this is the proposal density, so

there are many other alternatives that would lead to consistent estimates. What the argument in the previous paragraph strongly suggests, and our experience con…rms, is that a
t-distribution for p( j sT ; ), using the mean and variance from normal conjugate formulae,
provides a good approximation to the target distribution p( j xT ; "; sT ; ), as judged by
how quickly the draws converge and the very high acceptance rate that we obtain for the
draws.20
Finally, for step 4, our algorithm does not make any signi…cant improvement over the
literature. We neither know p( "j xT ; ); nor is there any hope of having even an approximate
result beyond very speci…c models, since the parameters " usually enter the system in a
highly non-linear way. In practice, we used a random-walk Metropolis for this step, drawing
"(j) from a normal with mean "(j

1)

and covariance matrix equal to the inverse-Hessian at

the mode of the posterior, scaled to reach an acceptance rate around one quarter. We have
tried several alternatives: independent Metropolis, rejection sampling, and modifying the
random-walk Metropolis to have the new draws depend on

(j) ,

but none clearly dominated

the more conventional random-walk Metropolis.

3.4

Relaxing the two assumptions

Some features of assumption 1 are central to our method. First, the state-space linear form
of equations (11)-(12) are important, especially for proposition 2. Second, the fact that the
matrices

i (";

) with the model solution are non-linear functions of the parameters, with

many cross-equation restrictions imposed by the theory, distinguishes our problem from an
unrestricted state-space system. Both of these features de…ne what a linear DSGE is, so
they restrict us only insofar as we are dealing with this class of models.
Third, assumption 1a) ensures that the inference problem is not trivial.
sumption 1b) is important for the conjugate distribution of

Fourth, as-

in proposition 2, but this

20
Some readers, accostumed to the Metropolis-Hastings random walk sampling often used in economics,
may …nd it puzzling that we refer to high acceptance rates as a measure of e¢ ciency. This is the case
because we are using independence Metropolis.

25

principle of certainty equivalence applies to all linearized DSGE models. Fifth and …nally,
the assumption that the economic parameters " do not a¤ect the law of motion for the
disturbances in (12) is crucial for the ability to deal separately with the two types of parameters, but it is as much an assumption as it the modelling de…nition of what

and "

are.
The other assumptions can all be relaxed in many ways. Starting with equation (10), we
could allow for H2 (")(L) and H3 (")(L), so the measurement equation linking the endogenous
variables to the observable can depend on the economic parameters. This requires no change
in the algorithm, although we have trouble …nding economic models to which this extension
would be useful.
Assumption 1c) can be signi…cantly relaxed, as it is easy to accommodate many types
of restrictions on the VAR matrices.
AR(k)s, so

j

and

One case is when disturbances follow independent

matrices are all diagonal.
k
j (i)]j=1 ,

to i = 1; :::; ns independent normals for [
gammas squared for each of

and i = 1; :::ns independent inverse-

(i), our results follow. A second case is to have dynamic but

not contemporaneous correlation, so the
In this case, using the normal priors for
gamma priors for

Adapting the priors in assumption 2

j

are unrestricted but the

must be diagonal.

from assumption 2, and the independent inverse

(i) just described, again our results follow. Finally, more generally, we

may wish to impose that some of the elements of

j

and

are either zero, or appear more

than once in the matrices. In this case, equation (12) is a system of seemingly unrelated
regressions (SUR). Collecting the disturbances into the vector s of size ns (T
written as s = Z + "; with "

N (0;

It

k ),

k), it is

where Z contains the lagged states as

well as blocks of zeros allowing for a rich set of restrictions on the VAR. The coe¢ cients
include the elements of
1

.

As long as the prior for

j

is normal and the prior for

is the Wishart distribution as described in assumption 2, then our results on conjugate

distributions still hold (Zellner, 1962).
Another important class of prior restrictions comes from the common desire to impose
the constraint that the VAR in equation (12) is stationary. This a¤ects the distribution
for

in step 3, which is now truncated to the stationarity region. However, our experience

is that still using as proposal the t-distribution based on the approximate-normal result,

26

but truncating it to only accept stationary draws, has almost no e¤ect on the performance
of the algorithm.

This is perhaps not entirely surprising; the truncation does not a¤ect

the relative density of di¤erent draws in the stationary region, so it has little e¤ect on the
importance sampling algorithm.
Turning to assumption 2, the normality of the errors and initial conditions is important
to our method in order to obtain the conjugate conditional distribution for the disturbances
in proposition 2. Assumption 2c) and 2d) can be somewhat relaxed. There are alternative
conjugate priors to the normal-inverse-Wishart family.

Kadiyala and Karlsson (1997)

discuss combinations of di¤use, normal, Wishart and Minnesota prior distributions that
deliver conjugate families for VARs.

Sims and Zha (1998) propose an alternative, with

a normal conjugate family for the distribution of

conditional on

, which puts fewer

restrictions on the prior variance than the one in assumption 2 and has some computational
advantages, although the posterior for the covariance matrix

4

stops being conjugate.

New Keynesian cycles with correlated disturbances

The medium-scale DSGE models estimated by Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007) has been
very in‡uential in the study of business cycles and monetary policy. In this section, we ask
to what extent their inferences are robust to the possibility of correlated disturbances.

4.1

The model

Smets and Wouters (2007) found that a new Keynesian model augmented with a variety of
frictions, including sticky prices and wages, habits in consumption, and investment adjustments costs, can …t the U.S. data well. They focused on seven series: output, consumption,
investment, hours worked, real wages, in‡ation and nominal interest rate.21
The appendix lays out the equations of the model.

Our focus is on its seven exoge-

nous disturbances: total factor productivity (A), investment-speci…c productivity (EI), risk
premium (B), government spending (G), monetary policy (ER), price markups (EP ), and
wage markups (EW ). Following the DSGE tradition, Smets and Wouters assume that they
21

Del Negro et al (2007) document more exhaustively the empirical strengths and weaknesses of the model.

27

all follow independent AR(1)s, with only two exceptions.

First, the model includes two

…rst-order moving average terms for the price and wage markup disturbances to …t highfrequency movements in the data. Second, Smets and Wouters allow for contemporaneously
correlated disturbances between government spending and total factor productivity.
We re-estimate the Smets and Wouters model, using the same data and priors, but with
two di¤erent assumptions for the dynamics of the disturbances.22

In the …rst case, we

assume that disturbances are independent AR(1)s, just like Smets and Wouters, with only
one modi…cation: we set to zero the contemporaneous correlation between productivity and
government spending. This way, all of the disturbances are independent. In the second
case, we allow for correlated disturbances that follow a VAR(1). We impose the restriction
on this VAR that disturbances are dynamically correlated, but not contemporaneously so.
That is, using the notation from section 3, the matrix of dynamic-correlation coe¢ cients
is left unrestricted, but the variance matrix

is required to be diagonal.

We restrict

ourselves to this case because, with seven disturbances, any orthogonalization would be
controversial.23

4.2

The economic parameters and impulse responses

The full set of estimates and impulse responses is reported in the appendix. While there
are a few di¤erences between the estimates of the economic parameters across the two
speci…cations of the disturbances, the posterior credible sets typically overlap.

Since, in

turn, these sets are wide, it is hard to draw any …rm conclusions. One exception is in the
estimates of the parameter that measures the elasticity of adjustment costs to investment,
which are well above the prior with independent disturbances, but slightly below it with
correlated disturbances.
Focusing instead on the impulse responses, …gure 3 shows the impulse responses of
output, hours and in‡ation to disturbances to productivity, …scal spending, and monetary
policy.

They are all qualitatively similar.

An improvement in productivity still lowers

22

All the estimates are based on 3 million draws, preceeded by another 6 million draws used to update
the covariance matrix in the Metropolis proposals.
23
It is important to emphasize that, with our algorithm, allowing the disturbances to follow vecor autoregressions of much higher order would be feasible and fast.

28

hours and in‡ation, more government spending still boosts output only in the …rst quarter,
and higher interest rates cause a recession and a hump-shaped decline in in‡ation.
Quantitatively though, there are some noticeable di¤erences. With correlated disturbances, an increase in government spending lowers output by more after the …rst quarter,
partly because if has a more modest and temporary impact on hours. Also, the response of
in‡ation to monetary policy is more than twice as large with dynamically-correlated rather
than independent disturbances.
The models also both do roughly well at explaining the data: the log marginal predictive densities of the models with independent and dynamically-correlated disturbances are
within 5 log points of each other. Part of this similarity is explained by the many sources
of endogenous dynamics in the model that reduce the impact of correlated disturbances.
Another part is due to the imprecision with which many of these moments are estimated.

4.3

Variance decompositions and statistical parameters

Table 3 shows the median variance decompositions for output, hours, real wages and in‡ation in the short run (1 quarter ahead), the long run (unconditionally), and at business
cycle frequencies (2 years and 8 years ahead).24 With independent disturbances, the ‡uctuations in output and hours are accounted mostly by government spending, risk premium
and investment-speci…c productivity at the shorter horizon. At longer horizons, as Smets
and Wouters (2007) emphasized, it is the wage-markup disturbance that dominates.
With correlated disturbances, the conclusions are similar at the short-run frequencies but
very di¤erent at the business-cycle and long-run frequencies. Focusing on the variance of
output, wage markups go from accounting for 47% and 49% at the 8-year and in…nite horizon
with independent disturbances, to only 25% and 9% with correlated disturbances. The two
productivity disturbances and government spending now explain 80% of the variance of
output in the long run, and as much as 35% at the 2-year horizon.

Looking instead

at the variance of in‡ation, again the role of wage markup declines signi…cantly when we
allow for correlated disturbances, and the di¤erence from the independent-disturbances case
increases with the horizon. Across all series, there is an increase in the role of productivity
24

The 90% credible sets are in the appendix.

29

and government spending in accounting for the business cycle.
Next, looking at the nuisance parameters in the (dynamic-)correlation structure, there
are a few that are signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. (The whole posterior distribution is in
the appendix.)

First, the correlation between total factor productivity and government

spending is large, and goes in both directions (

AG

and

GA ).

In part, this justi…es the

Smets and Wouters (2007) modelling assumption of allowing for contemporaneous correlation between these two variables. It also shows that while the new Keynesian model is
more involved than the simple RBC model from section 2, it is still missing an important
role for …scal policy rules.25
Second, all of the other signi…cant correlations (
EIG ,

REI )

BA ,

BEI ,

BER ,

ERB ,

EIA ,

EIB ,

involve either the risk-premium disturbance or investment-speci…c productiv-

ity. This suggests that an important direction for future research building on this model
should focus on endogenizing these disturbances. Combining this observation with the differing estimates for the elasticity of investment adjustment costs, suggests that models with
…nancial imperfections (e.g., Cúrdia and Woodford, 2009) seem particularly promising.

4.4

Lessons from correlated disturbances in the new Keynesian model

To conclude, allowing for correlated disturbances con…rmed some of the lessons from previous estimates of the Smets-Wouters model. There are three changes though, that again
highlight the need to allow for correlated disturbances to robustify inference and to point the
direction of future research. First, the size of the response of the economy to government
spending and monetary policy disturbances depends on how disturbances are modelled, recommending caution in using this model to too …nely tune the economy. Second, we found
that the much debated …nding that markup disturbances are important is not robust. The
role of wage markups is much reduced for all variables and becomes insigni…cant for output
and wages beyond a few quarters.26 Third, as in the simple model of section 2, the results
25

Alternatively, both models assume a closed economy, so G may be capturing net exports. Since both
theory and casual empirics suggest that the trade balance is sensitive to the business cycle, this reinforces
our point that it is inappropriate to assume an exogenous G.
26
See Chari, Kehoe, McGrattan (2009) for some of the debate, and Justiniano and Primiceri (2008) for
an alternative estimation approach that converges with our results that wage markups are not as important
as previously thought.

30

showed that it is important to account for endogenous …scal policy responses to the business
cycle. Moreover, the main missing element in the endogenous dynamics of the model is in
modelling risk and investment.

5

Conclusion

DSGE modelling has made great strides in the last decade, in particular in the area of
estimation and statistical inference.

Because this work is in its infancy, there are still

some clear holes in our knowledge that must be …lled. This paper identi…ed one of these
holes: the strong and incredible restrictions that models typically place on the exogenous
disturbances. Using well-known points in simultaneous-equation econometrics, we argued
that these restrictions could severely hamper the model’s ability to …t the data and severely
bias inferences on key parameters and model predictions. We proposed the alternative of
allowing for correlated disturbances, in the tradition of Zellner (1962).
The main obstacle to allowing for correlated disturbances is that it introduces a large
number of nuisance parameters. We proposed a new method for estimating DSGE models, based on using conjugate families for some conditional posterior distributions.

The

algorithm is also valid and useful with uncorrelated disturbances, and with correlated disturbances it makes previously infeasible estimation now possible.
We applied the method to a simple real business cycle mode, and found that many
apparent empirical puzzles in this model were easily accounted for by its omission of the
strong correlation between government spending and productivity disturbances. This suggests that endogenous countercyclical …scal policy is the main missing element to make this
model roughly consistent with the data.
We then studied the impact of correlated disturbances in a more involved monetary
business cycle model.

We found that disturbances to markups are much less important

once one accounts for correlated disturbances. Rather, it is productivity and …scal policy
that drives the signi…cant part of the business cycle previously ascribed to markups, and
again endogenizing it is the priority for future research. Our method again not only showed
which of the inferences were not robust to correlated disturbances, but also provided hints on

31

where modelling should turn to next. Endogenously modelling risk premia and investmentspeci…c productivity disturbances seems to be the most promising avenue to bringing this
model closer to the data.

32

Appendix
The New Keynesian business cycle model.

We follow Smets and Wouters (2007)

closely, including keeping their notation in this appendix as much as we can.

The only

change is for the statistical parameters to …t our general setup in section 3. The notation
refers to: yt is output, ct is consumption, it is investment, qt is the value of capital, lt
is hours worked, zt is capital utilization, rt is the nominal interest rate,
p
t

wt is the real wage, kt is capital installed,
mark-up.

is the price mark-up, and

t

is in‡ation,

w
t

is the wage

The disturbance are all denoted by st with the superscript denoting the type

of shock. The estimates of the model with independent AR(1) disturbances and dynamic
correlated VAR(1) disturbances are in tables A.1 and A.2, respectively. Impulse responses
at the median of the posterior are in …gure A.1 and the credible sets for the variance
decompositions are in table A.3.
The model has the following equations:
iy ) ct + iy it + Rk ky zt + sgt

yt = (0:82
ct = c1 ct

1

+ (1

c1 )Et ct+1 + c2 (lt

it = i1 it

1

+ (1

i1 )Et it+1 + i2 qt + sit

qt = q1 Et qt+1 + (1
yt =

[ kt

1

zt = [(1

=

+

1 t 1

wt = w1 wt
p
t

=

w
t

= wt

rt =

+ (1

1

(kt

rt

1
1

+ (1

+ (1

t+1

+ sbt )

(rt

Et

t+1

+ sbt )

k1 )it + k2 sit
p
3 t

+ spt

w1 ) (Et wt+1 + Et
lt )

[ l lt + (ct
1

Et

kt + wt )

2 Et t+1

+ zt

kt+1 + wt+1 )

c3 (rt

)lt + sat ]

+ zt + (1

) = ] (lt

kt = k1 kt
t

q1 )Et (lt+1

Et lt+1 )

)[r

t+1 )

w2

t

+ w3

t 1

w4

w
t

+ sw
t

wt + sat
ct

1
t

= ) = (1

= )]
ytp )] + r

+ ry (yt

y

( yt

ytp ) + srt

The reduced-form parameters are linked to structural parameters according to: iy =
(

0:975)ky ; c1 = ( = )(1 + = ); c2 = [(
33

c

1)(W h L =C )=[ c (1 + = )], and c3 =

(1

0:975= , k2 = (1
(

(1

= )=[(1 + = ) c ]; i1 = 1=(1 +

1= p)

w3 =

1

(1

w w1 ;

k1 )(1 +

1

p )(1

p )=

c

w4 = w1 (1

1

)

c

2 ',

1

p [10(

=

); i2 = i1 =

p =(1

w )= f w

1

+

1) + 1]

w )(1

c

c)

2 ',
c

q1 = 0:975

p );

2

=

1

1

, w1 = i1 , w2 = w1 (1 +
[10(

SW

1) + 1]g ,

c
c

, k1 =

= p,
1

= 100(

=

3
c

w );

1),

and ky is the steady-state capital-output ratio and Rk is the steady-state rental rate of
capital,
The structural parameters are:
the steady-state hours worked,

= 100(

1) is the steady-state growth rate, l is

is the steady-state in‡ation rate,

is one plus the share of …xed costs in production,
substitution keeping labor …xed,
stickiness,

l

p

is the elasticity of intertemporal

is the degree of habit formation,

is the wage elasticity of labor supply,

the degree of wage indexation,

c

p

is the discount factor,

w

is the degree of wage

is the degree of price stickiness,

is the degree of price indexation,

parameters, and

SW ,

r , ry and r

y

is

is a positive function of

the steady-state elasticity of the capital utilization adjustment cost function that is ',
is the gross steady-state labor markup,

w

SW

are the monetary policy-rule

is the capital share.

References
Backus David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland (1992). “International Real
Business Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy, 100 (4), 745-775.
Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King (1993). “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium.”
American Economic Review, 83 (3), 315-334.
Basu Susanto, John G. Fernald and Miles S. Kimball (2006). “Are Technology Improvements Contractionary?” American Economic Review, 96 (5), 1418-1448.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Charles M. Kahn (1980). “The Solution of Linear Di¤erence
Models under Rational Expectations.” Econometrica, 48 (5), 1305-1311.
Carter, C. K. And R. Kohn (1994). “On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models.” Biometrika, 81, 541-553.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe and Ellen R. McGrattan (2007). “Business Cycle Accounting.” Econometrica, 75 (3), 781-836.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe and Ellen R. McGrattan (2009). “New Keynesian Models:
34

Not Yet Useful for Monetary Policy.”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
1 (1), 242-266.
Chib, Siddartha (2001). “Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods: Computation and Inference.” In Handbook of Econometrics, edited by J. J. Heckman and E. E. Leamer,
volume 5, chapter 57, pp. 3569-3649.
Chib, Siddartha and Srikanth Ramamurthy (2010). “Tailored Randomized-block MCMC
Methods with Application to DSGE Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 155, 19-38.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1992). “Current Real-Business-Cycle
Theories and Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations.” American Economic Review,
82 (3), 430-450.
Cochrane, D. and G. Orcutt (1949). “Application of Least Squares Regression to Relationships Containing Autocorrelated Error Terms.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 44, 32-61.
Cogley, Timothy and James M. Nason (1995). “Output Dynamics in Real-Business-Cycle
Models.” American Economic Review, 85 (3), 492-511.
Cúrdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford (2009). “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary
Policy.” Columbia University and FRB New York, manuscript.
Dedola, Luca and Stefano Neri (2007). “What does a technology shock do? A VAR analysis
with model-based sign restrictions.”Journal of Monetary Economics, 54 (2), 512-549.
Del Negro, Marco and Frank Schorfheide (2009). “Monetary Policy Analysis with Potentially Misspeci…ed Models. ” American Economic Review, 99 (4), 1415-1450.
Del Negro, Marco, Frank Schorfheide, Frank Smets and Rafael Wouters (2007). “On the
Fit and Forecasting Performance of New Keynesian Models.”Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 25 (2), 123-162.
Durbin, James and Siem J. Koopman (2001). Time Series Analysis by State Space Methods.
Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK.
Evans, Charles L. (1992). “Productivity Shocks and Real Business Cycles.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 29 (2), 191-208.
Fair, Ray S. (2004). Estimating How the Macroeconomy Works. Harvard University Press.
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus (2009). “The Econometrics of DSGE Models.”Working paper.

35

Fisher, Jonas M. (2006). “The Dynamic E¤ects of Neutral and Investment-Speci…c Technology Shocks” Journal of Political Economy, 114 (3), 413-451.
Francis, Neville and Valerie A. Ramey (2005). “Is the technology-driven real business cycle
hypothesis dead? Shocks and aggregate ‡uctuations revisited.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 52 (8), 1379-1399.
Gali, Jordi (1999). “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review, 89 (1), 249271.
Gelman, Andrew and Donald B. Rubin (1992). “Inference from Iterative Simulation Using
Multiple Sequences.” Statistical Science, 7, 457-511.
Gelman, Andrew, John B. Carlin, Hal S. Stern and Donald B. Rubin (1998). Bayesian
Data Analysis. Chapman & Hall / CRC Press.
Geweke, John (1989). “Bayesian Inference in Econometric Models Using Monte Carlo
Integration.” Econometrica, 57 (6), 1317-1339
Geweke, John (1992). “Evaluating the Accuracy of Sampling-Based Approaches to the
Calculation of Posterior Moments.”In J. M. Bernardo et al, eds., Bayesian Statistics
vol. 4, Clarendon Press: Oxford UK.
Geweke, John (2005). Contemporary Bayesian Econometrics and Statistics. John Wiley
and Sons.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell (1997). “Long-Run Implications of
Investment-Speci…c Technological Change.”American Economic Review, 87 (3), 342362.
Griliches, Zvi (1967). “Distributed Lags: A Survey.” Econometrica, 35, 16-49.
Hall, Robert E. (1988). “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.”Journal of Political
Economy, 96 (2), 339-57.
Hall, Robert E. (1997). “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time.”Journal
of Labor Economics, 15 (1), S223-250.
Ireland, Peter N. (2004). “A method for taking models to the data.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, 28 (6), 1205-26.
Jorgenson, Dale W. (1966). “The Embodiement Hypothesis.”Journal of Political Economy,

36

74 (1), 1-17.
Justiniano, Alejandro and Bruce Preston (2010). “Can Structural Small Open Economy
Models Account for the In‡uence of Foreign Shocks?” Journal of International Economics, 81 (1), 61-74.
Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio E. Primiceri (2008). “Potential and Natural Output.”
Working paper.
Kadiyala, K. Rao and Sune Karlsson (1997). “Numerical Methods for Estimation and
Inference in Bayesian VAR-Models.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 12 (2), 99132.
Komunjer, Ivana and Serena Ng (2010). “Dynamic Identi…cation of DSGE Models.” Manuscript.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West (1987). “A Simple, Positive Semi-de…nite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica,
55 (3), 703-708.
Parkin, Michael (1988). “A Method for Determining Whether Parameters in Aggregative
Models Are Structural.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 29,
212-252.
Prescott, Edward C. (1986). “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” FRB Minneapolis Quarterly Reiview, 9-22.
Rabanal, Pau, Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez and Vicente Tuesta (2010). “Cointegrated TFP
Shocks and International Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Reis, Ricardo (2008). “Using VARs to Identify Models of Fiscal Policy: A Comment on
Perotti.” NBER Macoeconomics Annual 2007, 22, 227-236.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1992). “Oligopolistic Pricing and the E¤ects
of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity.”Journal of Political Economy, 100 (6),
1153-1207.
Sargent, Thomas J. (1978). “Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under Rational Expectations.” Journal of Political Economy, 86(6), 1009-1044.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2010). “Business Cycles with a Common

37

Trend in Neutral and Investment-Speci…c Productivity.” Review of Economic Dynamics, forthcoming.
Shapiro, Matthew D. and Mark W. Watson (1986). “Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 3, 111-148.
Sims, Christopher A. (2002). “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models.” Computational Economics, 20 (1-2), 1-20.
Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha. (1998). “Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate
Models.” International Economic Review, 39 (4), 949-968.
Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters (2003). “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area.”Journal of the European Economic Association,
1 (5), 1123-1175.
Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters (2007). “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles:
A Bayesian DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review, 97 (3), 586-606.
Solow, Robert M. (1957). “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 39, 312-320.
Stock, James H. (2010). “The Other Transformation in Econometric Practice: Robust Tools
for Inference.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24 (2), 83-94.
Tierney, L. (1994). “Markov Chains for Exploring Posterior Distributions.” Annals of Statistics, 22, 1701-62.
Uhlig, Harald (2004). “Do Technology Shocks Lead to a Fall in Total Hours Worked?”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2 (2-3), 361-371.
Yogo, Motohiro (2004). “Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution When
Instruments Are Weak.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86 (3), 797-810.
Zellner, Arnold (1962). “An E¢ cient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated Regressions and Test for Aggregation Bias”Journal of the American Statistical Association,
57, 348-368.

38

Table 1. Prior Distributions for RBC model
Parameter
Economic



Densitya

Mode

5

Percentile
50

95

G
G

0.6667
4.8480

0.2347
2.7326

1.1559
5.3290

3.3311
9.2117

Statistical
Panel A. Independent AR(1)s
N
0.7525
0.5141
0.7459
A
N
0.4255
0.1994
0.4297
G
IG2
.00010
.00006
.00015
A
2
IG
0.2297
0.1452
0.4002
G
Panel B. Unrestricted VAR(1)
N
0.7525
0.5070
0.7413
AA
N
0.0000
‐0.0041
0.0001
AG
N
0.0000
‐12.960
‐0.0558
GA
N
0.4255
0.1788
0.4237
GG
IW
.00008
.00006
.00015
AA
IW
0.0000
‐0.0080
0.0000
AG
IW
0.2583
0.2012
0.4820
GG
a. The densities are the gamma (G), normal (N) and the inverse‐Wishart (IW).

0.9356
0.6554
.00050
1.7917
0.9308
0.0041
12.720
0.6540
.00048
0.0081
1.5017

Table 2. Posterior Distributions for RBC model
Parameter
Panel A. Independent AR(1)s
Economic


Statistical
A
G
A
G
Panel B. Unrestricted VAR(1)
Economic


Statistical
AA
AG
GA
GG
AA
AG
GG

Mean

Mode

5

Percentile
50

95

1.4029
0.6184

1.4234
0.4896

0.4970
0.2632

1.2435
0.5471

2.8629
1.2036

0.8173
0.7505
.00014
0.2706

0.8106
0.7518
.00014
0.2475

0.7422
0.6713
.00012
0.1928

0.8174
0.7520
.00014
0.2645

0.8923
0.8234
.00017
0.3684

0.4301
4.8550

0.4304
4.3184

0.2892
1.9072

0.4170
4.6302

0.6060
8.5641

0.9385
0.0048
‐8.62
0.8805
.00013
0.0084
2.0718

0.9355
0.0048
‐8.26
0.8828
.00013
0.0071
1.3527

0.9058
0.0041
‐11.21
0.8362
.00011
0.0045
0.7942

0.9402
0.0049
‐8.50
0.8811
.00013
0.0080
1.6752

0.9656
0.0054
‐6.25
0.9232
.00016
0.0138
4.6432

Table 3. Variance Decompositions in the Smets‐Wouters model
Shock
Investment
productivity

Monetary
Policy

Price
markup

Wage
markup

0.1160
0.082
0.006
0.007

0.065
0.034
0.012
0.014

0.025
0.006
0.268
0.807

0.003
0.014
0.682
0.137

0.191
0.149
0.061
0.022

0.095
0.087
0.055
0.050

0.083
0.059
0.269
0.408

0.163
0.242
0.474
0.443

0.072
0.066
0.080
0.021

0.033
0.033
0.044
0.044

0.034
0.026
0.189
0.321

0.474
0.596
0.304
0.542

0.043
0.041
0.073
0.019

0.019
0.019
0.040
0.037

0.020
0.015
0.172
0.279

0.489
0.558
0.280
0.593

0.392
0.212
0.004
0.020

0.032
0.023
0.002
0.022

0.016
0.007
0.007
0.023

0.053
0.014
0.325
0.638

0.023
0.032
0.564
0.202

0.173
0.069
0.057
0.067

0.066
0.136
0.021
0.056

0.019
0.012
0.029
0.063

0.103
0.046
0.227
0.288

0.308
0.289
0.275
0.386

0.275
0.059
0.199
0.081

0.096
0.097
0.120
0.066

0.011
0.019
0.011
0.060

0.027
0.035
0.059
0.258

0.252
0.484
0.069
0.383

0.287
0.094
0.258
0.175

0.129
0.107
0.142
0.098

0.005
0.016
0.005
0.032

0.011
0.028
0.019
0.145

0.094
0.407
0.036
0.231

Total
Risk
Government
Variable
productivity premium
spending
Panel A. Independent AR(1) disturbances
1‐quarter ahead
Output
0.016
0.289
0.475
Hours
0.421
0.160
0.274
Real wage
0.010
0.016
0.000
Inflation
0.026
0.003
0.001
2‐years ahead
Output
0.177
0. 075
0.184
Hours
0.158
0.075
0.203
0.098
0.018
0.000
Real wage
Inflation
0.050
0.008
0.003
8‐years ahead
Output
0.200
0.023
0.134
Hours
0.064
0.026
0.170
Real wage
0.330
0.011
0.001
Inflation
0.046
0.007
0.004
Unconditional
Output
0.133
0.014
0.208
Hours
0.047
0.015
0.257
Real wage
0.379
0.010
0.001
Inflation
0.044
0.006
0.006
Panel B. Dynamic VAR(1) disturbances
1‐quarter ahead
Output
0.008
0.454
Hours
0.468
0.229
Real wage
0.045
0.036
Inflation
0.054
0.009
2‐years ahead
Output
0.108
0.161
Hours
0.210
0.180
0.300
0.023
Real wage
Inflation
0.058
0.020
8‐years ahead
Output
0.237
0.051
Hours
0.128
0.104
0.452
0.046
Real wage
Inflation
0.068
0.027
Unconditional
Output
0.381
0.044
Hours
0.177
0.089
Real wage
0.456
0.047
Inflation
0.224
0.036

Figure 1. Convergence in simulated RBC model with AR(1) disturbances: random‐walk
Metropolis versus conjugate‐conditionals methods

Figure 2. Impulse response functions in RBC model, median and distributions
Panel A. Independent AR(1)s case

Panel B. Unrestricted VAR(1)

Figure 3. Median impulse response functions in the Smets‐Wouters model, with independent
and correlated disturbances

Table A.1. Prior and posterior distribution for MBC model, independent AR(1) disturbances

l
1

100(

c

w
l
p
w
p

SW

r
SW

ry
r y
A;1
B;1
G;1
EI;1
ER;1
EP;1
EW;1
EP
EW
A
B
G
EI
ER
EP
EW

1))

Dist
N
N
G
G
N
N
B
B
N
B
B
B
B
N
N
B
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
B
B
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2

5%
0.2355
-0.4935
0.4652
0.1111
1.5327
0.8832
0.5242
0.3351
0.7664
0.3351
0.2526
0.2526
0.2526
1.0526
1.0888
0.5701
0.0378
0.0378
0.2178
0.1986
0.2010
0.1869
0.1957
0.1925
0.1967
0.1834
0.1718
0.1718
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291

Prior
Median
0.4000
0.0000
0.6146
0.2368
4.0000
1.5000
0.7068
0.5000
2.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
1.2500
1.5000
0.7595
0.1200
0.1200
0.3000
0.4964
0.4959
0.4994
0.4975
0.4958
0.4983
0.4979
0.5000
0.5000
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823

95%
0.5645
0.4935
0.7931
0.4339
6.4673
2.1168
0.8525
0.6649
3.2336
0.6649
0.7474
0.7474
0.7474
1.4474
1.9112
0.8971
0.2022
0.2022
0.3822
0.7732
0.7805
0.7780
0.7853
0.7764
0.7772
0.7882
0.8282
0.8282
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889

Mode
0.3898
0.0000
0.6873
0.1470
6.1285
1.4058
0.7024
0.7056
1.7248
0.7011
0.5110
0.2645
0.6195
1.6617
1.9834
0.8015
0.0846
0.2257
0.1676
0.9601
0.2021
0.9945
0.7119
0.1698
0.7203
0.9802
0.5470
0.8926
0.2076
3.4472
0.3182
0.2170
0.0615
0.0264
0.0673

Mean
0.3864
0.0003
0.7100
0.1698
6.1955
1.3673
0.7083
0.6756
1.7625
0.6845
0.5137
0.3024
0.6366
1.6628
2.0435
0.8008
0.0884
0.2257
0.1698
0.9609
0.2382
0.9910
0.7147
0.1779
0.7053
0.9794
0.5228
0.8540
0.2143
3.9211
0.3285
0.2272
0.0648
0.0279
0.0701

Posterior
SE
5%
0.0191 0.3523
0.3006 -0.4989
0.1024 0.5454
0.0592 0.0830
1.1311 4.4047
0.1409 1.1508
0.0486 0.6218
0.0701 0.5562
0.5421 0.9467
0.0572 0.5850
0.1259 0.3061
0.1109 0.1438
0.0693 0.5299
0.0764 1.5398
0.1724 1.7654
0.0258 0.7562
0.0207 0.0566
0.0289 0.1788
0.0179 0.1408
0.0139 0.9369
0.1478 0.0274
0.0062 0.9795
0.0570 0.6204
0.0713 0.0604
0.0982 0.5365
0.0098 0.9616
0.1363 0.2866
0.0641 0.7331
0.0257 0.1758
2.0819 1.0706
0.0376 0.2723
0.0453 0.1621
0.0078 0.0528
0.0051 0.0203
0.0117 0.0526

Median
0.3881
0.0020
0.7071
0.1643
6.1516
1.3589
0.7122
0.6788
1.7220
0.6872
0.5142
0.2899
0.6326
1.6608
2.0392
0.8020
0.0872
0.2254
0.1695
0.9618
0.2206
0.9922
0.7149
0.1787
0.7098
0.9807
0.5291
0.8653
0.2122
3.6287
0.3255
0.2223
0.0642
0.0275
0.0693

95%
0.4145
0.4954
0.8843
0.2765
8.1194
1.6113
0.7807
0.7861
2.7179
0.7735
0.7203
0.5046
0.7585
1.7914
2.3341
0.8405
0.1243
0.2739
0.1998
0.9822
0.5267
0.9986
0.8089
0.2934
0.8575
0.9931
0.7358
0.9367
0.2596
7.8164
0.3946
0.3092
0.0786
0.0371
0.0906

Table A.2. Prior and posterior distributions for MBC model with correlated VAR(1) disturbances

l
1

100(

1))

c

w
l
p
w
p

SW

r
SW

ry
r y
A;A;1
A;B;1
A;G;1
A;EI;1
A;ER;1
A;EP;1
A;EW;1
B;A;1
B;B;1
B;G;1
B;EI;1
B;ER;1
B;EP;1
B;EW;1
G;A;1
G;B;1
G;G;1
G;EI;1
G;ER;1
G;EP;1
G;EW;1
EI;A;1
EI;B;1
EI;G;1
EI;EI;1
EI;ER;1
EI;EP;1
EI;EW;1

Dist
N
N
G
G
N
N
B
B
N
B
B
B
B
N
N
B
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

5%
0.2355
-0.4935
0.4652
0.1111
1.5327
0.8832
0.5242
0.3351
0.7664
0.3351
0.2526
0.2526
0.2526
1.0526
1.0888
0.5701
0.0378
0.0378
0.2178
0.1787
-0.2779
-0.2820
-0.2886
-0.2817
-0.2768
-0.2859
-0.2828
0.1942
-0.2874
-0.2864
-0.2799
-0.2786
-0.2873
-0.2914
-0.2791
0.1996
-0.2826
-0.2816
-0.2839
-0.2794
-0.2904
-0.2901
-0.2882
0.1922
-0.2855
-0.2782
-0.2901

Prior
Median
0.4000
0.0000
0.6146
0.2368
4.0000
1.5000
0.7068
0.5000
2.0000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
0.5000
1.2500
1.5000
0.7595
0.1200
0.1200
0.3000
0.4932
-0.0033
-0.0025
-0.0049
0.0021
-0.0006
0.0016
0.0012
0.4910
0.0048
-0.0036
0.0076
-0.0013
-0.0018
-0.0008
0.0017
0.4931
0.0010
0.0036
0.0016
-0.0026
-0.0039
-0.0019
-0.0026
0.4911
0.0030
0.0022
0.0012

95%
0.5645
0.4935
0.7931
0.4339
6.4673
2.1168
0.8525
0.6649
3.2336
0.6649
0.7474
0.7474
0.7474
1.4474
1.9112
0.8971
0.2022
0.2022
0.3822
0.7524
0.2907
0.2848
0.2828
0.2944
0.2862
0.3046
0.2923
0.7528
0.3024
0.2867
0.3013
0.2933
0.3019
0.2920
0.2847
0.7622
0.2724
0.2758
0.2958
0.2871
0.2980
0.2762
0.2836
0.7543
0.2898
0.2846
0.2830

Mode
0.2753
-0.0000
0.6090
0.2335
5.1223
1.4438
0.5250
0.6400
0.9592
0.5150
0.4756
0.2083
0.3518
1.4191
1.5055
0.7611
0.0564
0.2250
0.0395
0.9302
-0.0088
-0.2914
-0.0961
0.0222
-0.0588
0.1247
0.0693
0.6947
-0.1308
-0.4177
-0.5817
0.2720
0.1370
-0.1899
-0.0630
0.7551
0.4629
-0.0990
0.1392
0.3713
0.0595
-0.0385
-0.1085
0.6312
-0.1230
0.0318
0.0213

Mean
0.2964
-0.0001
0.6559
0.2645
5.3067
1.5421
0.6873
0.5441
1.2453
0.5832
0.5619
0.2912
0.4891
1.4946
1.7383
0.7535
0.0801
0.1913
0.0994
0.9141
0.0096
-0.2712
-0.0922
-0.0142
0.0074
0.0872
0.2099
0.2397
-0.1692
-0.8591
-1.2483
0.7074
0.4821
-0.1787
-0.0196
0.6769
0.1924
0.0240
0.1926
0.1419
0.0643
-0.0324
-0.0779
0.6918
-0.0878
0.0180
0.0756

Posterior
SE
5%
0.0201 0.2623
0.2976 -0.4911
0.1024 0.4937
0.0907 0.1304
1.1751 3.3973
0.2238 1.2028
0.0629 0.5668
0.0545 0.4560
0.5283 0.4435
0.0628 0.4772
0.1284 0.3453
0.1105 0.1324
0.0585 0.3944
0.0734 1.3765
0.1887 1.4361
0.0325 0.6979
0.0302 0.0330
0.0305 0.1418
0.0183 0.0713
0.0348 0.8578
0.0239 -0.0366
0.0521 -0.3588
0.1051 -0.2675
0.1290 -0.2228
0.1573 -0.2537
0.0995 -0.0767
0.1217 0.0385
0.2056 -0.0321
0.1635 -0.4602
0.4121 -1.5980
0.6686 -2.4081
0.6548 -0.2060
0.4196 -0.1093
0.0394 -0.2445
0.0252 -0.0596
0.0660 0.5686
0.1345 -0.0144
0.1482 -0.2175
0.1760 -0.0969
0.1190 -0.0489
0.0280 0.0203
0.0175 -0.0638
0.0387 -0.1463
0.0575 0.5961
0.0964 -0.2495
0.1008 -0.1424
0.0912 -0.0741

Median
0.2976
-0.0003
0.6525
0.2563
5.2952
1.5300
0.6965
0.5430
1.2086
0.5845
0.5644
0.2789
0.4885
1.4930
1.7327
0.7552
0.0787
0.1909
0.0984
0.9137
0.0135
-0.2702
-0.0899
-0.0162
0.0096
0.0873
0.1974
0.1961
-0.1550
-0.8148
-1.2064
0.6163
0.4332
-0.1779
-0.0191
0.6770
0.1843
0.0228
0.1927
0.1394
0.0632
-0.0305
-0.0749
0.6928
-0.0852
0.0148
0.0781

95%
0.3271
0.4878
0.8295
0.4259
7.2588
1.9303
0.7745
0.6356
2.1817
0.6841
0.7687
0.4932
0.5857
1.6180
2.0606
0.8035
0.1314
0.2420
0.1311
0.9719
0.0399
-0.1876
0.0753
0.2012
0.2625
0.2513
0.4282
0.6489
0.0707
-0.2752
-0.2460
1.9356
1.2362
-0.1155
0.0187
0.7846
0.4281
0.2704
0.4808
0.3405
0.1117
-0.0083
-0.0199
0.7854
0.0646
0.1882
0.2184

ER;A;1
ER;B;1
ER;G;1
ER;EI;1
ER;ER;1
ER;EP;1
ER;EW;1
EP;A;1
EP;B;1
EP;G;1
EP;EI;1
EP;ER;1
EP;EP;1
EP;EW;1
EW;A;1
EW;B;1
EW;G;1
EW;EI;1
EW;ER;1
EW;EP;1
EW;EW;1
EP
EW
A
B
G
EI
ER
EP
EW

Dist
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
B
B
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2
IG2

5%
-0.2710
-0.2781
-0.2786
-0.2735
0.2035
-0.2715
-0.2837
-0.2843
-0.2901
-0.2960
-0.2846
-0.2898
0.1988
-0.2785
-0.2686
-0.2822
-0.2895
-0.2707
-0.2839
-0.2856
0.1819
0.1718
0.1718
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291
0.0291

Prior
Median
0.0030
0.0038
-0.0002
0.0015
0.4908
0.0017
0.0003
-0.0005
0.0049
-0.0016
-0.0007
0.0014
0.4934
0.0025
-0.0004
-0.0018
0.0008
0.0043
-0.0002
-0.0028
0.4911
0.5000
0.5000
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823
0.0823

95%
0.2851
0.2789
0.2843
0.2936
0.7542
0.2855
0.2837
0.2877
0.2851
0.2891
0.2847
0.2903
0.7435
0.2842
0.2937
0.2723
0.2891
0.2966
0.2809
0.2851
0.7657
0.8282
0.8282
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889
0.3889

Mode
-0.0283
-0.0810
0.0075
0.1007
0.1292
-0.0099
0.0423
-0.0107
-0.0007
-0.0273
-0.0007
0.0253
0.8069
-0.0243
0.0099
-0.0008
0.0124
-0.0247
-0.0082
0.0002
0.9735
0.5134
0.9665
0.2431
0.4768
0.2563
0.0582
0.0497
0.0296
0.0855

Mean
-0.0330
-0.0335
0.0192
0.1143
0.1838
0.0011
-0.0052
-0.0058
0.0014
-0.0036
0.0072
0.0062
0.6629
-0.0082
0.0055
0.0029
0.0194
-0.0024
-0.0194
-0.0035
0.9422
0.3397
0.6739
0.2257
5.1996
0.2584
0.0912
0.0542
0.0257
0.0724

Posterior
SE
5%
0.0174 -0.0624
0.0148 -0.0620
0.0276 -0.0260
0.0438 0.0459
0.0771 0.0577
0.0842 -0.1391
0.0640 -0.1122
0.0058 -0.0157
0.0055 -0.0071
0.0102 -0.0204
0.0171 -0.0207
0.0399 -0.0570
0.0842 0.5205
0.0222 -0.0484
0.0083 -0.0083
0.0081 -0.0091
0.0132 -0.0003
0.0261 -0.0434
0.0544 -0.1077
0.0532 -0.0854
0.0331 0.8826
0.1212 0.1422
0.1094 0.4751
0.0284 0.1828
3.3725 0.6226
0.0310 0.2120
0.0334 0.0473
0.0066 0.0444
0.0052 0.0181
0.0132 0.0528

Median
-0.0327
-0.0308
0.0190
0.1126
0.1832
0.0017
-0.0040
-0.0056
0.0012
-0.0035
0.0078
0.0051
0.6660
-0.0057
0.0055
0.0027
0.0183
-0.0034
-0.0193
-0.0061
0.9481
0.3382
0.6877
0.2235
4.8122
0.2562
0.0854
0.0537
0.0252
0.0712

95%
-0.0052
-0.0149
0.0652
0.1896
0.3102
0.1384
0.0976
0.0034
0.0107
0.0126
0.0336
0.0735
0.7962
0.0235
0.0191
0.0149
0.0429
0.0427
0.0676
0.0867
0.9830
0.5421
0.8264
0.2756
11.5165
0.3126
0.1552
0.0659
0.0351
0.0961

Table A.3. Variance Decompositions, Smets‐Wouters model, 5% and 95% in the posterior
Shock
Investment
productivity

Monetary
Policy

Price
markup

Wage
markup

.072, .168
.053, .120
.002, .013
.001, .023

.043, .099
.021, .058
.003, .030
.005, .033

.016, .038
.002, .011
.208, .341
.680, .907

.000, .017
.006, .028
.583, .756
.069, .222

.107, .299
.092, .229
.004, .107
.028, .065

.051, .162
.048, .145
.024, .099
.026, .091

.054, .124
.036, .093
.293, .389
.181, .544

.069, .297
.122, .403
.332, .624
.315, .557

.034, .143
.034, .121
.031, .164
.005, .064

.014, .072
.015, .069
.018, .087
.021, .083

.017, .065
.014, .049
.112, .323
.223, .435

.315, .633
.420, .752
.147, .520
.408, .674

.012, .106
.012, .096
.025, .157
.004, .062

.005, .051
.006, .048
.013, .084
.015, .076

.006, .048
.005, .035
.084, .306
.146, .405

.201, .762
.227, .828
.108, .512
.429, .786

.259, .488
.152, .275
.000, .026
.001, .062

.003, .076
.003, .050
.000, .016
.001, .074

.001, .060
.000, .031
.000, .032
.001, .086

.021, .114
.003, .041
.219, .440
.482, .790

.005, .073
.014, .075
.419, .695
.111, .308

.093, .288
.035, .136
.007, .182
.009, .170

.017, .190
.036, .289
.003, .116
.005, .180

.002, .098
.001, .074
.001, .125
.007, .182

.028, .221
.006, .144
.097, .404
.187, .426

.173, .460
.145, .487
.110, .477
.247, .528

.143, .428
.022, .154
.094, .323
.017, .194

.027, .225
.033, .263
.032, .243
.013, .184

.001, .053
.003, .099
.001, .050
.009, .173

.008, .084
.008, .120
.021, .156
.167, .377

.110, .460
.286, .671
.028, .162
.241, .523

.162, .432
.030, .250
.135, .398
.059, .321

.030, .254
.037, .252
.038, .264
.033, .203

.001, .030
.003, .085
.000, .028
.006, .116

.002, .048
.007, .103
.004, .071
.048, .267

.022, .308
.154, .636
.008, .125
.080, .436

Total
Risk
Government
Variable
productivity premium
spending
Panel A. Independent AR(1) disturbances
1‐quarter ahead
Output
.004, .044 .234, .355
.397, .545
Hours
.349, .491 .123, .210
.229, .326
Real wage
.002, .029 .004, .049
.000, .001
Inflation
.011, .051 .001, .012
.000, .003
2‐years ahead
Output
.109, .264 .047, .137
.121, .267
Hours
.101, .226 .047, .144
.147, .269
Real wage
.028, .231 .003, .046
.001, .002
Inflation
.029, .083 .006, .026
.000, .007
8‐years ahead
Output
.111, .323 .013, .047
.066, .246
Hours
.039, .103 .014, .055
.093, .279
.121, .590 .004, .027
.000, .002
Real wage
Inflation
.023, .079 .002, .022
.001, .010
Unconditional
Output
.048, .278 .005, .031
.051, .642
Hours
.018, .088 .005, .035
.076, .674
.130, .708 .004, .024
.000, .005
Real wage
Inflation
.018, .081 .002, .018
.002, .014
Panel B. Dynamic VAR(1) disturbances
1‐quarter ahead
Output
.000, .067 .355, .560
Hours
.383, .547 .173, .303
Real wage
.014, .101 .006, .093
Inflation
.021, .104 .000, .067
2‐years ahead
Output
.035, .220 .082, .300
Hours
.110, .323 .069, .342
Real wage
.152, .458 .008, .090
Inflation
.021, .120 .001, .130
8‐years ahead
Output
.098, .395 .023, .121
Hours
.059, .250 .037, .254
.311, .590 .009, .126
Real wage
Inflation
.028, .142 .004, .124
Unconditional
Output
.189, .552 .010, .126
Hours
.076, .391 .028, .225
.309, .607 .005, .134
Real wage
Inflation
.074, .431 .007, .116

Figure A.1. Median impulse response functions in the Smets‐Wouters model, with
independent and correlated disturbances

Variables: dY is output growth, dCo is consumption growth, dlo is investment, dWo is wage growth, Lo is
hours, pio is inflation, and Ro is the nominal interest rate.
Disturbances: total factor productivity (A), risk premium (B), government spending (G), investment‐
specific productivity (EI), nominal interest rates (ER), price markups (EP), wage markups (EW).

