NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUILIBRIUM FICTIONS:
A COGNITIVE APPROACH TO SOCIETAL RIGIDITY
Karla Hoff
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 15776
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15776

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

We thank Roland Bénabou and Varun Gauri for valuable comments, and Alana Bevan and Rebecca
Wieters for excellent research assistance. Financial support from the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged.
This paper is a much shortened version of an earlier paper. The views expressed here are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the World Bank or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Karla Hoff and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Equilibrium Fictions: A Cognitive Approach to Societal Rigidity
Karla Hoff and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 15776
February 2010
JEL No. N10,O43,Z13
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses the role of ideas in economic change, combining economic and historical analysis
with insights from psychology, sociology and anthropology. Belief systems shape the system of categories
(“pre-confirmatory bias”) and perceptions (confirmatory bias), and are themselves constrained by
fundamental values. We illustrate the model using the historical construction of racial categories.
Given the post-Reformation fundamental belief that all men had rights, colonial powers after the 15th
century constructed ideologies that the colonized groups they exploited were naturally inferior, and
gave these beliefs precedence over other aspects of belief systems. Historical work finds that doctrines
of race came into their own in the colonies that became the US after, not before, slavery; that out of
the “scandal of empire” in India emerged a “race theory that cast Britons and Indians in a relationship
of absolute difference”; and that arguments used by the settlers in Australia to justify their policies
towards the Aborigines entailed in effect the expulsion of the Aborigines from the human race. Racial
ideology shaped categories and perceptions in ways that we show can give rise to equilibrium fictions.
In our framework, technology, contacts with the outside world, and changes in power and wealth
matter not just directly but because they can lead to changes in ideology.
Karla Hoff
World Bank
MC 3-301
1818 H St NW
Washington DC 20433
khoff@worldbank.org
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 814
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Equilibrium Fictions: A Cognitive Approach to Societal Rigidity
Karla Hoff and Joseph E. Stiglitz

Psychologists, sociologists, and anthropologists have emphasized that the
cognitive frames within which people view the world are both collectively held
and malleable over time. Category systems have cultural roots and influence what
attributes people perceive (surveys are Eric Margolis and Stephen Laurence 1999
and Bertrand, Chugh, and Mullainathan 2005). The cognitive frames operative in a
culture unconsciously influence, as well, how people interpret whatever information they register (see, e.g., Mary Douglas 1987). Yet economists have generally
neglected the role played by socially constructed cognitive frames. For instance, in
rational expectations (hereafter, RE), each individual is assumed to use all relevant
information in an unbiased way.
However, two economists have called attention to social constructs in accounting for development. Gunnar Myrdal (1968) argued that “irrational beliefs”
in South Asia bred social inertia. Douglass North (2005), drawing on cognitive
science, argued that perception is always an interpretation that is shaped by the
belief systems of the society. Drawing on economic history, he argued that those
belief systems are a key determinant of economic development.

1

Recently, economic theorists have investigated the consequences of the endogeneity of cognitive frames (see, e.g.,Roland Bénabou and JeanTirole 2006 and
Bénabou 2008). They have modeled individuals as trading off the motivational or
hedonic benefits of suppressing certain kinds of information, against the possible
biases in action that that may cause. Recent discussions of macro-economics have
assigned a role to Keynesian “animal spirits”—emotions that influence confidence—giving almost unfettered scope to changes in beliefs.
In our approach, the infinite set of potentially observable data and the
infinite ways in which that data could be processed are limited by the finite set of
socially constructed categories that make up a part of what are called ideologies.
These categories are a state variable, which cannot be changed in the short run.
These “lenses” even affect views about whether there is a need for change. Incorporating this perspective helps explain why institutional change can be so difficult
and societies so rigid. A set of beliefs that may have been functional at one time,
but is no longer so, can persist after the economics/technology that had led to the
adoption of the beliefs has changed. We explain how even a fiction can be supported as an equilibrium. In the equilibrium, individuals’ beliefs affect their
behavior and perceptions. We show that allowing for “equilibrium bias” in perceptions increases the range of beliefs that can be sustained in equilibrium and may
explain the existence across time periods and across societies of very different

2

ideologies. This approach allows for a larger and more robust set of equilibria than
can be supported by a RE model. On the other hand, the set of equilibria in our
approach is much more constrained than the “animal spirits” equilibrium, which
presumes that virtually any set of beliefs could be sustained.
While this paper does not provide a fully articulated model of the evolution
of ideologies, it does present a framework that suggests some key determinants.
Because belief systems affect the equilibrium, e.g., by shaping perceptions, elites
have a strong incentive to influence people’s beliefs. In contrast, in a RE equilibrium, this is not relevant—cognitive frames play no role. But beliefs may also
constrain the set of equilibria relative to what might emerge if elites could determine the rules in their own self-interest. The elites cannot simply “choose” the
cognitive frames that work best for themselves (nor can non-elites simply choose
the beliefs that might work best for themselves). The task of “choosing” for themselves and imposing on others cognitive frames is more complicated and is itself
constrained by higher-order beliefs. Those in “power” control some beliefs, and
while they may attempt to do so they typically do not control all the determinants
of the evolution of beliefs. Cultures are always contested.
Incorporating beliefs as state variables provides part of a general theory of
social change that is markedly different from traditional theories, in which only
capital and the distribution of power and wealth are state variables. If beliefs

3

change, the equilibrium can change, with no change in the “fundamentals.”
We use the example of the construction of racial categories to illustrate the
idea of an equilibrium social construct (ideology). Section I discusses historical
instances. Section II presents a model in which differentially biased cognition
helps sustain the idea of race. Section III formalizes the notion of an equilibrium
social construct.

I. Historical examples of the collective determination of racial categories
The construction of race to justify slavery. Skin color was not initially an
organizing principle in the colonies that became the US. There were multiple categories of coerced labor, and freedom and slavery were not yet associated with
persons of white and black skin. In the 17th century,
“a substantial number of Virginia’s Negroes were free or became free. And
all of them, whether servant, slave, or free, enjoyed most of the same rights
and duties as other Virginians. … They could sue and be sued in court. They
did penance in the parish church for having illegitimate children.”
(Morgan,1972, p. 18)

Racist codes and beliefs emerged in the late seventeenth century, as the economics of slavery changed. After 1660, Virginia’s death rate, which had been
“comparable only to that found in Europe during the peak years of a plague,” fell
sharply. Two consequences were that “an investment in slave labor was much
more profitable than an investment in free labor,” and the engrossment of
4

Virginia’s lands kept many former servants landless and impoverished (Morgan
pp. 19, 25). In Bacon’s Rebellion of 1676, Virginia’s “Poore Endebted Discontented and Armed” turned against the elite in a plundering expedition that spread
across the entire state (p. 22). The fear of unrest contributed to the decline in the
reliance on indentured servants and to the abridgement of the liberties of Africans.
“To keep as slaves black men who arrived in that condition was possible and
apparently regarded as plain common sense” (p. 25). Some states forbade anyone
to teach even a free black to read and write. In 1712, South Carolina passed laws
that became the model for slave codes in the South. They forbade schooling,
travelling, church attendance, land ownership, and inter-marriage. Yet given
emerging Enlightenment ideologies, oppression came to need justification. David
Brion Davis (1975) argues that at the very point in time when large numbers of
men and women were beginning to question the moral legitimacy of slavery, the
idea of race came into its own. Out of this process, the project of creating two
fictions emerged. The first fiction was the biological inequality of human beings.
The second was the natural discontinuity between the categories, “white” and
“black.” Many states went the way of the Virginia statute which, as revised in
1924, “classified as white only a person ‘who has no trace whatsoever of blood
other than Caucasian’” (Hollinger 2003, p, 1369). In these ways, race emerged as a
social construct.

5

The British imperial narrative in India. The East India Company in the 18th
century “had become a rogue state: waging war …and collecting revenue over
Indian territory” that produced massive private fortunes and contributed to famine in
Bengal in 1770 (Nicholas B. Dirks, 2006, p. 13, 252). Parliamentary inquiries
brought the scandal to national attention. They culminated in the trial of the governor of India, Warren Hastings. In his opening speech, Edmund Burke declared, “‘I
impeach him in the name of the English Constitution, which he has violated and
broken,--I impeach him in the name of Indian Millions, whom he has sacrificed to
injustice.’” Burke protested against Hastings’ “‘Geographical morality’”: “‘We
think it necessary in justification of ourselves to declare that the laws of morality are
the same everywhere’” (Dirks, pp. 105, 196,107). But over the nine years of the
trial, the idea that British law applied to agents of Britain in India was salvaged not
by finding Hastings guilty (he was acquitted) but instead by inventing a new interpretation of India: “the social, political, cultural, and economic buoyancy of India in
the 18th century was not just forgotten but suppressed.” “Built on fabrication,
colonial history imputed barbarism to justify, and even ennoble, imperial ambition.”
“Scandal became normalized in the assumptions and categories of modernity itself”
(Dirks, pp. xii,.5, 29). What emerged was a “race theory that cast Britons and
Indians in a relationship of absolute difference” (Dirks, 2001, p. 133).

6

The emergence of a racial idiom for Native Americans. In the mid-17th
century, it was still common to argue that “‘Nature knowes no difference between
Europe and Americans in blood, birth, bodies, &c’” (Chaplin 1997, p. 245 citing a
1656 source). But by the 18th century,
“[t]he English contended that the Indians were ill-adapted to any region”
[and] “used that explanation to usurp the very habitat of Americas’ preColumbian natives…. English discourses of nature and the human body
were fundamental to their imperial project. The proof was in the body.”
“These beliefs [of Indians’ physical inferiority] were not universal, nor did
they fail to elicit disagreement…But a good measure of the persuasiveness
of the argument for English physical superiority was the fact that it appeared
even in the writings of colonists who were sympathetic to Indians and who
otherwise argued for native hardiness” (Chaplin, pp. 248, 232-233, 250).

The “expulsion” of Australian Aborigines from the human race. Aborigines were classified as British subjects. “The early governors [in the 17th century]
wanted to see them converted to Christianity and farming …—an idea loathed and
resisted by every white [settler], no matter what his class” (Robert Hughes, 1987,
p. 275). One historian characterizes the arguments used by the settlers to justify
their policies towards the Aborigines as entailing the expulsion of the Aborigines
from the human race (Humphrey McQueen, 1971, p. 115). Colin M. Tatz (1972, p.
99) describes over 30 statutes in Australia that ascribe certain characteristics,
usually negative, to Aborigines, including the inability to manage their own affairs
and property and to govern their communities.

7

By the Age of Revolution, oppression both called for a justification and
narrowed the basis on which such a justification might rest to one based on the
slaves’ or the natives’ innate inferiority, 1 a “presumed incapacity for freedom…
that crystallized into a racial one with all its subsequent pseudobiological
trappings” (Barbara Fields, 1982, p. 162). As Montesquieu quipped, “‘It is impossible for us to suppose that these beings should be men; because if we suppose them
to be men, one would begin to believe that we ourselves were not Christians’”
(Davis, p 302). This dilemma did not occur, or at least not to the same extent, in
earlier periods and in other regions. In antiquity, natural philosophy in general
stressed “an underlying, universal human similarity” (Chaplin, p. 230) and yet saw
no wrong in enslaving prisoners of war and colonized peoples. When the
Athenians landed on the island of Melos, the Melians asked for mercy, invoking
their goodness in the eyes of the gods. But the Athenians killed all the men, sold
the women and children as slaves, and colonized the island, justifying their action
this way: “right, as the world goes, is only in question between equals in power,
while the strong do what they can and the weak suffer what they must”
(Thucydides c. 431 BC, Book 5.89).
After the 15th century, racial categories were constructed and given precedence over other aspects of belief systems in which slavery might be viewed as

1

As noted by David Hume (1751, p. 45).

8

unacceptable. The categories came to be represented as “God-given.” They were
entrenched and embedded in individuals’ minds through symbolism and protocol.
Strictly enforced codes of interracial etiquette reminded the subordinate group of
its place. For example, in Australia, “the racialized designation of space expressed
and reproduced social and ontological categories on which colonial society was
founded” (Gillian Cowlishaw 1999, p. 63, emphasis added). In the Jim Crow
South, the unwritten rules that governed day-to-day interactions across race lines
have been seen “not only as a form of social control but also as a script for the
performative creation of culture and of ‘race’ itself”(Jennifer Ritterhouse, 2006, p.
4). As Charles Evers, brother of the murdered civil rights activist Medgar Evers,
explained in his autobiography, “‘Our mothers began telling us about being black
from the day we were born’” (cited in Ritterhouse, p.5). Histories in which the
subordinate group had played a different role, were suppressed (e.g., the Indians in
pre-colonial Bengal or the history of biracial political parties in the US in the
1880s).

II. A Model of Inequality Based on Fictions
This section expands on Olivier Compte and Andrew Postlewaite (2004)’s
model of confidence-enhanced performance and biased perception to show how a
fiction can be maintained in equilibrium. The model rests on three hypotheses,

9

each supported by empirical evidence. The first is called confirmatory bias: People
tend to misread evidence as additional support for initial hypo-theses. Experiments
demonstrate “how providing the same ambiguous information to people who differ
in their initial beliefs on some topic can move their beliefs farther apart” (see
Matthew Rabin and Joel L. Shrag 1999 for a review and model). This bias can also
explain how individuals, with favorable prior beliefs about themselves, can
maintain an inflated view of themselves.
We call the second hypothesis pre-confirmatory bias: When people draw
inferences, they begin with a specification that posits certain categories, e.g., racial
categories, that they do not individually choose (Glenn Loury 2002, ch. 2). The
third hypothesis is that self-confidence boosts performance. For example, in three
separate experiments, Pamela K. Smith et al. (2008) find that the perception that
one is low in the social hierarchy lowers performance in complex tasks.
A recent set of experiments with junior high school boys in India illustrates
the interaction among these hypotheses. Children in castes that were traditionally
Untouchable can solve mazes as well as high-caste children (Hoff and Pandey
2006). Yet when students’ caste identities are publicly revealed, the performance
of the low caste falls both absolutely and relative to the performance of the high
caste. We infer that in other possible worlds, the Untouchables could have been an
equal or dominant group. There are no intrinsic ability differences by caste. It is

10

clear that a social construct has affected behavior.
In our model, individuals undertake a series of projects, at each of which they
can fail or succeed. Confidence, based on a person’s perception φ of his empirical
frequency of past success, affects the probability of success ρ in future attempts, in
ways that may be beyond his conscious control. Figure 1 shows the relationship ρ =
ρ(φ). Under the assumptions of RE, there would be a unique equilibrium at the point
marked RE, where the 45 degree line intersects the curve ρ(φ).

Figure 1. Equilibrium with rational expectations (at RE) and with biased
perceptions (at points r and g)
ρ, success probability
1
ρ(ϕ)
RE

g
r
ϕ(ρ;γgreen )

ϕ(ρ;γred )
ϕ, confidence

45°

0

1

However, this will not be an equilibrium if an individual “forgets,” or
rationalizes as uninformative of future success, his failures with probability γ > 0.

11

Frequencies of success are random variables. But in the long run, a true frequency
of success ρ will translate into a perceived frequency of success whose distribution
is concentrated around a single value, which we denote by φ(ρ; γ).
There are two races, red and green. The critical hypothesis is that reds are less
able to “forget” experiences of failure: γred < γgreen. The interpretation of this hypothesis is as follows. Pre-confirmatory bias means that racial categories are salient—
the reds see themselves as red, the greens as green. The reds have historically been
treated as inferior, and this affects their perception of themselves—how they
interpret experiences of failure (confirmatory bias). The reds see failures as confirming their (socially constructed) perceptions of inferiority, while the greens dismiss a
large fraction of their failures because such failures are not consistent with their
prior beliefs.
Equilibrium is the intersection of the production function, ρ(φ), and a perception function, φ(ρ; γ). In the equilibrium, beliefs generate a level of performance
that is consistent with those beliefs, given the bias in perceptions. The result is that a
social construct will be self-fulfilling. The equilibrium at point g in the figure
corresponds to better performance than that at r.

12

III. A Model of an Equilibrium Fiction and the Dynamics of Changes in
Beliefs
The preceding section modeled a short-run equilibrium, given a social
construct, namely, a racial ideology. Here we present a simple model in which
beliefs, however they originate, affect behavior, and we formalize the idea of an
equilibrium social construct. There are three levels of “cognition” or belief systems
in the model:

first, a “lens” through which individuals process data (called

ideology), which we denote by S; using that lens, a set of beliefs about particulars,
e.g. I am competent, which we denote by Ai for agent i; and third, an überideology
that affects individuals’ judgments about the adequacy of their ideology (U). Letting
boldface letters denote vectors (so e.g., A corresponds to the vector (A1,A2, A3,…)),
the structure at time t is

At = F(Qt , St),

Qt = G(Xt , At),

and

Xt = H(At , St) .

The short-run equilibrium modeled in the previous section takes the state variable St
as fixed. Dropping the subscript t on S, an individual’s particular beliefs at time t (Ai,t)
are a function of outcomes Qt and the “lens” S. Outcomes are a function of behaviors
by each agent (denoted Xi,t) and particular beliefs. And individual behaviors are a
function of the particular beliefs as mediated through the lens. For example, in the
Indian experiments in puzzle-solving, the “behavior” may have been effort. Particular
beliefs Ai,t may affect outcomes in other ways, too: Low-caste individuals may
13

generate worse outcomes, e.g., number of puzzles solved, when their caste identities
are publicly revealed, because of anxiety or other psychological factors.
The second and third equations can be combined to give

Qt = G[H(At, S), At] = Z(At ,S).
A short-run equilibrium, e.g., an equilibrium fiction, is defined by a value of A that
satisfies, for a particular S:

Q* = Z(A*, S)

and

A* = F(Q*, S).

This equilibrium departs from rational expectations in just one respect: It posits
biased perceptions of which an individual is not aware. The bias arises because of
the ideology. This pair of equations states that, given an S (ideology), people will
generate outcomes that are consistent with their beliefs.
There is a dynamic process, which generally occurs at a slow speed:
St+1 = χ (St, Ut, Tt, Vt),
where Ut is the überideology, Tt is the “economic regime” (technology and wealth
distribution), and Vt is a vector of other variables, e.g., encounters with other civilizations and their belief systems. We will not model in detail the evolution of
ideologies (St ). That process, and even more so the evolution of the überideology,

14

are idiosyncratic. 2 Losing a war might lead to a change in views about racial
superiority. An encounter with a different civilization—people who see the world
through a different lens—might make individuals aware of the possibility that their
own lens is distorted. As we noted earlier, there may be pressures for ideologies to
change when the elites discover that there is another belief system that does a
better job in maximizing their well-being. The elites may not have sufficient
control over the processes by which ideologies get formed to do so, though of
course, they can use rituals and censorship to exert some influence on the ideology
operative in society. In a democratic society, how that is done may be affected by
the “median voter” as much as by elites. But there is no reason to believe that
belief systems evolve as if they were chosen by a critical decision maker. They
may be part of an (inefficient) Nash equilibrium, one that does not serve well the
interests of any group.
Ideologies and individual observations of outcomes, themselves mediated
through ideology, can provide a set of “conceivable” belief systems, among which
individuals choose: Si,t+1 is chosen by individual i at time t + 1 from a set Ω(St, At,
Ut, Λ(Q,A,S)), where the set is defined (constrained) by the previous ideology and
beliefs, the überideology, and the perception of outcomes Λ as mediated through
ideology and beliefs. This is methodological individualism. These “choices,” like
2

For instance, notions of equality may have been championed by new economic interests to promote free markets,
but the evolution of these ideas may also have been affected by the evolution of deeper, philosophical or religious
ideas. The framework we set forth is consistent with these alternative interpretations.

15

other individual decisions, are affected by the social construct. But these individual
“choices” get aggregated into a new social construct:
� (S1,t, S2,t, S3,t,…Si,t, …,Ut, Tt, Vt).
St+1 = Φ

There is a medium-term equilibrium in which there is no tendency for

society’s belief system to change. The beliefs that we model here occur at two
levels: individuals have beliefs about the nature of society, racial differences, etc.,
but those beliefs are turned into social constructs (“belief systems”) through the
kinds of mechanisms illustrated in Section I, including legislation and rituals. To
consider this in the context of race, what individuals can conceive of is affected by
the prevailing ideology. It is difficult in a racist society not to use “racial categories.” But one can still believe that racial categories should be outlawed and that
those who are disadvantaged by them would “choose” such a frame. The societal
frame may change much more slowly. It may pay no attention, for instance, to the
views of the “reds”—the relevant frames are dictated by laws and systems of information-gathering, and those may be controlled by the greens. Alternatively, the vast
mass of individuals who neither benefit nor lose from racism may “switch” their
beliefs in a process of contagion—when a racist marries a liberal, their children may
become liberal. The überideology of equality may make racist categorizations unacceptable to these individuals. That could lead to a system in which there is a sudden

16

tilting of the societal perception when, for instance, those who find a racist
categorization unacceptable become a majority.

IV. Conclusion
Ideologies (belief systems, including those that determine the admissible categories, the “lenses” through which the world is perceived) are constrained by
“higher-order beliefs” that can be thought of as intrinsic values (or an überideology). Beliefs about the acceptability of slavery were affected by the überideology of equality.

Notions of equality made it necessary to invent and

institutionalize various racial categories to justify certain economic relations. But
changed notions of equality eventually made the notion of race as a basis of
slavery—and eventually as an admissible category for other purposes—
unacceptable.
We don’t explain changes in überideology, just as we don’t explain changes
in technology. Changes arise partly from internal dynamics—a dialectic of ideas—
and partly from changes in economics and in the opportunities to influence belief
systems. It is not just economics. “Motivated beliefs” may help explain change, but
not in the standard way. The Protestant Reformation emphasized individuals’ relationship with God, not mediated by authority; and the equality of men at least
arguably evolved out of these religious conceptions. Ideas have their own dynamic.

17

For economists to ignore the factors that affect how we process information as part
of the interpretation of economic change would be as wrong as to ignore the evolution of technology itself.
We agree with the sociologists and anthropologists on the need to incorporate social constructs (belief systems) into our models of institutions and
development. But these scholars have left out that social constructs need to be
understood as an equilibrium. Ideology is a state variable in our theory of change
and development (as also in that of Greif and Laitin 2004). The theory we have
sketched helps explain societal rigidities. Beliefs shape not only behavior but
perceptions. Beliefs typically do not change overnight. If there were a different set
of beliefs that might be good for societal elites—or even for society as a whole—
no one (including the government) could manage that change. Untouchability, for
example, has persisted, at least in some parts of India, despite its abolition. At the
same time, the approach of this paper provides elements of a theory of societal
change. Technology, contacts with the outside world, endogenous changes in
power and wealth, matter not just directly but because they can lead to changes in
ideology.

18

References
Bénabou, Roland. “Groupthink: Collective Delusions in Organizations and
Markets.” Manuscript, Princeton University, 2008.
Bénabou, Roland and Tirole, Jean. “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive
Politics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121(2), pp. 699-746.
Bertrand, Marianne; Chugh, Dolly and Mullainathan, Sendhil. “Implicit
discrimination.”American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2005,
95(2), pp. 94-98.
Chaplin, Joyce E. “Natural Philosophy and an Early Racial Idiom in North
America: Compar-ing English and Indian Bodies.” William and Mary
Quarterly, 1997, 44(1), pp. 229-252.
Compte, Oliver and Postlewaite, Andrew. “Confidence-Enhanced Performance.”
American Economic Review, 2004, 94(5), pp. 1535-57.
Cowlishaw, Gillian. Rednecks, eggheads, and blackfellas: A study of racial power
and intimacy in Australia. Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1999.
Davis, David Brion. The problem of slavery in the age of revolution 1770-1823.
New York, Oxford University Press, 1975.
Dirks, Nicholas B. Castes of mind: Colonialism and the making of modern India.
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2001.
Dirks, Nicholas B. The scandal of empire: India and the creation of imperial
Britain. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 2006.
Douglas, Mary. How institutions think. Syracuse, Syracuse University Press,
1986.
Fields, Barbara J. “Ideology and Race in American History” in Region, race, and
reconstruction, Ed. J. Morgan Kousser and James M. McPherson, New
York, Oxford University Press. 1982, pp. 143-47.
19

Greif, Avner and Laitin, David. “A theory of endogenous institutional change,”
American Political Science Review, 2004, 98(4), pp. 633-52.
Hoff, Karla and Pandey, Priyanka. “Discrimination, Social Identity, and
Durable Inequalities.” American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, 2006, 96(2), pp. 206-11.
Hollinger, David A. “Amalgmation and Hypodescent: The Question of Ethnoracial
Mixture in the History of the United States.” American Historical Review,
2003, 108 (5), pp. 1363-1390.
Hughes, Robert. The fatal shore: The epic of Australia’s founding. New York,
Knopf, 1987.
Hume, David. An enquiry concerning the principles of morals. London, A.
Millar, 1751.
Laurence, Stephen and Margolis, Eric. “Concepts and Cognitive Science.” In
Concepts: Core reading, eds. Margolis and Laurence, Cambridge, MIT
Press, 1999, ch. 1.
Loury, Glenn C. The anatomy of racial inequality. Cambridge, Harvard
University Press, 2002.
McQueen, Humphrey. “Racism and Australian Literature.” In Racism: The
Australian experience, ed. Frank S. Stevens, Vol 1: Prejudice and
Xenophobia, New York, Taplinger Press, 1971, pp. 115-122.
Myrdal, Gunnar. Asian drama: An inquiry into the poverty of nations. New York,
Pantheon, 1968.
North, Douglass C. Understanding the process of economic change. Princeton,
Princeton University Press, 2005.
Rabin, Matthew; Schrag, Joel L. “First Impressions Matter: A Model of
Confirmatory Bias.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114(1), pp. 3782.
20

Ritterhouse, Jennifer. Growing up Jim Crow: How black and white Southern
children learned race. Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Press,
2006.
Smith, Pamela, Nils B. Jostmann, Adam D. Galinsky, and Wilco W. van Dijk.
“Lacking Power Impairs Executive Functions.” Psychological Science,
2008, 19 (5), pp.441-47.
Tatz, Colin M. “Aborigines: Law and Political Development.” In Racism: The
Australian Experience, ed. Frank S. Stevens, Vol 2: Black versus White,
New York, Taplinger Press, 1972, ch. 8.
Thucydides, The Peloponnesian war. Trans. Richard Crawley. New York, Modern
Library, 1951.

21

