                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            PROPERTY RIGHTS, LAND CONFLICT AND TENANCY IN BRAZIL

                                             Lee J. Alston
                                           Bernardo Mueller

                                         Working Paper 15771
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15771


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2010




The authors acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation Grant 0528146. Mario Miranda
and Adam Canton provided able research assistance organizing the data set. We received useful comments
 from Jonathan Conning, Peter Houtzager, Wolfgang Keller, A. Mushfiq Mobarak, Charles Mueller,
Décio Zylbersztajn, and participants at a seminar at the University of Illinois and participants at the
following conferences: IV Research Workshop on Organizations and Institutions in São Paulo 2009,
and the International Society for New Institutional Economics 2009 Berkeley. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Lee J. Alston and Bernardo Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Property Rights, Land Conflict and Tenancy in Brazil
Lee J. Alston and Bernardo Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 15771
February 2010
JEL No. H0,J41,J43,K0,K11,L23,O1,O13,O17,O38,O43,O54,Q1,Q15,Q24,Q28

                                               ABSTRACT

Tenancy has been a means for labor to advance their socio-economic condition in agriculture yet in
Brazil and Latin America, tenancy rates are low compared to the U.S. and the OECD countries. We
test for the importance of insecure property rights in Brazil on the reluctance of landowners to rent
because of a fear of expropriation arising from land reform. Since 1964, the Land Statute in Brazil
has targeted rental lands for redistribution. The expropriation of farms, resulting from land conflicts,
is currently at the heart of land reform policies in Brazil. Land conflicts are a means for landless peasants
to bring attention to land reform agencies for the need for redistribution. Land conflicts may also signal
to landowners that their land is at risk for expropriation. Utilizing data across all counties in Brazil,
we found that land conflicts reduce the likelihood of tenancy. This result implies: a reduction in agricultural
efficiency; a reduction in the well-being of potential tenants, now landless peasants; and an expansion
of the agricultural frontier through deforestation. Because of endogeneity between land tenancy and
land conflict we instrument land conflict with Catholic priests.


Lee J. Alston
Program on Environment and Society
Institute of Behavioral Science
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0483
and NBER
Lee.Alston@colorado.edu

Bernardo Mueller
Departamento de Economia
Universidade de Brasília
Campus Darcy Ribeiro, ICC Norte
Brasília-D.F. 70910-900
Brasil
bmueller@unb.br
1. Introduction
        Compared to the rest of the world, farmers in Brazil rely relatively little on tenant
contracts.1 In agriculture, career mobility is associated with moving up the agricultural ladder
from working for wages to renting to owning [Alston and Ferrie 2005]. Alone, this fact may not
present a puzzle but coupled with the large number of landless peasants and large amounts of
unused land the question is: why don’t landowners with unused or under‐utilized land
negotiate land rental contracts with the landless.2 In Brazil this avenue for advancement has
been hurt by a reluctance of owners to rent in areas experiencing land conflict. The lack of
rentals is an important issue because Brazil is geographically a large country, roughly the size of
the continental U.S. and has an expanding agricultural frontier, some of which is cutting into
the Amazon. If the lack of land rentals is pervasive across Brazil and also signals inefficiency in
production, the total magnitude is likely to be large when summed across the country. Some
scholars have attributed the lack of rentals to a fear by landlords that renters will become de
facto owners because of existing legislation making it extremely costly to evict tenants, if they
are in default with their rental payments [Buanin et al. (2008); Conning and Robinson (2007) ,de
Janvry, Macours and Sadoulet (2002); de Janvry and Sadoulet (1989); Deininger (2003); and
Macours (2002).] A similar fear of rentals may arise from land reform projects [de Janvry,
Macours and Sadoulet (2002), Rezende (2006)]. For example, in Brazil, land should be put to
productive use or it may be subject to compensated expropriation [Alston, Libecap and Mueller
(1999)]. Renting land could be deemed unproductive use by land reform agencies and as a
result owners would be fearful of renting [Buanin et al. (2008), Brandão et al. (2001); Deininger
and Chamorro (2003); Jamarillo (2001); World Bank (1994: 199‐200)]. An additional explanation
for the lack of rentals rests on the labor and capital intensity of different crops. Some land may
not be worth the opportunity cost of capital, and the return to applying labor via a rental
contract may be close to zero. As such landowners may opt to leave land vacant as a potential
1
  The use of land rentals is relatively low across all of Latin America. de Janvry, Macours and Sadoulet (2002)
present tables showing the importance of land rentals across the world and for certain countries in Latin America.
Data exhibited in Hayami and Otsuka (1983: 9) show that in 1970 Latin America only had 11.8% of farmland in
tenancy while North America had 63.4%, Europe 41.0%, Africa 32.2% and Asia 16%.
2
  The MST (Landless Peasant Movement) estimates that there are 4 million landless peasants in Brazil. However,
this estimate includes all who are ‘demanding land’ and is broader than those with actual aptitude for agriculture
and the intention to stay on the land.
                                                         2
store of value or in some cases collateral for credit to be used elsewhere. Alternatively, if
farmers are fearful that land may be invaded and expropriated if left idle, they might opt to
rent to demonstrate use and possession, particularly if the landlord has reason to trust the
renter. To the extent that land conflict and land reform policies reduce land rentals and
encourage expansion of the agricultural frontier into the Amazon, deforestation will result. By
estimating the impact of land conflict on land rentals we can better judge the deficiencies in
current land reform policies and this can be a guide for better policies in the future. Better land
reform policies can be trebly important: 1) Lives can be saved and poor people’s lot improved if
tenancy is a step on the agricultural ladder; 2) land reform policies can improve the productivity
of agriculture in Brazil; and 3) land reform policies can slow the rate of deforestation in the
Amazon, which holds the largest stock of forest in the world.
         We test for the impact of land conflict on land rentals by using municipio (county) level
data from the Brazilian censuses along with data on land conflicts from the Pastoral Land
Commission (CPT). In Section 2 we give a brief overview of the theoretical literature on tenancy
contracts. In Section 3 we discuss the specific hypotheses to be tested for the Brazilian case. In
Section 4 we describe the data and in Section 5 we present the results and discussion. We offer
concluding remarks in Section 6.


2. Theoretical Hypotheses about Tenancy
         The theoretical literature on tenancy is voluminous. We assume that the standard
explanations for the efficiency of sharecropping and tenancy – share and fixed‐rent ‐ are now
public knowledge. By standard explanations we mean risk and transaction costs.3 In short,
depending on the endowments of landlords and workers as well as their preferences towards
risk, there exist conditions such that the optimal operator status can be either, owner‐operator




3
 By transaction costs we mean the information, monitoring and enforcement costs associated with contracting.
They include issues of moral hazard and adverse selection. We stick to the Coase and Williamson pedigree in
referring to the costs as transaction costs. We also follow in the footsteps of the agricultural economists analyzing
tenancy in the early part of the 20th century. For a review of the some of the earlier work of agricultural
economists see Alston and Higgs (1982).
                                                          3
(with only household or with hired wage workers); sharecropper; share tenant; or fixed‐rent
tenant.4
        In the U.S. in the 19th and early 20th centuries there was a life‐cycle to contract choice
which agricultural economists referred to as the agricultural ladder. The ‘ladder’ referred to the
movement with age from the statuses of wage worker to tenant to owner [Alston and Ferrie
(2005); Alston and Kauffman (1997) and (1998)]. Climbing the rungs on the ladder meant
acquiring human and physical capital as well as improving socio‐economic status. Most
transaction cost explanations for contract choice rest on the costs of information, negotiation,
supervision and enforcement. The plethora of explanations based on transaction costs (or
market failures) arose because many economists initially took to heart the Marshallian
inefficiency argument and then had difficulty explaining why various forms of tenancy and
sharecropping have been so ubiquitous over time and space (Marshall, 1890). Now economists
are turning the issue on its head: why are there some regions of the world that rely too little on
tenancy and sharecropping, given the existence of transaction costs? Consistent figures are
difficult to find but both North America and Europe stand out in the high percentage of land
and farm establishments rented. For example, de Janvry, Macours and Sadoulet (2002; pp. 24‐
25) present data showing that farmers in the U.S. leased 45% of agricultural land in 1988 and in
Europe the figures for 1995 range from a low of 12% for Ireland to above 60% for Belgium,
France and Germany. Figure 1 shows the evolution of tenancy in Brazil from 1920 to 1995. The
total number of farm establishments that were rented fell nearly half from 1970 (20%) to 1995
(11%), while the corresponding area fell from a high of 10% in 1940 to a low of 2.5% in 1995.
                                                    [Figure 1 here]
        Most explanations for the lack of rentals rest on the insecurity of property rights.
Insecure property rights may reduce the prevalence of rentals because of difficulties in conflict
resolution. If it is difficult to evict tenants who do not meet the rental terms, landlords may
respond by using wage labor or by only renting to those they trust such as relatives and




4
 de Janvry, Macours and Sadoulet (2002) provide a very helpful table of the ‘contextual conditions’ under
which each land tenure status is observed.
                                                        4
friends.5 In some countries tenants receive the right to purchase the land that they rent and not
surprisingly landlords may be reluctant to rent.6 Some governments prohibit land rentals on
land redistributed through land reform projects, either de facto (because there are frequently
delays in assigning formal titles) or de jure because of a fear of absentee beneficiaries.7
         Conning and Robinson (2007) analyze the effect of property rights insecurity on
agricultural organization by linking a model of contract choice to a political economy model of
potential property rights reform. In the contract choice model the key feature is the existence
of an essential non‐traded factor (skill) that is required for production in addition to land and
labor. Because this factor cannot be traded, the efficient organization of agriculture requires
farm sizes that are proportional to the distribution of this factor, with land being leased from
those who do not have enough of the essential factor to those with an excess relative to their
own holding of land. This first‐best situation will hold if property rights are secure. But if the
agents have reasons to fear that future events might bring a change in the security of property
rights, such as a land‐to‐the‐tiller reform, then the agents might optimally chose to forgo the
potential gains of entering into tenancy contracts so as to avoid the losses that will be borne if
the threat does in fact materialize. The approach thus includes two market imperfections ‐ a
non‐traded factor and insecure property rights– with both reform and the extent of tenancy
being endogenously determined. The most important testable hypothesis that emerges from
the model is that anything that increases the threat to property rights will lower the incidence
of land rentals. We will test this hypothesis with county level data for Brazil in Section 4.
         A similar approach that integrates the choice of agricultural organization to the political
economy of reform is presented by de Janvry and Sadoulet (1989) to analyze what they call ‘the
lost game of Latin American land reform.’ The equilibrium they see prevailing in most of Latin
America is one where the threat of reform in the 1960s induced large and medium sized farms
to modernize and increase their productivity so as to preempt any form of expropriation, which
in turn increased their economic and political power thus hindering any future attempts at

5
  Macours (2002) found that in the Dominican Republic landlords were more likely to rent to those in their same
social network.
6
  This was the case in the Pampas in Argentina under Peron (Gallo, 2003); and in the Dominican Republic following
legislation passed in 1972 (de Janvrey, Macours and Sadoulet, 2002).
7
  Brazil is probably not atypical in the long delays associated with assigning formal titles. In Mexico, until recently,
the government forbade the renting of ejidos.
                                                           5
reform even though these could potentially lead to large net social gains. Although the authors
refer to distributive land reform, the argument fits perfectly the history of tenancy in Brazil
where legislation put into place in the early 1960s was explicitly hostile to tenancy and
sharecropping contracts thus inducing landowners to expel masses of tenants from their lands
in the following decades (further details in section 3).
         In addition to the fear by landlords of expropriation (de facto or de jure) there may be
factors on the demand side limiting rentals. It may be that many ‘would be’ renters lack either
the physical capital or human capital necessary to profitably rent land. We are less persuaded
by the physical capital constraints because presumably rental markets for physical capital
should arise, though we recognize that there are transaction costs associated with abuse in
renting capital that may preclude the emergence of active rental markets. On the human
capital side many potential renters may lack the skills necessary to successfully rent. This may
be particularly important where the region is shifting to new crops, e.g. niche crops like flowers
or even a switch from tree crops like coffee to annual crops like soybeans.



3. Hypotheses about Tenancy in Brazil

         3.1 – Introduction
         In this paper we utilize a dataset that includes all counties in Brazil and contains
variables that measure both the agro‐climatic/geographic determinants of contract choice, as
well as the political economy determinants. We will estimate a system where the dependent
variable of each equation is the percent of total farm area that is held under each of the four
categories included in the Brazilian Agricultural Census: fixed rent, sharecropper, owner and
occupant (no formal title).8 In order to measure the extent to which contract choice is
determined by the natural and physical endowment of each county, we will use as independent
variables the percent of total farm land that is placed under cotton, rice, coffee, cane, beans,


8
  In the Brazilian Agricultural Census fixed rent are those properties that belong to a third party but are worked by
a producer who pays a previously set fixed quantity in cash or its equivalent in products. Sharecroppers work
properties that belong to a third party in exchange of a previously set proportion of the production. Occupants are
those on land that belongs to some third party (may be public land) with no payment in exchange, which might be
the case of squatting or of consensual cession of the use of the land. Owned land belongs to the producer on the
land.
                                                          6
manioc, corn and soy beans. Each crop has its own physical attributes and agro‐climatic
requirements which determine where they can be grown and the best farm size, given relative
prices. At the same time each crop’s attributes along with attributes of the landowner imply
that a given type of contract would be best for dealing with the problems inherent in its
production. Coffee, for example, is a perennial crop, by nature labor intensive, has few
economies of scale and consequently tends to be produced more productively by smaller
owner‐run farms than by fixed rent contracts.9 Other variables that control for the impact of
endowments, capturing elements of geography, transport costs and climate, are the distance to
state capital, transport costs to São Paulo, existence of train stations and latitude and
longitude.10
        The major objective of the empirical test is to ascertain whether the choice of
agricultural organization in terms of contract choice is essentially determined by endowments,
that is agro‐climatic and geographic factors, or whether political economy factors also have an
effect, distorting the choice of contract by limiting the extent of tenancy despite its superiority
in terms of efficiency, given the crop mix in the county. To this end we use data collected by the
Pastoral Land Commission of the Catholic Church (CPT) to measure the extent of land‐related
violence in each county from 1985 to 1995. In those places that experienced violence and
conflict, land owners and claimants expect a greater probability of intervention from the
government, generally in the form of expropriation and redistribution of land to landless
peasants through the creation of settlement projects (Alston, Libecap and Mueller, 1999a,
1999b, 2000, 2008). The struggle for land in Brazil since the mid 1980s has essentially revolved
around the strategy by organized groups of landless peasants, such as the Landless Peasants
Movement (MST), of selectively invading properties that are legally vulnerable to expropriation
(low productivity and/or large area) so as to attract the government and force it to expropriate
in their favor. The impact of conflicts affects not only the decision of whether to plant or not,
but also whether to engage in tenancy contracts. One of the main reasons for this is that the
Land Statute of 1964, which still underpins all of the land related legislation, imposes very rigid

9
  Potentially long term leases could deal with the perennial nature of coffee but perennial leases may be more
problematic with respect to the land statute and constitution’s emphasis on beneficial use, issues that we discuss
shortly.
10
   Other factors such as soil type, temperatures, rain, sunshine etc are partially captured by state dummies.
                                                         7
limits for tenancy contracts and explicitly states that farms in rental arrangements may be
preferable candidates for redistribution.11 The origins of this bias in the legislation may be a
reaction to the historically very unequal distribution of wealth and power in the Brazilian
countryside. Nevertheless, as noted in World Bank (1994: 199):
         … the perverse effect is to reduce access to exactly those people the regulations were
         designed to protect. In addition, the Land Statute contains other provisions that relate
         the incidence of renting and sharecropping to the possibility of expropriation of farms,
         that is, the law provides that "expropriation... will be applied to: ... areas with high
         incidence of renters, sharecroppers and squatters." The threat of expropriation may
         have been much more effective in constraining the rental market and sharecropping
         arrangements than the provisions that regulate such arrangements. This seemed to be
         particularly true when claims for land reform were increasing.
         Another strong legal impediment to tenancy in Brazil is the 1963 Rural Worker Statute
that extended the set of legal labor benefits already held by urban workers to those in
agriculture (Rezende and Kreter, 2007).12 The Statute set regional minimum wages, established
the 13th salary, holidays, payment for overtime, 48‐hour workweek and limited the employers’
acceptable justifications for firing. It is argued by several authors that even though this
regulation was not well enforced, it was far from innocuous and the imposition of these
encumbrances led landowners to dispense hordes of rural workers, both tenants and wage
workers and to switch towards using temporary workers [Saint, 1980; Ribeiro and Stolf, 1975;
Nichols, 1971, IPARDES 1978; Carvalho, 1991].
         Given this nature of land and labor policy in Brazil, our expectation is that the variable
that measures conflict will be negatively related to both the percentage of area in fixed rent
and sharecropping and positively related to the area in owner‐farmed properties, even after
controlling for endowments. Although labor legislation and those parts of the land legislation
that directly refer to tenancy impose impediments to this type of contracting, land reform
legislation may provide incentives in the other direction. As noted above, land reform today in
Brazil starts with invasion of unproductive properties by organized landless peasant groups with
the government providing land reactively. In this scenario it may make sense for a landowner


11
   For a very good discussion of the hostility towards tenancy arrangements in Brazilian legislation see Rezende
(2006, section 8). See also Romeiro and Reydon (1994).
12
   To the present day Brazil possesses very progressive labor laws conceding a wide set of benefits and privileges to
rural and urban workers. Labor justice in Brazil almost always decides in favor of the employee, which at least
reduces uncertainty. However these benefits make for more rigid labor markets and may increase unemployment.
                                                         8
who wants to hold land but not yet put it to use, to lease the land as a means to make it
productive and thus immune to expropriation.13 Our results will thus allow us to test which
effect of conflicts predominates in Brazil or if they cancel each other out. If the coefficient is
found to be positive and statistically significant for fixed rent and sharecropping, then we can
conclude confidently that land reform provides incentives for landowners to enter into more
rental arrangements than they would in the absence of conflicts, and the low levels of tenancy
in Brazil would be even lower without conflicts. This result would be in line with that found in
Ghana by Besley (1995), in Uganda by Place and Otsuka (2002), in Paraguay by Carter and
Olinto (2003), in Africa by Pinckney and Kimuyu (1994) and for Brazil by Vertova (2006). Finally,
if we find the coefficient of conflicts in the fixed rent and sharecropping equations to be
negative, this will be strong evidence of a perverse effect of land legislation on the choice of
agricultural contract leading to inefficiencies of the type predicted in the models by Conning
and Robinson (2007) and de Janvry and Sadoulet (1989).14 It is possible, or course, that
different impacts prevail in different regions, for different types of producers and in different
periods of time. We will test for these possible variations where data allows.Before turning to
the results, it is necessary to address the problem of simultaneity between contract choice and
conflicts.

         3.2 – Instruments for the First‐stage Estimation of Conflict

         Our major objective is to determine the relative impacts of conflicts and endowments
on contract choice. However, there is a potential endogeniety of conflicts that would render
OLS estimates inconsistent, given that land invasions and other forms of violence may be more
probable in areas where there is a greater incidence of tenancy arrangements and farms
without formal title. This endogeneity is in fact confirmed by a Hausman‐Wu test which will be

13
   During much of the 1970s and 1980s the lack of a more highly developed financial system meant that land
ownership was a widely used instrument to hedge against inflation. This resulted in large areas of unproductive
latifunidia despite the possibility for the owners to gain twice by renting the land out to productive use while still
fulfilling its financial objective. Rezende (2006) argues that this outcome is a consequence of the hostility of the
agrarian legislation towards tenancy arrangements.
14
   Pande and Udry (2006) provide a very detailed review of the literature on the effect of property rights on
economic outcomes in agriculture in developing countries. In Table 5 they summarize numerous studies for many
different countries. The results in the literature vary considerably leading the authors to conclude that “… land
titling and registration typically increase agricultural productivity and farm investment. However, the extent of
increase depends upon the details of the titling program and the pre‐existing land tenure system.”
                                                           9
presented in the results section. Therefore we need to find appropriate instruments for conflict
in order to estimate a first‐stage equation that will allow us to control for the potential
simultaneity. These instruments must be correlated with conflicts but should have no direct
effect on contract choice.

           The dependent variable of the second‐stage regression is contract choice in 1996 (the
last agricultural census available with county level data). Because we want to determine the
impact of conflict on contract choice, the conflict data aggregates all land‐related conflicts in
each county from 1985 to 1995.15 Thus an instrument which is correlated with conflict should
be situated in the 1980s. An examination of the nature of rural conflicts in Brazil indicates the
crucial role of organized rural movements. The literature on these movements in the late 1970s
and early 1980s identifies a key role played by the Catholic Church, suggesting that a possible
instrument for conflicts could be the magnitude of the presence of the church in a given
county. The politics behind the struggle for land in this period was not so much, as one may
expect, a contest between poor rural communities against the military state, but rather a
campaign by the military‐technocratic elite against regional oligarchies and local elites that
resisted the modernization of the countryside seen by the government as essential for the
development of the country (Houtzager, 2001). The government sought to empower the rural
communities by encouraging rural unions that would, under its tutelage, organize the poor and
give the state a stronger presence in rural areas:

           The military‐technocratic elite extended the developmental state into the countryside in
           an effort to modernize the agrarian sector and, in doing so, sought to replace an
           oligarchic pattern of authority based on traditional and clientelist forms of social
           control, and in which agricultural wage laborers and small farmers in various forms of
           land tenure were effectively excluded from existing labor legislation, social security, and
           national law generally. (Houtzager, 2001:16)

           In a parallel but separate effort the Catholic Church, which was transforming into the
“most progressive Church in Latin America” (Bruneau, 1985: 271), having made in the late
1970s a ‘preferential option for the poor’, became instrumental in organizing groups of landless
peasants to demand their rights (Mainwaring and Wilde, 1989). As noted by Houtzager (2001:
23‐24):

15
     Note that this gives some element of dynamics to our estimation despite it being a cross‐section.
                                                           10
           The church was an ideal institutional host. It is a transnational institution with firm roots
           in rural communities. It is able, on the one hand, to garner critical resources,
           information, and political support from national and international sources and, on the
           other, it is a local actor represented by the Bishop, the parish priest and local pastoral
           agents. Progressive clergy and lay activists in Brazil were able to mobilize rural social
           groups (primarily small farmer and peasant groups) and local resources through the
           church's impressive associational web, its own elaborate organizational structure, and a
           popular religious identity. The church's myriad pastoral programs, the CPT and other
           church entities, linked community leaders and activists to each other and to the national
           movements of the left emerging in the transition. …The religious content of its
           organizing initiatives resonated with the prevailing belief system in rural communities
           and allayed the fears of community members of being labeled communists and agitators
           by local authorities and the military. Religion conferred a degree of legitimacy and
           provided protection from repression by local elite groups and the national state. This
           depth of the church's involvement in organizing rural social groups and its direct, self‐
           conscious, sponsorship of these groups' involvement in a national movement,
           distinguishes the church as institutional host from the church as a simple ally.

           This key role of the Church in organizing rural communities is highlighted by one of the
founders and still currently the main leader of the MST, João Pedro Stédile:
           The CPT (Pastoral Land Commission) was the practical application of the Theology of
           Liberation, which was an important contribution to the landless peasants’ struggle from
           the ideological point of view. The priests, pastoral agents and pastors discussed with the
           peasants the need for them to organize themselves. The Church stopped doing
           messianic work and saying to the peasant: ‘Wait and you will go to heaven.’ Now they
           started saying ‘You have to get organized and fight to solve your problems here on
           earth’ (quoted in Menezes Neto (2007).
           This instrumental role of the Catholic Church in enabling the rural organizations
that would change the nature of the struggle for land after 1985 is also recognized by
several other authors, such as Adriance (1991, 1994, 1995), Hewitt (1990) and Krischke
(1991), Mainwaring (1986), Maybury‐Lewis,(1994). Therefore a variable that measures
the strength of the church’s presence in a given county during the 1975‐1985 period
would be expected to correlate with the existence of conflicts over land. We thus use
the number of priests per hectare in a county in 1985 as a proxy of the church’s
presence.16

           In order for priests to be an appropriate instrument for conflict in our contract
choice regression it is necessary to show that there is no direct impact of priests on
contract choice. Because our argument depends on the validity of the instruments we

16
     The sources and description of the data used will be provided in the next section.
                                                           11
present several arguments to justify the orthogonality of priests to contract choice. First
of all it is necessary to make it clear that the instrument’s validity depends on there
being no direct link between priests and choice of land contracts, that is fixed rent,
sharecropping, occupied and land used by the owner. A connection between priests and
conflicts does not invalidate the instrument. On the contrary it is precisely the channel
through which priests affect contract choice. What cannot happen for our argument to
stand is that the church systematically allocates priests based on criteria where the
proportion of farms in each contract category is a significant component. Note also that
our contract choice variable refers to land and not labor. If the Church allocates priest
according to areas where there are tensions regarding labor relations, that does not
invalidate our instrument. Both our contract choice variable and our conflict variable
refer exclusively to land‐related issues and not labor related issues. The Pastoral Land
Commission data does have information on labor‐related conflicts, but we do not
incorporate those in our conflict variable. Similarly, farms under any of the contract
choice categories (fixed rent, sharecrop, occupied and owner) can have wage laborers
and problems between workers and those that hired them. If the Church does in fact
take into account the presence of rural strife when allocating priests, it is much more
probable that they will target areas where there is land conflict and labor unrest rather
than land contract type. In fact there are several other issue areas that compete for the
Church’s interest. Besides the Pastoral Land Commission the Church has more than 25
other Pastoral Commissions, with themes such as children, imprisoned, health,
migrants, elderly, sobriety, family, Aids, etc. Several of them existed in the early 1980s.
Also during this period the Catholic Church started losing believers to rapidly growing
evangelical groups. The allocation of priests is potentially affected by all these interests
of the church, further reducing the probability that land tenure is a major determinant.

       Furthermore, although the total number of priests increased by 16% in Brazil
from 1985 to 1995, the correlation across municipios in those two years is 97%
suggesting that the allocation of priests remained very stable in the 10 years prior to our
contract choice variable. Contributory factors for this inertia are the reluctance of

                                                 12
priests to move to smaller cities in the interior, and the restraining effect of
infrastructure, such as churches and priest’s quarters on changes in priest allocation.
During the same period the correlation of the tenancy variables was much lower, 0.41
for sharecropping and 0.72 for fixed rent, suggesting a much greater variability over
time of these variables than that of priests. Finally, in order to ascertain that priests is an
appropriate instrument we will show that the same results hold if instead of the number
of priests per rural population in 1985 we use the data for 1975, that is 20 years before
the land contract variable.

       In order to better capture the catalyzing effect of priests over rural organization
we will interact our priest variable with another variable that measures the
‘frontierness’ of the county. The idea is that frontier areas are more contentious, with
less well‐defined property rights than areas that are already well established (Garcia‐
Jimeno and Robinson, 2009). Similarly, in these areas the priests will suffer less
monitoring from hierarchical superiors that tend to be less progressive and will thus
have greater liberty to pursue more radical interventions in line with Liberation
Theology. This strategy will allow us to identify how the effect of priests on conflicts
varies depending on the socio‐political nature of the county in question.

       In order to measure the ‘frontierness’ of a given county we take advantage of
the fact that over time the number of municipios in Brazil has greatly increased through
the subdivision of counties into two or more autonomous entities. This movement has
lead to an increase from 643 counties in 1872 to 5,507 in 2000. The evolution of the
number of counties shown in Figure 2 suggests that the creation of new counties
accompanies the expansion of the economic, demographic and agricultural frontiers
(Reis, Pimentel and Alvarenga, 2009). As the frontier expands there is a natural
tendency for political‐administrative decentralization by creating new counties out of
localities within the original municipio. Our index of ‘frontierness’ explores this
correlation to create a measure of which municipios have undergone a greater process
of frontier expansion. The subdivisions that take place over time have always made
comparisons of county‐level data over time very difficult. Luckily there has recently

                                                  13
been an effort to create minimum comparable areas (MCA) that aggregate the data in
such a way that makes comparison possible (IBGE, 1984; Reis, Pimentel and Alvarenga,
2009). Figure 3 shows the MCAs for 1920‐2000. The current subdivision of municipios in
light grey lines shows how some MCAs are composed of a large number of current
counties. In our empirical tests we use the minimum comparable areas for 1970‐2000
which aggregate the 5,507 counties of 2000 into 3659 comparable areas. The index of
‘frontierness’ is created by counting the number of municipios of 2000 that are in each
of these MCAs. The great majority of MCAs (2894 out of 3659) did not undergo any
modification from 1970 to 2000, indicating a consolidated frontier process. The
remaining 765 MACs underwent varying number of subdivisions, with the distribution
varying from 482 MCAs that subdivided twice to one that subdivided 52 times. This
variable will be used in the conflict equation both to access its own impact on conflict as
well as interacted with the priest data. An alternative to try to capture the same effect is
the distance from the state capital, which will also be used, however the frontier index
is superior as the furthest places are not always where the frontier has expanded the
most.

                                          [Figure 2 here]

                                          [Figure 3 here]

        Another instrument that will be used to account for the possible endogeneity of
conflicts in the contract choice equation is the percent of seats in each county assembly that
were won by the MDB (Brazilian Democratic Movement) in the 1982 election and by the PT
(Worker’s Party) in 1996. Each of these parties was the main opposition party in each of these
years. The logic is similar to that of using the number of priests. In counties where the
opposition had a greater influence there would be greater ease for progressive ideas and
organization to thrive, leading to higher chances of invasions and land‐related conflicts
(Houtzager 2001, 25‐26; Ondetti, 2008: 52‐53). Here again, for the instrument to be
appropriate it is necessary to argue that political parties do not have a direct effect on the
choice of land contract. As was the case for the Church`s interests, it is much more probable
that political parties were concerned with more salient issues such as jobs, redistribution,
                                                 14
public services, etc., or even land and labor conflicts than with type of agricultural contracts. In
any case we present the results with and without the use of opposition parties as instruments.

4. Data

          Our estimation procedure, presented in the next section, involves a first‐stage
regression to obtain predicted level of conflicts per hectare in each county, and then a second
stage where contract choice is the dependent variable. This involves four general groups of
variables which we describe briefly here leaving the details to Appendix 1. As noted above the
observations are at the level of minimum comparable areas for the period 1970‐2000, which
comprises a total of 3659 observations. Some of the variables were available for downloading
from IPEADATA (www.ipeadata.gov.br) in the MCA format, but other variables, such as the
conflict and priest data, and even some of the agricultural census variables had to be
painstakingly aggregated to fit the MCA format.17

          The first group of variables is from the Agricultural Census (IBGE). This includes the
contract choice variables (% of total farm land), crop mix (% of total farm land), land use
variables (natural forest, planted forest, permanent crops, temporary crops, pasture, etc, all in
% of total farm land), average size of farms (hectares), tractors per hectare. We use agricultural
data for both 1995 and 1985, sometimes to calculate growth rates.

          We acquired conflict data from the Pastoral Land Commission (CPT) of the Catholic
Church. The CPT released data on conflicts in yearly reports since 1985. The data cover threats,
murders, murder attempts and occupation, by municipio. We used this data to create a simple
additive index. In this index we gave a weight of ten to occupations because these are central to
land conflicts and involve large numbers of people. A non‐weighted index yielded essentially
the same results.18 In creating the index the total number of violence‐related incidents is
divided by the number of farms in the muncipio.

          The third set of variables measures the presence of the Catholic Church in each county.
This data is from Catholic Hierarchy (http://www.catholic‐hierarchy.org/) which provides not

17
  We thank Mario Miranda and Adam Canton for research assistance preparing the data.
18
  The index is merely additive instead of being created by principal components because most observations had
no conflicts, and these methods do not work well when the series have many zeros.
                                                      15
only the number of Catholics and of priests per diocese but even the names of all the bishops,
sometimes as far back as the 16th century. In order to make the diocese level data compatible
with the county and MCA data we used the Catholic Census of Brazil compiled by CERIS (1997).
The priest data we used is for 1985 as the conflict data is for 1985 to 1995 and the priests’
organizing effort precedes the conflicts. The number of priests is divided by rural population to
account for the different diocese sizes.

         The final group of variables captures assorted effects. There are variables that control
for geographic and climatic variations such as distance of the county to the state capital,
transportation cost to São Paulo, number of train stations and latitude and longitude
coordinates. Other variables control for economic and political effects such as county GDP and
the number of assemblymen in the opposition party in 1982. Descriptive statistics are shown in
Table 1.

                                                   [Table 1 here]

5. Estimation and Results

         5.1 – First‐stage: Determinants of Rural Conflict

         Table 2 presents the results of the first‐stage regression where we estimate the
determinants of rural conflict per 1000 farms across the 3,556 MCAs, using as instruments
priests, frontier and the strength of the opposition party. The first column uses priest data from
1985 and the second data from 1975 to make any direct effect of priests on the second stage
dependant variable even less likely. We estimate our regression by Tobit because there are
2,930 observations censored at zero, that is, without any conflicts from 1985 to 1995. We
interact priests with the frontier index, thus the estimated impact of priests on rural conflict has
to be interpreted taking into account the coefficients of all three variables, priests, frontier and
the interaction term. This impact is more easily perceived in Figure 4 that plots the estimated
coefficient of priests for every value of the frontier index in our sample (1 to 52).19 The
interpretation is that for municipios where the frontier index equals 1, that is, those that have
19
  The coefficient of the interaction term in Table 2 is the value that holds when the frontier index is zero, a value
which makes no sense as the index starts at 1. Similarly the reported standard deviation for the estimate of this
coefficient ignores some covariance terms which should be taken into account. The correct interpretation of the
interaction term taking these issues into account is given in the graph of Figure 4.
                                                          16
been consolidated since 1970, the estimated coefficient for priests is negative but not
significant. For municipios with a frontier index greater than or equal to 2 the impact of priests
on conflict is positive, significant and growing as the index increases. An additional priest per
1000 rural population in a county with a frontier index of 10 leads to 0.31 additional conflicts
per 1000 farms. At a frontier index of 20 this value jumps to 0.71 conflicts. These results imply
that priests serve as catalysts for land related conflict by organizing social movements, as
recognized in the literature cited in the previous section. Our result qualifies this perception by
showing that it is stronger in areas that are currently undergoing a more intense frontier
process. Besides these impacts through priests, the frontier index also has a positive and
significant direct on conflicts, with a unit increase in the index leading to an additional 0.02
conflicts per 1000 farms. A McDonald and Moffit (1980) decomposition of the marginal effects
of the independent variables on the number of conflicts shows that 18% of these effects work
through muncipios that already have conflicts (above the limit) and 82% through those that do
not. This implies that policies that seek to reduce the determinants of rural conflicts should not
focus exclusively in areas that have already experienced violence, as the potential for conflict is
often latent even in areas that have been apparently peaceful in the past.

       In addition to the influence of priests and the frontier we also use as an instrument for
conflict the strength of the opposition party in the county assembly (MDB in 1982 and PT in
1996). Both of these variables are found to have a positive and significant impact on conflicts. In
order to compare the effect of priests with that of opposition parties we calculated the effect of
a one standard deviation increase in each of these variables. The impact found for the strength
of the opposition party in 1982 is 0.11 additional conflicts per 1000 farms and that for 1996 is
0.07 additional conflicts. In order to compare the impacts of priests and politicians we have to
consider that the effect of priests varies with the level of the frontier index of the municipio.
When the index is set at 2, a one standard deviation increase in priests leads to a decrease of
0.15 conflicts. When the index is set at 3 the impact is an increase of 1.26 conflicts per 1000
farms. Thus priests have a greater impact on rural conflict than politicians only in the more
frontier municipios.

                                           [Table 2 here]

                                                 17
                                              [Figure 4 here]

        Of the three geographic variables, distance to state capital is positive and significant,
while latitude and longitude are statistically equal to zero. Latitude and longitude capture the
effect of temperature and other climatic factors, so this result suggests that these factors are
not important determinants of conflicts. However the state dummies also partially capture the
same factors. We found some variables that control for the level of agricultural activity in the
county to be negative and statistically significant. These variables are the number of tractors
per hectare and the proportion of rural to urban population. The amount of cattle per hectare
was also negative but not significant. These results show that conflicts are less likely, ceteris
paribus, where there is more economic activity. On the other hand greater population growth
from 1985 to 1995 – which includes migration – has a positive and significant effect on conflicts
as does population density. Similarly those municipios that experienced greater rates of GDP
growth from 1985 to 1995 registered more violence.20 These results are not trivial as one may
have expected that conflicts would occur with greater probability in regions that are not yet
fully put to use. But the data are very clear in showing that conflicts are more likely in regions
where there are rents to be captured, a notion which is in line with several models of the
evolution of property rights, such as Demsetz (1967) and Alston, Harris and Mueller (2009).

        Finally there are the crop mix variables and the land use variables, all in % of total area
for the year of 1995. Of the land uses, forests, pasture and unused land all reduce conflict.
Permanent crops on the other hand have a positive effect. Temporary crops are the excluded
category. This fits the previous results as pasture and forests are low intensity land uses in
Brazil, as is, by definition, unused land, whereas temporary and permanent crops are more
often associated with higher levels of activity. The results also show that rice, coffee, beans and
manioc are less likely, ceteris paribus, to lead to conflict. Once again this fits the notion that
conflict occurs where agriculture is more active, as these crops (except for coffee) are more
often associated with subsistence farming. Soybeans on the other hand are found to be
positively associated with conflict. In addition state dummies are statistically significant for


20
  We used GDP growth rather than levels to reduce the possibility of endogeneity of GDP. Removing GDP from the
equation has practically no effect on the other results.
                                                     18
several states, indicating that there are many idiosyncratic factors not captured in our other
variables.

       5.2 – Second Stage: Determinants of Contract Choice
       The objective of the second‐stage regression is to test for the determinants of contract
choice. The dependent variables are the percent of total farm land that is cultivated under fixed
rent, sharecropping, by the owner or cultivated without formal title. We will thus estimate a
system of four equations through seemingly unrelated regression. The advantage of this
method is that we can restrict the coefficients of every variable in the four equations to add up
to one. This is desirable because the dependent variables are measured in percent of total farm
land so that if a change in an independent variable causes one of the dependent variables to
rise, this must be compensated with a decline in one or more of the other three dependent
variables. Furthermore, because the conflict variable that enters each equation is endogenously
estimated in the first stage, the method will actually be three‐stage least squares, which
besides applying instrumental variable estimation to each equation also controls for
contemporaneous correlation in the errors. That instrumental variables are necessary is
confirmed by a Hausman‐Wu test in each of the four equations (see last line in table 3). The
exogeneity of conflicts is strongly rejected (1%) for the sharecropping, fixed rent and owner
cultivated equations, though it is not rejected for the equation that measures occupied land.
We present the the non‐instrumented, though not consistent results in Table A1 in the
appendix.

       The purpose of the estimation is to ascertain the relative impacts of endowments and
political/institutional factors on the form of agrarian organization. The endowments of a given
county are captured by the crop mix that is found to prevail in 1995, the idea being that given
relative pries, the choice of crops is overwhelmingly determined by agro‐climatic and
geographic factors, i.e. you can’t grow coffee too far south because of the frosts. Latitude and
longitude coordinates are also used to control for these factors in addition to the crop mix
variables and the land use variables. In addition we control for other factors through variables
that measure distance to the state capital, transportation costs, the growth from 1985 to 1995



                                               19
of the municipio’s GDP, tractors, cattle, population growth, urbanization and population
density.

         The political/institutional determinants of contract choice are captured by the conflict
variable that was estimated in the previous section. The conflict variable includes any incidence
of land related violence that was registered from 1985 to 1995 by the CPT (Pastoral Land
Commission). The assumption is that the existence of such events in a county reflects a
perception by economic agents of property rights insecurity that, given the biases in Brazilian
land legislation and enforcement discussed in section 3, may affect their choice of contract. Our
interest is not only to determine whether these issues actually affect contract choice, but also
the direction of the impact. In Section 3 we showed that there are theoretical models and
empirical evidence in the literature going both ways, that is, greater property right insecurity
leading to both less and more tenancy arrangements. Our results are shown in Table 3.21

                                                  [Table 3 here]

         The results show that the crop mix that prevails in a given county affects the form of
agrarian organization. Almost all the estimated coefficients for the eight crops are statistically
significant in each of the four equations. The results show that the use of fixed rent is more
probable where cotton, soybeans, rice and sugar cane is planted, and less probable where
coffee and corn are planted, with beans and manioc having no statistically significant effect.
These results are compatible with generally held perceptions of the nature of these crops, for
example Almeida and Buainain (2001: 4‐5) state that in Brazil fixed rent contracts are
particularly intense in rice growing areas. The magnitudes of the impacts of the crop variable
will be discussed below in comparison to the impact of conflicts. First we will analyze the
impact of the other variables. Latitude and longitude are both statistically significant in all four
equations except sharecropping, thus increasing the confidence that we are controlling for
geographic and climatic factors so that any effect captured by the conflict variable will be
ceteris paribus. Similarly counties that are more distant from the state capital were found to
use less fixed rent contracts and more sharecropping. Transport costs to São Paulo increased


21
  Table 3 shows the results using data on priests for 1985. The results with data on priests for 1975 will be
discussed below.
                                                         20
the area in occupations and reduced the sharecropped area. The availability of train stations
increased the area in fixed rent contracts.

       The positive effect of GDP growth from 1985 to 1995 on occupied areas and the
negative effect on owner‐run areas is an indication that less‐developed areas tended to grow
more during this period. An increase in the number of tractors per hectare had the effect of
making municipios more sharecrop and occupant intensive to the detriment of owner‐run
areas. Increases in cattle reduced fixed rent and increased owned area, while population
density had the opposite effect. The greater the proportion of rural to urban population the
greater the occupied area. Fixed rent areas increased where the population grew more from
1985 to 1995.

       The main variable of interest in this regression is conflicts per farm. The results show
that increases in conflicts lead to lower use of fixed rent and sharecropping, with a
corresponding increase in owner run farms. All three coefficients are statistically significant at
the 1% level, while no impact was found on occupied area. This result provides strong evidence
that property rights insecurity is detrimental to the adoption of tenancy arrangements and may
have important efficiency effects as recognized by the large literature on the economics of
agricultural organization. The evidence in our test thus corroborates for Brazil the hypotheses
in Conning and Robinson (2007) and de Janvry and Sadoulet (1989) concerning the perverse
effects of politics and conflict. In order to gauge the magnitude of these effects and compare
them with the effect of endowments, Figure 5 shows how a one‐standard deviation increase in
each of the crop variables and the conflict variable affect each of the dependent variables.
These results show that the negative effect of conflicts on tenancy arrangements is large,
decreasing fixed rent contracts from over 4% to less that 3% and sharecropping by half, from
almost 2.5% to approximately 1.25%. Correspondingly, a one‐standard deviation increase in
conflicts increases the average level of owner‐run farms from about 83.5% of the total farm
area to 86%. The crops that have the greatest impact are shown by this exercise to be sugar
cane, rice and soybeans, increasing both forms of tenancy and reducing owned area. When we
use the 1975 priest data in the first regression as a further measure to assure an appropriate
instrument, the results remain basically the same.

                                                 21
                                           [Figure 5 here]



       5.3 – Testing the appropriateness of the instruments
       For the results just presented to be valid it is necessary that the instruments used have
certain properties. The first is that they have a clear effect on conflict. The second is that the
only reason for the relationship between contract choice and priests is the first stage. One way
to test for the first property, that is, whether the instruments are weak, is through an F‐statistic
on the joint significance of the instruments in the first‐stage regression (Stock, Wright and
Yogo, 2002). If the F‐statistic is greater than a given threshold value then the instruments can
be considered as not being weak. The threshold value at 5% for the case of 5 instruments is
9.20 (Stock, Wright and Yogo, 2002: Table 1 pg. 522). Table 4 column 2 shows the F‐statistic for
several different specifications of the first‐stage, allowing for different combinations of the
instruments to show the robustness of the results. In the first row we use all instruments;
priests (1985), the interaction of priests with frontier, and opposition party strength in 1982
and 1996. These are the results shown in Tables 2 and 3. In the second line we replicate the
previous specification but use instead priest data from 1975. In the third line opposition parties
are dropped and in the fourth line the interaction term is dropped. In all cases the null
hypotheses of weak instruments is clearly rejected.

       In order to test the second property of the instrument, that is, the exclusion restriction,
a Sargan–Hansen statistic to test for overidentifying restrictions would be recommended.
However this is not possible in our case because although we do have several instruments in
the first stage, the second stage is actually estimated using the fitted value from the first stage
as a single instrument rather than plugging in the separate fitted values. This procedure is
necessary because the first stage is nonlinear (Wooldridge, 2002: 542; Angrist and Pischke,
2009). Applying 2SLS reasoning directly with a non‐linear first‐stage is not guaranteed to
produce first‐stage residuals that are uncorrelated with fitted values and covariates. In any case
we show in Table 4 that our main result is robust to different specifications of the instruments.
Columns 3 to 6 show the estimated coefficient of conflicts in each of the four contract choice
equations. The table shows that conflicts have a negative impact on tenancy even if priest data
                                                 22
from 1975 is used and if opposition parties are not included. Only when the interaction of
priests with frontier is dropped do the results start to breakdown, although even then the
negative impact of conflict on fixed rent remains.

                                                   [Table 4 here]



         5.4 – Testing the robustness of the negative relationship between conflict and tenancy
         The strong negative relationship found between insecure property rights and tenancy
arrangements contradicts studies that predict insecure property rights will lead to incentives for
more investment as a means to signal occupancy and use and thus preempt invasion and
expropriation ( Besley 1995, Carter and Olinto 2003, Place and Otsuka 2002, Pinckney and
Kimuyu 1994 and Vertova 2006). One might interject, however, that our estimation of the full
sample of Brazilian counties only provides an overall average, and that the effect of property
rights on agrarian organization might vary in different regions or for different subsamples.
Similarly it may be the case that the effect we estimated is valid only for the specific time
period of our data, that is conflict from 1985 to 1995 affecting contract choice in 1995, and the
relationship might have been different before and after this specific window. In this subsection
we test the robustness of our findings to consider its validity more generally.

         The first check is to look at the data for contract choice and violence graphically, which
allows us to include data from other census years and thus get a more dynamic picture. In
Figure 6 we plot the % of total farms under fixed rent and sharecropping for the census years
from 1970 to 1995, separating the counties into subsamples that experience some violence
from 1985 to 1995 and those that had none.22 The graph shows that since 1975 those areas
with conflicts had about half of the area in tenancy arrangements of those that did not.
Furthermore it shows that overtime the use of tenancy arrangements is slowly falling in both
areas with and without conflicts. Also, the impact of violence has decreased slightly from 1985
to 1995 for sharecropping but not discernibly so for fixed rent, a result we shall return to below.
These results are for the country as whole. When the data are analyzed for specific regions

22
  This uses data from the agricultural censuses of 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985 and 1995. Note that although data for
contract choice, agricultural production and priests exists for each of these years, the conflict data is only available
for the period after 1985. This is what impedes the estimation of a panel across these years.
                                                          23
separately, we find that there is significant regional variation. Figures 7 and 8 show the data for
the southern and the north (Amazon) regions. In the south there is no apparent impact of
conflicts throughout the entire period and about twice the use of tenancy arrangements than
the country average. In the north there was significant use of fixed rent contracts up until 1985
with a high impact of violence. Probably as a consequence of the widespread violence in the
region by 1995 the use of tenancy arrangements had become almost negligible.23

                                               [Figure 6, 7 and 8 here]

        Given this regional variation we ran a regression allowing for a separate coefficient for
conflict for each state by interacting conflict with each of the state dummies. In this regression
the dependent variable is the sum of the area in fixed rent and in sharecropping. Of the 27
states 20 had a negative and statistically significant impact of conflict on tenancy. In six states
conflict was found to have no effect, and in one single state the relationship was positive and
significant. This state was the Federal District, but this is somewhat of an outlier given that it is
a one‐municipio state, while all other states have hundreds of counties.24

        Another possibility is that there are some counties that have certain characteristics that
make for a positive relationship between conflicts and tenancy, but that are not grouped
regionally, being instead dispersed throughout the country. In order to test for this possibility
we implemented a bootstrapping exercise that repeatedly sampled from our data set of 3659
municipios sub‐samples of size 500 and ran an instrumental variable regression on the % of
total area in fixed rent, registering the coefficient and standard deviation of conflict.25 The total
number of repetitions was 10,000 to allow for a great number of combinations of municipios in
the subsample. The idea is to see if some combinations of counties are randomly drawn that
have a positive relationship of conflicts and fixed rent area. If so we can gauge how frequently
this happens and what are the characteristics of those samples. The distribution of the
estimated coefficient for conflict is shown in Figure 9. Of the ten thousand regressions 1,380
had coefficients that were statistically significant at least at 10% and are included in the

23
   Graphs for the other three regions are omitted in the interest of space.
24
   These regression results are available upon demand from the authors.
25
   We used only fixed rent because it was too demanding computationally to run the full 3SLS system 10,000 times
and fixed rent is the more prevalent of the tenancy arrangements.
                                                       24
distribution. The mean of the distribution is ‐0.009 which contrasts with the coefficient for the
whole sample of ‐0.0025. Of all the coefficients that were significant, only 110 (8.7%) were
positive, while 1270 (91.3%) were negative. Repeating the same exercise with samples of 1,000
yields 3,346 significant coefficients out of which 2.2% were positive and 97.8% negative (see
Figure 10). With N=2,000 there are 6,726 significant coefficients and only 0.1% are positive. As
N increases there is thus a convergence of the estimated coefficient to the full sample value of ‐
0.0025 and fewer occurrences of positive coefficients.

                                                    [Figure 9 here]

                                                   [Figure 10 here]

           This provides strong evidence that the negative relationship between conflicts and
tenancy arrangements is general across counties. Even with the smaller sample size of 500 we
incur a Type‐I error of only 1.1% when we reject the hypothesis that conflicts are positively
related to fixed rent tenancy.26 This indicates that those subsamples found where conflicts
increases tenancy are probably flukes rather than samples with special characteristics. In any
case we examined 20 of those 110 positive samples to see if any systematic characteristics
could be found. This was done by performing difference in means tests for all variables in our
data set comparing these N=500 subsamples which exhibited the positive coefficients with the
overall sample where N=3659. Although each of the samples had a few variables that proved to
be statistically different from the full data set, there was no evidence of characteristics
systematically related to all or most of the samples. The estimated impact of distance to the
state capital, for example, was statistically different in 6 of the 20 samples, but in 3 of those it
was larger and in the other 3 smaller. The evidence is thus overwhelming for a negative impact
of conflict on tenancy in Brazil in 1995.

6 – Which Tenancy Contracts are Forgone Due to Property Rights Insecurity?

           With census data aggregated at the municipio level we cannot directly examine which
types of contracts are most affected by the property rights insecurity in the form of land
conflicts. Figure 11, constructed using that data, shows the distribution of fixed rent and


26
     This value comes from 110 positive and significant relationships out of 10,000 regressions.
                                                           25
sharecropped farms both in terms of area and number of properties. These distributions show
that sharecropping tends to take place on smaller farms, but this does not provide any
information on the channels through which conflicts affect contract choice. We can, however,
get at this issue indirectly by using our data to test the determinants of average farm size. This
can be done by using the results from our contract choice regression (Table 3) to calculate how
a change in violence affects average farm size through its effect on contract choice. In order to
do this we assume that all the variables in the contract choice regression, as well as the
instruments in the conflict regression, affect average farm size indirectly through the choice of
contract type. Thus in Table 5 we regress average farm size on the contract variables and add
state dummies to capture other fixed local effects. Because the four contract type variables add
up to 1 we cannot have them all simultaneously in the regression and must leave one out. This
excluded variable will be the one against which the estimated coefficients for the other three
variables will be interpreted. Each estimated coefficient measures the amount by which
average farm size changes given a change in that coefficient keeping the other two fixed. If we
exclude the variable ‘% owned’, for example, the estimated coefficient for ‘% fixed rent’ gives
us a measure of how average farm size is affected by an increase in the % area under fixed rent
and corresponding decrease in % area of owned properties, keeping ‘sharecrop’ and ‘occupied’
fixed. In Table 4 we show four estimations each excluding one of the four contract variables.
We will focus only on the first column of Table 4 that excludes owned properties because our
main interest is to understand how violence affects the choice between renting and farming
directly oneself.
                                         [Figure 11 here]
                                          [Table 5 here]
       The results show that a decrease in the area under fixed rent leads to a decrease in
average area, and that a decrease in sharecropped area leads to an increase in average area,
both statistically significant at 1%. This implies that when conflicts reduce both types of
contracts, as we showed above, the impact on average farm size is different through fixed rent
and sharecropping. Because a drop in fixed rent reduces average farm size, it must be that the
fixed rent contracts that are being forgone on the margin involve farms larger than the average
size. Thus an increase in violence that reduces fixed rent contracts is on average impeding
                                                26
larger properties (compared to the average in the municipio) from contracting. With
sharecropping the effect is the opposite. When violence decreases sharecropping the average
farm size increases, which implies that the sharecropping must occur predominantly in
properties below the municipio average. The coefficient for occupied is not statistically
different from zero so no changes to average farm size take place when occupied area changes.
These results show that the losses in efficiency due to insecure property rights that we
identified involve the forgoing of fixed‐rent contracts on larger size farms and the forgoing of
sharecropping contracts on smaller size farms.
       In order to measure the magnitude of these effects we use the contract choice
equations in Table 3 to estimate how much a change in violence from zero to the average level
of violence in those muncipios that had any violence (that is, 4.4 conflicts) affect the size of
fixed rent and sharecropped farms. The effect of this change in violence on average farm size
through its impact on fixed rent is a decrease from 163.8 to 156.6 hectares, that is a drop of
4.4%. The effect through sharecropping is an increase in average farm size from 167.5 to 180.8
hectares, a 7.9% increase. Both the increase in average size that results from the decrease of
sharecropping as well as the decrease that results from lower fixed rent are inefficient as they
preclude gains to trade that would be realized were it not for the insecurity of property rights
caused by conflict. Furthermore, the 13.3 hectare increase due to less sharecropping is greater
than the 7.2 hectare fall due to less fixed rent, so that in net average farm size increases, which
in a country with such high land ownership concentration as Brazil, is considered in itself an
undesirable outcome.


7 – Concluding Remarks
       In Brazil, land reform, by affecting the security of property rights via increasing land
conflicts, has a perverse impact on land rentals resulting in an inefficiency or inability to realize
the gains from agricultural contracting. In a large commodity based country like Brazil the losses
are undoubtedly high. Even if there are other reasons not related to land conflict for why some
farmers may want to hold large and unproductive properties, such as to hedge against inflation
(very relevant for the time period of our data) or for political power, it would still be
advantageous to the prospective tenant and sharecroppers, as well as to society, for the
                                                 27
landowner to rent the land and profit twice (Rezende, 2006; Sayad, 1982). The very low levels
of tenancy in Brazil and much of Latin America are thus a puzzle. The difficulty of solving this
paradox lays not so much in being able to point to causes of the scarcity of rental contracts. In
this paper we have provided very robust evidence that insecure property rights are an
important deterrent to tenancy arrangements. The greater puzzle, as noted by Conning and
Robinson (2007: 421) is why economic agents are not able to contract around these
inefficiencies.
        The extent of the losses from forgoing rental contracts in Brazil has in the recent past
led to several attempts at getting around the impediments of tenancy by creating special
regional programs where all the necessary conditions would be provided by policymakers and
other organizations for rental transactions to take place. Buainain et al. (2008) survey some of
these attempts and conclude that “however well considered the initiatives are, they have not
achieved their goals … county administrations do not manage to use either the incentives or the
coercive instruments required to induce landowners and landless farmers to negotiate under
equal conditions leading to mutually profitable contracts.” It is the understanding of this
greater inability to credibly commit to not expropriating rented farms and thereby the inablility
to realize the gains from contracting that is the real puzzle to be explained. Put another way:
given that both landowners and tenants would benefit from more secure property rights, what
are the impediments to a more sensible land reform policy? We conjecture that the answer
rests on the politics of land reform, a debate that entails the entire electorate and not simply
the parties to the contract. Given Brazil has the highest land inequality in Latin America, with a
highly urbanized and enfranchised citizenry, voters favor a land reform policy based on
redistribution which has the unintended consequence of increasing land conflicts and reducing
the career mobility prospects of many landless rural peasants.




                                                28
                                            References

Adriance, Madeleine C. 1991. “Agents of Change: The Roles of Priests, Sisters, and Lay Workers
 in the Grassroots Catholic Church in Brazil,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 30(3):
 292‐305.
Adriance, Madeleine C. 1994. “Base Communities and Rural Mobilization in Northern Brazil,”
 Sociology of Religion, 55:2, 163‐178.
Adriance, Madeleine C. 1995. “The Brazilian Catholic Church and the Struggle for Land in the
 Amazon,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion. 34(3): 377‐382.
Allen, Douglas and Dean Lueck. 1992. “Contract choice in modern agriculture: cash rent versus
 cropshare.” Journal of Law and Economics, 35 (2), 397‐426.
Almeida, Patricia J. and Antonio M. Buainain. 2001. “Arrendamento de Terras: uma
 Contribuição ao Neoinstitucionalismo Econômico,” In: III International Conference on
 AgriChain/Networks Economics and Managemente, 2001, Ribeirão Preto/SP – USP, ‐ 24 a 26
 de outubro de 2001, p. 10‐30.
Alston, Lee J., Samar K. Datta and Jeffrey B. Nugent. 1984. "Tenancy Choice in a Competitive
  Framework with Transactions Costs," Journal of Political Economy, 92 (December): 1121‐
  1133.
Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie. 1999. Paternalism and the American Welfare State:
  Economics, Politics, and Institutions in the U.S. South, 1865‐1965. New York: Cambridge
  University Press 1999).
Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie. 2005. Time on the Ladder: Career Mobility in Agriculture,
  1890‐1938. The Journal of Economic History, Cambridge University Press, vol. 65(04): 1058‐
  1081, December.
Alston Lee J. and Robert Higgs. 1982. "Contractual Mix in Southern Agriculture since the Civil
  War: Facts, Hypotheses and Tests," Journal of Economic History, XLII (June): 327‐353.
Alston, Lee J. and Kyle Kauffman. 1998. “Up, Down and Off the Agricultural Ladder: New
  Evidence and Implications of Agricultural Mobility for Blacks in the Postbellum South,”
  Agricultural History 72,: 263‐279.
Alston, Lee J. and Kyle Kauffman. 1997. “Agricultural Chutes and Ladders: New Estimates of
  Sharecroppers and Welfare Implication for the Southern Agricultural Labor Market, 1900‐
  1960," Journal of Economic History (June): 464‐475.
Alston, Lee J., Edwyna Harris and Bernardo Mueller. 2009. “De Facto and De Jure Property
 Rights: Land Settlement and Land Conflict on the Australian, Brazilian and U.S. Frontiers”
 NBER Working Paper No. 15264, September.
Alston, Lee J., Gary D. Libecap, and Bernardo Mueller. 1999a, A model of rural conflict: violence
 and land reform policy in Brazil. Environment and Development Economics, Cambridge:UK,
 4:135‐160.

                                                29
Alston, Lee J., Gary D. Libecap, and Bernardo Mueller. 1999b. Titles, conflict and land use: the
 development of property rights and land reform on the Brazilian Amazon frontier, Ann Arbor,
 The University of Michigan Press.
Alston, Lee J., Gary D. Libecap, and Bernardo Mueller. 2000, Property rights to land and land
 reform: legal inconsistencies and the sources of violent conflict in the Brazilian Amazon.
 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 39:162‐188.
Alston, Lee J., Gary D. Libecap, and Bernardo Mueller. 2010. How Interest Groups can Influence
 Political Outcomes Indirectly through Information Manipulation: The Landless Peasants
 Movement in Brazil. Working Paper.
Angrist, Josua D. and Jorn‐Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
 Companion. Princeton University Press.
Bailey, Martin J., "Approximate Optimality of Aboriginal Property Rights," Journal of Law and
 Economics, 1992, XXXV(1), 183‐198.
Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee. 2008. Determinants of redistributive politics: an
 empirical analysis of land reform in West Bengal. Working paper, Department of Economics,
 University of California, Berkeley, September.
Besley, T., 1995. “Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from
 Ghana.” Journal of Political Economy, 103 (5): 903‐937.
Binswanger, Hans P., Klaus Deininger and G Feder. 1995. Power, distortions, revolt and reform
 in agricultural land relations. In Handbook of Development Economics, Volume III, ed. Jere
 Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science: 2659‐2772.
Brandão, Antônio S., Guilherme S. Bastos Filho, Alexandre P. Brandão. 2001. “Land Markets and
 Rural Poverty Alleviation,” Chapter 4 in World Bank, Rural Poverty Alleviation in Brazil:
 Towards an Integrated Strategy‐ Vol. 1: Policy Summary, World Bank, Report No. 21790‐BR
Bruneau, Thomas. 1985. “Church and Politics in Brazil: the Genesis of Change,” Journal of Latin
 American Studies, n. 17: 271‐293.
Buainain, Antônio M., Patrícia J. Almeida, Fernando de Lima and José Maria de Silveira. 2008.
 “Land Rental Markets and Land Access in Brazil,” Basis Brief: Assets and Market Access, CRSP,
 July, http://www.basis.wisc.edu.
Carvalho, Marcia S. 1991. A Pequena Produção de Café no Paraná, São Paulo, University of São
 Paulo, Ph.D Thesis, Dept. of Geography.
Carter Michael R. and Pedro Olinto. 2003. “Getting Institutions 'Right' for Whom? Credit
 Constraints and the Impact of Property Rights on the Quantity and Composition of
 Investment,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 85, pp. 173‐186, 2003
CERIS – Centro de Estudos Religiosos e Investigações Sociais. 1997. Anuário Católico do Brasil,
 Rio de Janeiro, Vol. 10: 1‐973.
Cheung, Steven N.S. 1969. The Theory of Share Tenancy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.


                                               30
Conning, Jonathan H. and James A. Robinson. 2007. Property Rights and the Political
 Organization of Agriculture. Journal of Development Economics 82: 416‐447.
de Janvry, Alain and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 1989. “A Study in Resistance to Institutional Change:
 The Lost Game of Latin American Land Reform,” World Development, Vol. 17, No. 9: 1397‐
 1407.
de Janvry, Alain, Karen Macours, and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2002. “Access to Land in the Rural
  Development Agenda,” Sustainable Development Department, Inter‐American Development
  Bank, Washington D.C.
Deininger, Klaus and José S. Chamorro. 2004. "Investment and Income Effects of Land
 Regularization: The Case of Nicaragua." Agricultural Economics 30 (2): 101‐16.
Deininger, Klaus and Gershon Feder. 2000. Land Institutions and Land Markets. In Handbook of
 Agricultural Economics, ed. Jere Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science:
 2659‐2772.
Demsetz, Harold. 1967. “Towards a Theory of Property Rights”, The American Economic Review.
 Volume 57, Issue 2 May, 1967, 347‐359.
Federico, Giovanni. 2006. “The ‘Real’ Puzzle of Sharecropping: Why is it Disappearing?”
 Continuity and Change, 21(2): 261‐285.
Gallo, Andres. 2003. “Rural Rent Legislation in Argentina: Congress and Renters, 1912‐1943,”
 Working Paper.
Garcia‐Jimeno, Camilo and Robinson, James A. 2009. “The Myth of the Frontier,” NBER Working
 Paper Series, March, Vol. w14774, pp. ‐, 2009. Available at SSRN:
 http://ssrn.com/abstract=1352954 .
Hayami, Yujiro and Keijiro Otsuka. 1993. The Economics of Contract Choice: an Agrarian
 Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hewitt, Warren E. 1990. “Religion and Consolidation of Democracy in Brazil: The Role of the
 Comunidades Eclesiais de Base (CEBs),” Sociological Analysis, 50:2, 139‐152.
Houtzager, Peter P. 2001. “Collective Action and Political Authority: Rural Workers, Church, and
 State in Brazil,” Theory and Society, Vol. 30, No. 1, Feb: 1‐45.
IBGE. 1984. Áreas Mínimas de Comparação a Nível Municipal : 1980‐1970‐1960. Rio de Janeiro,
  IBGE.
IBGE. 2007. “Séries Estatísticas & Séries Históricas,” Rio de Janeiro, IBGE, Censo Agropecuário
  1920 to 1995/96: http://www.ibge.gov.br/series_estatisticas/subtema.php?idsubtema=100 .
IPARDES. 1978. “O Trabalhador Volante no Estado do Paraná,” Vol I, Curitiba.
Jamarillio, C.F. 2001. “El Mercado Rural de Tierras em America Latina: Hacia uma Nova
  Estatrategia,” Washington, Inter‐American Development Bank, Technical Report No. EVN‐124.
Krischke, Paulo, J. 1991. “Church Base Communities and Democratic Change in Brazilian
  Society,” Comparative Political Studies, Vol. 24, No. 2: 186‐210.

                                               31
Macours, Karen, Alain de Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, 2007. "Insecurity of Property Rights
 and Matching in the Tenancy Market", submitted to The Economic Journal, revised October
 2007.
Mainwaring, Scott. 1986. The Catholic Church and Politics in Brazil, 1916‐1985, Stanford:
 Stanford University Press.
Mainwaring, Scott and Alexander Wilde. 1989. The Progressive Church in Latin America. Notre
 Dame: University of Notre Dame, Press/Kellogg Institute.
Mançano, Bernardo F. and João P. Stédile. 1999. Brava Gente: A Trajetória do MST e a Luta pela
 Terra no Brasil, São Paulo, Editora Fundação Perseu Abramo.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. Edited by C.W. Guillebaud, Macmillan Company
 London (1961).
Maybury‐Lewis, Biorn. 1994. The Politics of the Possible: The Brazilian Rural Worker´s Trade
 Union Movement, 1964‐1985, Philadelphia, Temple University Press.
McDonald, John F. and Robert A. Moffit. 1980. “The Uses of Tobit Analysis,” The Review of
 Economics and Statistics, Vol. 62, No. 2, May: 318‐321.
Menezes Neto, Antonio J. 2007. “A Igreja Católica e os Movimentos Sociais do Campo: a
 Teologia da Libertação e o Movimento dos Trabalhadores Sem Terra,” Cadernos do CRH
 (UFBA), v. 20, p. 331‐342.
Murrell, Peter. 1983. “The Economics of Sharing: a Transactional Cost Analysis of Contractual
 Choice in Farming,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 14 (1), 283‐293.
Nichols, William H. 1971. “A Frontiera Agrícola na História Recente do Brasil: O Estado do
 Paraná, 1920‐65,” Revista Paranaense de Desenvolvimento. Curitiba, set‐out., 26:19‐53.
Ondetti, Gabriel A. 2008. Land, Protest and Politics: the Landless Movement and the Struggle for
 Agrarian Reform in Brazil, Pennsylvania State University Press.
Pande, Rohini and Christopher Udry. 2006. “Institutions and Development: A View from Below,”
 with Chris Udry in Proceedings of the 9th World Congress of the Econometric Society, edited
 by R.Blundell, W.Newey and T.Persson, Cambridge University Press.
Pinckney, Thomas C. and Peter K. Kimuyu. 1994. “Land Tenure Reform in East Africa: Good, Bad
  or Unimportant?” Journal of African Economies, Vol. 3, No. 1: 1‐28.
Place, Frank and Keijiro Otsuka. 2002. “Land Tenure Systems and Their Impacts on Agricultural
  Investmetns and Productivity in Uganda,” Journal of Development Studies, 38 (6):105‐124.
Reis, Eustáquio, Márcia Pimentel and Ana I. Alvarenga. 2009. “Áreas mínimas comparáveis para
 os períodos intercensitários de 1872 a 2000,” Rio de Janeiro, IPEA‐DIMAC.
Rezende, Gervasio C. 2006. “Políticas Trabalhista, Fundiária e de Crédito Agrícola no Brasil: Uma
 Avaliação Crítica,” Revista de Economia e Sociologia Rural, Vol. 44, No. 1: 47‐78.
Rezende, Gervasio C., Ana C. Kreter. 2007. “Agricultural Labor Legislation and Poverty in Brazil:
 A Transaction Costs Approach” Revista de Economia Agrícola, v. 54: 121‐137.

                                                32
Romeiro, Ademar and Bastiaan P. Reydon (coords.) 1994. O Mercado de Terras. Brasília: IPEA,
  1994, Estudos de Política Agrícola (Documentos de Trabalho, 13).
Ribeiro, M.C.M and M.I. Stolf. 1975. “A Moradia do Trabalhador na Fazenda de Café Paulista,”
  in E. Carone (ed.) O Café: Anais do II Congresso de História de São Paulo. São Paulo: 135‐156.
Saint, William S. 1980. “Mão‐de‐Obra Volante na Agricultura Brasileira: Uma Revisão da
  Bibliografia,” Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, IPEA, Vol. 10, Agosto, No. 2:503‐526.
Sayad, J. 1982. “Especulação com Terras Rurais: Efeitos sobre a Produção Agrícola e o Novo
   ITR,” Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, v. 12, n. 1, p. 87‐108, abr.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1974. “Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping,” Review of Economic
 Studies, 41 (2), 219‐255.
Stock, James H., Jonathan H. Wright and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. “A Survey of Weak Instruments
 and Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments,” Journal of Business & Economic
 Statistics, October, Vol. 20. No. 4: 518‐529.
Valdés, Alberto and Johan A. Mistiaen. 2001. Rural Poverty Alleviation in Brazil: An Integrated
 Strategy, Vol. 1: Policy Summary, Washington, World Bank.
Vertova, Pietro. 2006. “Property Rights on Unused Asset and Investment Incentives: Evidence
 from Brazil,” Tilburg University, Center for Economic Research, Discussion Paper 48.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press.
World Bank. 1994. “Brazil: The Management of Agriculture, Rural Development and Natural
 Resources, Vol. 2 Background Papers” Natural Resource Management and Rural Poverty
 Division, Country Department, Latin America and the Caribbean Region, July 31.




                                               33
 Figure 1 – Evolution of Tenancy over time in Brazil




Source: IBGE (2007). Data for 2006 from the 2006 Agricultural Census and may not be perfectly
comparable.




                                               34
Figure 2 – The Evolution of the Frontier ‐ Number of Counties, 1872 ‐ 2000.




       Source: Reis, Pimentel and Alvarenga (2009: 3).




                                         35
Figure 3 – Minimum Comparable Areas 1920‐2000 (dark lines), Municipios in 2000 (grey lines)




Source: Reis, Pimentel and Alvarenga (2009: 14).




                                                   36
            Table 1 – Descriptive Statistics
                   Variable                     N     Mean      Stand. Dev.    Min        Max
Conflicts per 1000 farms                       3640   0.7885      5.921         0       283.582
Priests per rural population 1985              3631    16.66      42.232      0.072     831.683
Frontier                                       3659    1.505      2.262         1          53
Political opposition 1982 (% seats – MDB)      3659    0.340      0.243         0          1
Political opposition 1996 (% seats – PT)       3652    0.025      0.057         0        0.615
Population density 1995                        3640   240.62    13,572.77     0.0087    818,792.3
GDP growth 1985‐1995 (log)                     3639   ‐0.165      0.677       ‐4.806     4.062
Tractors per hectare1995                       3588    0.004      0.007         0        0.129
Average size of farms (hec.)                   3640   93.720     174.619      0.104     4296.837
Cattle per hectare1995                         3640    0.556      1.227         0        63.462
Latitude                                       3659   ‐16.491     7.644       ‐33.519    3.843
Longitude                                      3659   44.881      5.833       32.411     72.67
Rural/Urban Population (1995)                  3621    1.071      1.631       0.0004     63.661
Population growth 1985‐1995                    3659    0.111      0.209       ‐0.400     3.490
Natural Forest (% total farm area) 1995        3640    0.154      0.136         0        0.900
Natural Pasture (% total farm area) 1995       3640    0.250      0.184         0        0.911
Permanent crops (% total farm area) 1995       3640    0.053      0.093         0          1
Usable but not used (% total farm area) 1995   3640    0.048      0.069         0        0.601
Unsuable area (% total farm area) 1995         3640    0.048      0.034         0        0.846
% of land in Fixed Rent contracts, 1995        3640    0.049      0.073         0        0.781
% of land in Sharecropping contracts, 1995     3640    0.021      0.041         0        0.714
% of land farmed by owner, 1995                3640    0.892      0.104         0         1.00
% of land occupied, 1995                       3640    0.038      0.063         0         1.00
Cotton, % 1995                                 3640    0.003      0.012         0        0.315
Rice, % 1995                                   3640    0.008      0.026         0        0.709
Coffee, % 1995                                 3640    0.012      0.038         0        0.429
Cane, % 1995                                   3640    0.039       0.142        0         1.00

Beans, % 1995                                  3640    0.024       0.047        0         0.715

Manioc, % 1995                                 3640    0.009       0.027        0         0.580

Corn, % 1995                                   3640    0.048       0.067        0         0.851

Soya, % 1995                                   3640    0.021       0.136        0         0.901

Distance to state capital (km)                 3659   240.467    158.039        0       1365.742
Transport cost to São Paulo (index)            3658   1475.81     1114.83       10      10,511.92
Train stations                                 3659    0.485       1.696        0          63



                                                      37
           Table 2 – Determinants of Rural Conflict – First Stage Equation
Dep. Var.: Violence 1985‐1996                   Priests 1985                    Priests 1975
Priests per rural population                      ‐0.709***                       ‐0.617***
                                                   (‐10.59)                        (‐10.29)
Frontier                                          0.150***                        0.161***
                                                     (3.09)                          (3.34)
Priest X Frontier                                  0.329***                       0.263***
                                                     (8.08)                          (7.77)
Political opposition 1982 (% seats                  4.71**                          4.95***
in state assembly – MDB                              (2.44)                          (2.57)
                                                           *
Political opposition 1996 (% seats                  12.30                           13.50*
in state assembly – PT                               (1.77)                          (1.95)
Population density 1995                           0.013***                        0.012***
                                                     (5.48)                          (5.11)
Agricultural GDP growth 1985‐                      2.839***                       2.849***
1995.                                                (4.81)                          (4.84)
                                                          **
Distance to state capital                           0.006                         0.007***
                                                     (2.29)                          (2.60)
Transport cost to São Paulo                         0.0007                          0.0007
                                                     (0.72)                          (0.71)
Number of train stations                             0.203                           0.281
                                                     (1.05)                          (1.44)
Latitude                                             0.317                           0.386
                                                     (1.31)                          (1.59)
Longitude                                           ‐0.406                          ‐0.444
                                                    (‐1.45)                         (‐1.59)
Cattle per hectare1995                              ‐0.561                          ‐0.619
                                                    (‐0.55)                         (‐0.58)
Tractors per hectare1995                        ‐1452.65***                     ‐1533.59***
                                                    (‐9.88)                        (‐10.21)
                                                          **
Rural/Urban Population (1995)                      ‐0.976                          ‐0.981**
                                                    (‐2.54)                         (‐2.55)
                                                          ***
Population growth 1985‐1995                      11.850                          11.951***
                                                     (7.09)                          (7.22)
Constant                                            29.034                         32.340*
                                                     (1.52)                          (1.69)
Number of observations                   Total:               3556       Total:             3556
                                         Censored at 0: 2930             Censored at 0: 2930
                                         Uncensored:           625       Uncensored:         625
Crop variables (8 crops)                              Yes                             Yes
Land Use Variables (5 categories)                     Yes                             Yes
State Dummies (27 states)                             Yes                             Yes
Pseudo R2                                           0.1644                          0.1629
2(55)                                            1269.66                         1256.13
Prob>2                                             0.0000                          0.0000
                Tobit Estimation. t‐stats in parentheses. Statistical significance:
                   ***     **      *
                1% . 5% , 10% . Weighted by the number of county
                subdivision from 1970‐2000.




                                                38
Figure 4 – Interaction of Priests and Frontier: Effect of Priests on Conflicts.
                                             20
  Effect of Priest per hectare on Violence
                                             15
                                             10
                                             5
                                             0




                                                  0   10   20                 30          40   50
                                                                   Frontier
                                                                95% confidence interval




                                                                  39
Table 3 – Determinants of Contract Choice

                                             Fixed Rent (%)        Sharecropper (%)              Owner (%)              Occupant (%)
                                                          ***                     ***                      ***
   Conflict per 1000 farms                       ‐0.002                  ‐0.002                    0.004                    0.0001
                                                    (‐3.02)                (‐4.86)                   (3.57)                  (1.17)
                                                             *                                              **                        *
   Frontier                                       ‐0.0003                  0.0001                 0.0005                   ‐0.0002
                                                    (‐1.85)                 (0.99)                   (2.12)                  (1.75)
                                                                                                           ***                     ***
   GDP growth 1985‐1995                              0.002                   0.001                ‐0.007                    0.004
                                                     (0.94)                 (1.22)                  (‐2.78)                  (2.71)
                                                          ***                                              ***                     ***
   Latitude                                      ‐0.001                    0.0002                  0.005                   ‐0.002
                                                    (‐4.00)                 (0.45)                   (4.38)                  (‐3.08)
                                                                                                           ***                     ***
   Longitude                                         0.001                 0.0003                 ‐0.005                    0.003
                                                     (1.26)                 (0.59)                  (‐4.13)                  (5.11)
                                                            ***                      **
   Distance to state capital                    ‐0.00002                0.00001                    0.00002                 ‐0.00001
                                                    (‐2.71)                 (2.74)                   (1.62)                   (1.63)
                                                                                      **                                             ***
   Transport cost to São Paulo                  0.0000008              ‐0.000004                  ‐0.00005                0.00001
                                                     (0.28)                (‐2.07)                  (‐1.24)                  (3.36)
                                                          **
   Number of train stations                        0.002                  ‐0.0005                    ‐0.001                ‐0.00006
                                                    (2.81)                 (‐1.28)                  (‐1.31)                  (‐0.13)
                                                            ***                                              ***
   Population density 1995                      0.00002                 0.000002                 ‐0.00002                  0.00003
                                                    (2.53)                  (0.61)                  (‐2.37)                   (0.58)
                                                                                                                                   ***
   Rural/Urban Population 1995                     ‐0.0008                ‐0.0002                    ‐0.001                 0.002
                                                    (‐1.33)                (‐0.54)                  (‐1.21)                  (4.04)
                                                          ***                                                                        *
   Population growth 1985‐1996                    0.014                      0.004                   ‐0.010                 ‐0.008
                                                    (2.62)                  (1.08)                  (‐1.26)                  (‐1.78)
                                                                                  ***                      ***                     ***
   Tractor per hectare growth 1985‐                 ‐0.135                0.461                   ‐0.828                    0.503
   1995                                             (‐0.71)                 (3.77)                  (‐3.02)                  (3.13)
                                                          ***                                              ***
   Cattle per hectare1995                        ‐0.007                     ‐0.001                 0.009                     ‐0.001
                                                    (‐3.59)                (‐1.03)                   (3.51)                  (‐0.97)
                                                          ***                     ***                      ***                      *
   Cotton, % of total farm area                   0.387                   0.206                   ‐0.705                     0.113
                                                    (4.81)                  (3.98)                  (‐6.08)                  (1.66)
                                                          ***                     ***                      ***
   Rice, % of total farm area                     0.250                   0.242                   ‐0.514                      0.022
                                                    (4.81)                 (10.26)                  (‐9.72)                   (0.70)
                                                          ***
   Coffee, % of total farm area                  ‐0.110                      0.031                    0.073                   0.005
                                                    (‐3.47)                 (1.54)                   (1.61)                   (0.20)
                                                          ***                     ***                      ***
   Cane, % of total farm area                     0.161                   0.058                   ‐0.209                     ‐0.010
                                                   (19.38)                 (10.81)                 (‐17.42)                  (‐1.44)
                                                                                  ***                      ***                     ***
   Beans, % of total farm area                      ‐0.033                0.115                   ‐0.201                    0.119
                                                    (‐1.22)                 (6.60)                  (‐5.12)                  (5.17)
                                                                                  ***                      ***                     ***
   Manioc, % of total farm area                    0.0001                 0.081                   ‐0.688                    0.607
                                                     (0.00)                 (3.00)                 (‐11.36)                 (17.12)
                                                           **                     **
   Corn, % of total farm area                     ‐0.048                  0.027                       0.013                   0.008
                                                    (‐2.36)                 (2.06)                   (0.46)                   (0.44)
                                                          ***                     ***                      ***
   Soy Beans, % total farm area                   0.197                   0.026                   ‐0.207                     ‐0.016
                                                  (‐14.51)                  (3.02)                 (‐10.57)                  (‐1.44)
                                                          ***                      **                      **                      ***
   Forest, % total farm area                     ‐0.071                   ‐0.013                   0.036                    0.048
                                                    (‐6.99)                (‐2.06)                   (2.46)                  (5.66)
                                                          ***                                              **
   Permanent crops, % total farm                 ‐0.042                      0.013                 0.046                     ‐0.016
   area                                             (‐3.19)                 (1.55)                   (2.37)                  (‐1.45)
                                                          ***                       *                                              ***
   Pasture, % total farm area                    ‐0.021                    ‐0.008                     0.005                 0.024
                                                    (‐2.70)                (‐1.67)                   (0.46)                  (3.68)
                                                           **                      **                                              ***
   Usable but not used, % total farm              ‐0.051                  ‐0.027                     ‐0.009                 0.081
   area                                             (‐2.28)                (‐2.14)                  (‐0.31)                  (4.86)
                                                                                  **                        **                     ***
   Unusable, % total farm area                      ‐0.047                0.050                    ‐0.128                   0.125
                                                    (‐1.33)                 (2.22)                  (‐2.54)                  (4.23)
                                                                                                           ***                     ***
   Constant                                         ‐0.034                   0.010                 1.153                   ‐0.129
                                                    (‐0.59)                 (0.27)                  (14.11)                  (‐2.70)
   Number of observations                 Total: 3556            Total: 3556               Total: 3556              Total: 3556
   State dummies (27 states)                          Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
             2
   Pseudo R                                           0.42                    0.20                     0.39                    0.38
    (16)
    2
                                                  2826.27                1273.49                   2484.34                 2242.88
           2
   Prob>                                          0.0000                  0.0000                   0.0000                  0.0000
   Hausman‐Wu Test                          F(1, 3503)=15.51        F(1, 3503)=36.24          F(1, 3503)=0.20         F(1, 3503)=37.77
   H0: Conflicts are exogenous.             p‐value= 0.0001          p‐value=0.0000           p‐value=0.6514           p‐value=0.0000
  Estimated by 3‐Stage Least Squares using predicted conflict as the single excluded instrument (Wooldridge, 2002: 542). t‐stats in
                                      ***    **         *
  parentheses. Statistical signif.: 1% . 5% , 10% . The coefficients for all four equations are constrained to add up to 0 for every variable.

                                                                     40
Table 4 – Analysis of Instruments
          Instruments             F‐test first   Sharecrop     Fixed‐Rent     Occupied       Owned
                                     stage       (impact of    (impact of    (impact of    (impact of
                                                   conflict)     conflict)     conflict)     conflict)
   Priests 1985, interaction,     F(5, 3501)=     ‐0.002***     ‐0.002***     ‐0.0001      0.004***
   opposition parties                32.18         (‐3.02)       (‐4.86)       (1.17)        (3.57)
   Priests 1975, interaction,     F(5, 3500)=     ‐0.002***     ‐0.003***     ‐0.0002      0.004***
   opposition parties                31.58         (‐3.41)       (‐3.52)       (0.29)        (3.75)
   Priests 1985, interaction,     F(3, 3510)=     ‐0.003***    ‐0.002***      0.0008       ‐0.004***
   no opposition parties             51.94         (‐3.74)       (‐5.19)       (1.41)        (4.09)
   Priests 1985, no               F(1,3502)=      ‐0.0008      ‐0.002***      0.002***       0.001
   interaction, no opp. parties      62.50         (‐1.34)       (‐4.20)       (2.74)        (1.16)




                                                     41
Figure 5 ‐ Marginal Effects of Crop Mix and
Conflicts on Contract Choice (+ 1 std. dev.)




                                               42
Figure 6 – The impact of Violence on Tenancy and Sharecropping ‐ Brazil




  Percent of fixed rent and sharecropping in municipios with (V) and without (NV) violence.

Figure 7 – The impact of Violence on Tenancy and Sharecropping ‐ South




  Percent of fixed rent and sharecropping in municipios with (V) and without (NV) violence.

Figure 8 – The impact of Violence on Tenancy and Sharecropping ‐ North




  Percent of fixed rent and sharecropping in municipios with (V) and without (NV) violence.

                                       43
Figure 9 – Distribution of Bootstrapped Coefficient of Conflict on Contract Choice, N=500


                       60
                       40
             Density
                       20
                       0




                              -.1                       -.05                   0                      .05
                            Coefficient of Conflict in Fixed Rent Regresion (N=500, 10,000 repetitions)

       Sub‐sample size = 500, Number of subsamples = 10,000. Only 1380 statistically significant (10%) coefficients were
       included in the histogram, of which 110 (8.66%) were positive and 1270 (91.34%) were negative.




                                                            44
Figure 10 ‐ Distribution of Bootstrapped Coefficient of Conflict on Contract Choice, N=1000




                  100
                  8060
               Density
                  40
                  20
                  0




                          -.06                -.04              -.02              0                 .02
                         Coefficient of Conflict in Fixed Rent Regression (N=1000, 10,000 repetitions)


        Sub‐sample size = 1000, Number of subsamples = 10,000. Only 3347 statistically significant (10%) coefficients were
        included in the histogram, of which 75 (2.2%) were positive and 3271 (97.8%) were negative.




Table 5 – Impact of Contract Choice on Average Farm Size
                                               Excluded             Excluded             Excluded              Excluded
                                              category:            category:             category:            category:
                                                Owner              Sharecrop            Fixed Rent            Occupant
   Fixed Rent (% of total farmland)           ‐1579.2***           2072.0***                                   766.5***
                                                (‐6.20)              (5.99)                                      (5.39)
   Sharecrop (% of total farmland)             561.2***                                  ‐2141.1***           ‐1404.1***
                                                 (5.04)                                     (‐6.42)             (‐4.16)
   Occupant (% of total farmland)               ‐219.7              1295.8***             ‐785.4***
                                                (‐1.53)               (3.72)                (‐5.55)
                                                                           ***
   Owner (% of total farmland)                                      1514.2                ‐561.1***                195.5
                                                                      (5.85)                (‐5.14)                (1.39)
                                                         ***                ***                   ***
   Constant                                       189.3            ‐1325.5                 751.4                   ‐11.0
                                                    (4.04)           (‐4.83)                 (6.93)               (‐0.09)
   Number of observations                    Total: 3556       Total: 3556          Total: 3556             Total: 3556
   State dummies (27 states)                         Yes               Yes                    Yes                   Yes
    2
   R                                                0.392             0.388                  0.395                 0.388
   R2 ‐ adjusted                                    0.387             0.383                  0.390                 0.383
   F(,29,3526)                                      96.87             96.03                  97.39                 96.24
   Prob>F                                          0.0000            0.0000                0.0000                 0.0000
  Instrumental Variables Estimator. Instruments are all the right‐hand side variables in Table 3. t‐stats in parentheses.
  Statistical significance: 1% ***. 5% **, 10% *.




                                                              45
Figure 11 – Distribution of Farm Area in Fixed Rent and Sharecropping.




                                          46
                                             Appendix 1 – Data

Total number of observations = 3556. This the AMC7097 grouping created by IPEA/IBGE which makes
data comparable from 1970 to 2000 by adding, or in some cases averaging, the data of municipios that
sub‐divided from 1970 to 1997. There are 27 states. The data for most of the variables are available for
two set of years, 1985 and 1995/96. Agricultural data and Priest data can be added for 1980 and 1975,
but Conflict data only goes back to 1985. Not all variables are used in the estimation but we list all
variables available.

          Agricultural data (source = IBGE Agricultural Census)

    1)    Area in farms (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    2)    Number of establishments (1985 and 1996).
    3)    Total municipio area (fixed)
    4)    Farm area in natural forest (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    5)    Farm area in planted forest (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    6)    Farm area in permanent crops (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    7)    Farm area in temporary crops (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    8)    Farm area in natural pasture (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    9)    Farm area in planted pasture (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    10)   Farm area left fallow (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    11)   Farm area productive but not used (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    12)   Farm area unsuitable for productive use (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    13)   Total area in farms run by owner (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    14)   Total number of owner run farms (1985 and 1996).
    15)   Total area in rented farms (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    16)   Total number of rented farms (1985 and 1996).
    17)   Total area in sharecropped farms (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    18)   Total number of sharecropped farms (1985 and 1996).
    19)   Total area in squatted farms (1985 and 1996), hectares.
    20)   Total number of squatted farms (1985 and 1996).
    21)   Number of heads of cattle (1985 and 1996).
    22)   Number of tractors (1985 and 1996).
    23)   Investments realized in the year R$ (thou) of 2000(mil) (Deflated) (1985 and 1996).
    24)   Revenues received in the year R$ (thou) of 2000(mil) (Deflated) (1985 and 1996).
    25)   Expenditures in the year R$ (thou) of 2000(mil) (Deflated) (1985 and 1996).
    26)   Area irrigated (1985 and 1996) hectares.
    27)   Total number of tractors in the municipio (1985 and 1996).
    28)   People working in farms (1985 and 1996).
    29)   Area in cotton (1985 and 1996) hectares.
    30)   Area in rice (1985 and 1996) hectares.
    31)   Area in coffee (1985 and 1996) hectares.
    32)   Area in sugar cane (1985 and 1996) hectares.
    33)   Area in beans (1985 and 1996) hectares.
    34)   Area in manioc (1985 and 1996) hectares.


                                                     47
35) Area in corn (1985 and 1996) hectares.
36) Area in soy beans (1985 and 1996) hectares.

Conflict data

37) Number of murders, yearly data (1985 to 1995). (Pastoral Land Commission)
38) Number of threats of murder, yearly data (1985 to 1995). (Pastoral Land Commission)
39) Number of murder attempts, yearly data (1985 to 1995). (Pastoral Land Commission)
40) Number of occupations/invasions, yearly data (1988 to 1995). (Pastoral Land Commission)
41) Area expropriated for land reform, yearly data (1979 to 1996). (INCRA/Ipeadata)
42) Capacity for settling families in settlement projects, yearly data (1979 to 1996), unit=families.
    (INCRA/Ipeadata)
43) Number of expropriations, yearly data (1979 to 1996). (Pastoral Land Commission)
    (INCRA/Ipeadata)


Priest data (source Catholic Hierarchy – The hierarchy of the Catholic Church http://www.catholic‐
hierarchy.org/ )

44) Number of Catholics, data for 1975, 1985, 1995 (proximate years in some cases).
45) Total population (data from Catholic Hierarchy, not IBGE), for 1975, 1985, 1995 (proximate years
    in some cases).
46) Number of priests in Diocese, data for 1975, 1985, 1995 (proximate years in some cases).
47) Number of Catholics per preist, for 1975, 1985, 1995 (proximate years in some cases).
      Other data
48) Area of entire municipio, square kilometers (oddly this varies from 1985 to 1996)
    (IBGE/Ipeadata).
49) Distance from the municipio head to the federal capital, kilometers, fixed for 1985 and 1996.
50) Distance to the state capital kilometers, fixed for 1985 and 1996.
51) Transport cost to São Paulo (index) – Nucleo de Estudos e Modelos Espaciais Sistêmicos,
    http://www.nemesis.org.br/ .
52) Number of train stations in the município ‐ Nucleo de Estudos e Modelos Espaciais Sistêmicos,
    http://www.nemesis.org.br/ .
53) Latitute, degrees, fixed for 1985 and 1996.
54) Longitude, degrees, fixed for 1985 and 1996.
55) Total population, 1980 and 1996. (IBGE/Ipeadata)
56) Total rural population, 1980 and 1996. (IBGE/Ipeadata)
57) Total urban population, 1980 and 1996. (IBGE/Ipeadata)
58) Economically active population 1985 and 1996. (IBGE/Ipeadata)
59) Economically active rural population 1985 and 1996. (IBGE/Ipeadata)
60) Economically active urban population 1985 and 1996. (IBGE/Ipeadata)
61) County GDP in R$ of 2000 (thou) (deflated), 1985 and 1996.
62) County agricultural GDP in R$ of 2000 (thou) (deflated), 1985 and 1996.
63) Number of county assemblymen elected by the main opposition party (MDB in 1982 and PT in
    1996) (TSE/Ipeadata)
64) Total number of county assembly seats, 1982 and 1996.


                                                48
Table A1 – Non‐Instrumented Results
                                           Fixed Rent (%)        Sharecropper (%)                 Owner (%)           Occupant (%)
   Conflict per 1000 farms                       0.0001                 ‐0.0001                      ‐0.0001            ‐0.000007
                                                  (1.01)                 (‐0.63)                      (‐0.40)              (‐0.05)
                                                           *                                                 **                    *
   Frontier                                    ‐0.0003                  0.0001                      0.0004                ‐0.002
                                                 (‐1.79)                  (1.15)                       (2.11)              (‐1.81)
                                                                                                              *                  ***
   GDP growth 1985‐1995                         ‐0.0001                 ‐0.0002                       ‐0.004              0.004
                                                 (‐0.03)                 (‐0.21)                      (‐1.84)              (3.24)
                                                        ***                                                 ***                  ***
   Latitude                                    ‐0.002                   0.0007                       0.004               ‐0.002
                                                 (‐3.37)                  (1.57)                       (3.78)              (‐3.50)
                                                        **                     **                           ***                  ***
   Longitude                                    0.002                   0.001                       ‐0.006                0.003
                                                  (2.22)                 (2.02)                       (‐5.48)              (5.07)
                                                           ***                                                ***
   Distance to state capital                 ‐0.00003                  0.00001                    0.00003                0.00001
                                                 (‐4.02)                 (1.37)                        (3.07)               (1.42)
                                                                                   **                                              ***
   Transport cost to São Paulo               0.0000004               ‐0.000004                      ‐0.00005            0.00001
                                                  (0.14)                 (‐2.34)                      (‐1.17)              (3.48)
                                                        ***
   Number of train stations                     0.002                   ‐0.0006                       ‐0.009             ‐0.00006
                                                  (2.70)                 (‐1.63)                      (‐1.17)              (‐0.01)
                                                            *                                                   *
   Population density 1995                    0.00001                 ‐0.000001                    ‐0.00001              0.00003
                                                  (1.91)                 (‐0.18)                      (‐1.64)               (0.63)
                                                                                                                                 ***
   Rural/Urban Population 1995                  ‐0.0006                ‐0.00004                       ‐0.001              0.002
                                                 (‐1.05)                 (‐0.13)                      (‐1.61)              (3.99)
   Population growth 1985‐1995                     0.006                 ‐0.004                        0.004               ‐0.006
                                                  (1.28)                  (1.43)                       (0.55)              (‐1.37)
                                                                               ***                          ***                  ***
   Tractor per hectare growth 1985‐               ‐0.015                0.575                       ‐1.022                0.462
   1995                                          (‐0.08)                 (5.05)                       (‐3.92)              (2.94)
                                                        ***                                                 ***
   Cattle per hectare1995                      ‐0.007                    ‐0.002                      0.010                 ‐0.001
                                                 (‐3.86)                 (‐1.37)                       (3.84)              (‐0.91)
                                                        ***                    ***                          ***                   *
   Cotton, % of total farm area                 0.394                   0.213                       ‐0.718                 0.111
                                                  (5.02)                 (4.35)                       (‐6.39)              (1.65)
                                                        ***                    ***                          ***
   Rice, % of total farm area                   0.267                   0.252                       ‐0.532                  0.017
                                                  (7.36)                (11.33)                      (‐10.42)               (0.56)
                                                        ***                    **
   Coffee, % of total farm area                ‐0.098                   0.042                          0.055                0.001
                                                 (‐3.21)                 (2.21)                        (1.25)               (0.05)
                                                        ***                    ***                          ***
   Cane, % of total farm area                   0.162                   0.058                       ‐0.209                 ‐0.010
                                                 (19.95)                (11.52)                      (‐18.07)              (‐1.48)
                                                                               ***                          ***                  ***
   Beans, % of total farm area                    ‐0.017                0.130                       ‐0.226                0.114
                                                 (‐0.67)                 (7.97)                       (‐6.05)              (5.05)
                                                                               ***                          ***                  ***
   Manioc, % of total farm area                    0.002                0.082                       ‐0.690                0.604
                                                  (0.06)                 (3.24)                      (‐11.77)             (17.14)
                                                         **                    **
   Corn, % of total farm area                   ‐0.043                  0.031                          0.006                0.006
                                                 (‐2.18)                 (2.54)                        (0.20)               (0.35)
                                                        ***                    ***                          ***
   Soy Beans, % total farm area                 0.196                   0.026                       ‐0.206                 ‐0.016
                                                (‐14.86)                 (3.18)                      (‐10.91)              (‐1.43)
                                                        ***                                                  *                   ***
   Forest, % total farm area                   ‐0.062                    ‐0.005                       0.022               0.045
                                                 (‐6.57)                 (‐0.87)                       (1.65)              (5.51)
                                                        ***                                                 ***
   Permanent crops, % total farm               ‐0.047                     0.009                      0.052                 ‐0.015
   area                                          (‐3.57)                  (1.19)                       (2.78)              (‐1.34)
                                                          *                                                                      ***
   Pasture, % total farm area                    ‐0.014                  ‐0.002                       ‐0.006              0.022
                                                 (‐1.94)                 (‐0.33)                      (‐0.61)              (3.50)
                                                                                                                                 ***
   Usable but not used, % total farm              ‐0.025                 ‐0.010                       ‐0.039              0.074
   area                                          (‐1.38)                 (‐0.83)                      (‐1.49)              (4.68)
                                                                               **                           ***                  ***
   Unusable, % total farm area                    ‐0.047                0.049                       ‐0.128                0.126
                                                 (‐1.39)                 (2.33)                       (‐2.62)              (4.27)
                                                                                                            ***                  ***
   Constant                                       ‐0.080                 ‐0.036                      1.233               ‐0.117
                                                 (‐1.51)                 (‐1.10)                     (16.27)               (‐2.56)
   Number of observations              Total: 3564             Total: 3564                  Total: 3564           Total: 3564
   State dummies (27 states)                        Yes                    Yes                          Yes                  Yes
    2
   R                                                0.45                   0.28                         0.43                 0.39
    (16)
     2
                                               2946.56                 1382.49                      2620.91              2256.15
           2
   Prob>                                        0.0000                 0.0000                        0.0000              0.0000
                                                                                          ***     **         *
  Estimated Seemingly Unrelated Regresion. t‐stats in parentheses. Statistical signif.: 1% . 5% , 10% . The coefficients for all four
  equations are constrained to add up to 0 for every variable.




                                                                    49
