                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  COLLECTIVE BARGAINING LAWS AND
                THREAT EFFECTS OF UNIONISM IN THE
               DETERMINATION OF POLICE COMPENSATION



                        Richard   B. Freeman

                         Casey Ichniowski

                          Harrison Lauer



                      Working Paper No. 1578




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBERtS research prograri
in Labor Studies and project in Government Budget. ny opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #1578
                                                         Narch 1985



                         Collective Bargaining Laws and
                        Threat Effects of Unionism in the
                      Determination of Police Compensation
                                      ABSTRACT


             This study examines the effect of public sector unions on compensation

packages. The model of the compensation determination process incorporates

distinctive institutional aspects of public sector labor relations, particularly
the differences in collective bargaining laws across states. The model is esti-
mated using    data on over 800 municipal police departments. Our results indicate

that the effect of public sector unions depend critically on these institutional

features of the public sector. First, unionism thrives only in those states

with protective legislation. Second, in states where unionism has flourished,

unionism exerts a strong upward pressure on both union and nonunion compensation

packages. Cross section estimates for 1978 indicate that salaries of union and

nonunion departments in highly unionized states are some 30% higher than are the

salaries in states with low levels of unionism. However, no significant dif-

ference between union and nonunion salaries within states is observed.

          Before—after estimates of the "state—wide union effect" are more

modest (9.9% to 18.1%). Finally, this "state—wide union effect" on union and

nonunion departments appears to 'be even more pronounced on fringe benefits than

it is on salaries. The net result is that in highly unionized states, a greater

proportion   of the larger compensation packages is paid in fringe benefits.

Richard B. Freeman             Casey Ichniowski             Harrison Lauer
National Bureau of             Graduate School of           115 Yorkshire Drive
Economic Research              Business                     Pittsburgh, PA 15238
1050 Massachusetts Ave.        Columbia Univeristy
Cambridge, MA 02138            713 Uris Hall
                               New York, NY 10027
        In spite of well—known institutional differences between public sector

and private sector collective bargaining, many studies of the effect of unioni-

zation on public sector compensation have essentially followed the private sec-

tor model, estimating union effects by comparing the wages of organized and

unorganized workers or cities. For the most part these studies have found

rather modest union wage effects in the public sector. "The 'average' wage

effect of unionism in government... is roughly on the order of five per cent...

smaller than the average union wage impact in private industry."1 "The general

effects (of public sector unions) which have been measured are not huge."2

        This study presents an alternative model of public sector union effects

on compensation which yields larger estimates of what unions do to compensation

in the public sector. The model incorporates two distinct aspects of public

sector labor relations that should affect unions' ability to raise wages.

First are differences in collective bargaining laws across states: the fact

that some states have duty—to—bargain laws that encourage unionism, while others

have legal environments that discourage or even outlaw bargaining among certain

groups of employees. Second, city managers, unlike private employers, are

charged with the responsibility of administering public policies. Where a state

has a duty—to—bargain policy then, municipal managers will not be in a position

to oppose unionism through aggressive anti—union campaigns of the type seen in

the private sector. We argue that because of these factors public sector

unionism proliferates in states with favorable bargaining laws, and that in

these states union wages 'spill over' to nonunion cities, leading standard union

wage equations to underestimate union wage effects.

       We conduct our analysis using data on over 800 municipal police depart-

ments in 19T8 and a smaller sample in 1965 and l9T3. We find that differences
                                       —2—



in laws regulating police collective bargaining produce two polar sets of states

—— those with high levels of bargaining between municipalities and their police

departments and those in which police bargaining is virtually nonexistent.

Furthermore, differences in the average police salaries (all else fixed) in

'bargaining' and 'non bargaining' states are on the order of 20 to 25%. By

contrast, comparisons of organized and unorganized departments within the

"bargaining"   and "nonbargaining" states reveal little or no difference between
salaries paid in organized departments and those paid in unorganized depart—
ments.   Our interpretation of these   results is that in the absence of a
bargaining   law virtually all departments will remain nonunion with wages

remaining at relatively low nonunion levels, but that in public sector environ-

ments where collective bargaining is the dominant mechanism for determining com-

pensation, there are greater spillover effects than are usually found in the

private sector.3

Direct and Threat Effects of Public Sector Bargaining

         In this section we present a simple model of the inter—relation among

legal regulations, public sector unionism, and direct and 'spillover' effects of

unionism on compensation. The key prediction of our model is that in states

where union organization is high (because of favorable laws) unionism will raise

police pay in nonunion as well as in union departments. In states where

unionism is weak (because of unfavorable laws), unionism will have only a modest

effect on salaries in organized departments and no effect on salaries in unorga-

nized departments.

         Consider first the situation in a state with laws favorable to collec-

tive bargaining among police. A city in such a state fa'es the three options

shown in Figure 1.
                                        —3—



           Path A: It accepts organization and raises wages through bargaining

with the amount of the wage increases dependent on the union's economic or

political power relative to that of the city government.

           Path B: It seeks to remain non union by paying union wages to discourage

organization; unlike private firms, city managers who are charged with the

responsibility- of administering public policies, cannot engage in expensive,

often illegal campaigns against unions to remain nonunion.

           Path C: It does not accept organization immediately but also does not

match the increased levels in union departments. In a state with favorable laws

the city runs a great risk of becoming organized over time, producing a tran-

sitory and unstable state.

        Since in the long run only nonunion cities that match union wages remain

nonunion, the indirect spillover effects of unionism are as large as the direct

bargaining effects.

        Consider next the effect of unionism in states which lack a law per-

mitting collective bargaining. In the absence of a law, there will be no mecha-

nism by which employees are able to become recogni.ed formally. If workers

organize   a   union, managers may ignore any requests or demands to bargain on the

grounds that no agent has the authority to participate in the compensation

determination process. In such a setting cities are unlikely to be organized.

Where a union does exist, the city government will have much greater bargaining

power than the union, while cities which are not organized need not copy union

wages to remain nonunion. In this environment, direct effects of unionism
                Figure   1:   Path Model With Direct and Threat Effects of Collective
                                  Bargaining on Public Sector Wages
                                  Unionize: increase
                                  wages
                                                                                        Increased
                  A                                                                     wages of
                                                                                        union and
Bargaining                        Remain nonunion:
Laws: Ability                     pay union wages                                       nonunion
To Organize
                                                                                        departments
                                                                                        in states
                                                                                        with laws
                                   Remain nonunion:
                                   pay nonunion wages
                                      —5—




should be small and there should be no indirect spillover effects.

          The spillover or threat nxdel just described yields several hypotheses

that will be tested in this study. First, formal collective bargaining should
be concentrated in states that have bargaining statutes or policies. Second, if
indirect "threat" effects of collective bargaining are equal in magnitude to the
direct effect of bargaining, salaries and wages in union and nonunion depart-
ments in the states with bargaining laws will be equivalent, but at levels of
compensation exceeding the levels observed in states without bargaining laws.

Third, the novement of a state from little unionization toconsiderable unioni-

zation should greatly raise the average pay for all police in the state.

Fourth, low wage nonunion municipalities in a state with a bargaining law should

be highly prone to unionization in the future. Fifth, unionism should, have only

modest direct and no indirect effects on pay in states where collective

bargaining is legally discouraged.

Data

         To test these hypotheses we have gathered 1978 compensation and unionism

data for over 800 municipalities with populations over 10,000. So that we could

also examine changes over time, we collected data for a smaller sariple of

just under 200 cities with populations greater than 25,000 for the years 1965

and 1913. For each year, we have obtained patrolman's minimum and maximum

salary   and the average departmental salary.   In   1978 we have also obtained two

fringe benefit measures: per employee contributions to retirement systems, and

per employee contribution to health and life insurance programs.

         To test how well the path model in the previous section describes the

effects of public sector unions on the compensation determination process,
                                      —6—



several variables are needed to describe the collective bargaining environment

at the municipal and state levels. Previous research on the public sector indi-

cates that a written labor contract is a better indicator of the presence of

the collective bargaining process than is a union local or association.5   To

collect contract data, we conducted a survey in which we asked the following two

questions: "Does your city have a written labor contract covering wages, hours

and conditions of employment for police personnel?", and "What year was the

first written labor contract signed?" It is assumed that cities responding

affirmatively to the first question have been party to a police contract con-

tinually since the date given in response to the second question. Collective

bargaining for police department I in year t is defined by the presence of a

written labor contract (Cit; c=i,o) based on this survey.

        From the municipal—level variable C, we derive the state—level

variable, PCst: the percentage of all municipalities in state s that have writ-

ten labor contracts in year t. Responses from 985 municipalities that answered

the contract questions are used to calculate PC in any given year.

        Also critical to the path model are state—level collective bargaining

policies or laws. In this study, LAW is a dummy variable which equals one if

there is a policy in the state (as defined by statute, court rulings, or state

attorney general's opinions) providing that collective bargaining for police is

permitted in the state.6

Control Variables

        Since LAW and PC are defined along state boundaries, it is important to

control for other state—wide characteristics that might influence police compen—
                                    —7-.




sation. Other state characteristics included in the analysis are: four

geographic region durnx variables (northeast, north central, south, and west),

the percentage of a state's nonagricultural workforce who are public employees

in 1970, and the percentage of a states' nonagricultural workforce who are union

members in 1970.   In addition to state controls, we include various municipal—

level characteristics: three government—type dummies (council—manager, mayor—

council, and commission), a central city dummy, population, per capita income,

total municipal revenue per capita. For a smaller sample of cities, information

was also available on: the salary paid to craft and kindred workers as a

measure of alternate salary available to police; serious crime rate; median edu-

cation level in the municipality; percentage black in the population; and land

area.7 When these additional control variables are included in analyses for

1978, the sample excludes smaller towns with populations between 10,000 and

25,000 and is reduced from just over 800 observations to under 200.

        At the municipal level, ability—to—pay measures, such as income per

capita and municipal revenue per capita, are expected to have a positive effect

on salaries. A number of variables, such as central city, median education,

percent black, land area and population, are included as controls for differen-

ces in needs or tastes (and therefore demand) for police services The salary

paid to craft—and—kindred workers should affect the supply of workers available

for police work and should therefore have a positive influence on police

salaries. Because independent and dependent variables come from different

sources, the data do not always pertain to identical years across variables,

but all independent variables are matched as closely as possible with the years

of the compensation data.
                                                    —8—




          The path model in Figure 1 suggests estimation of several equations.

Unionization or Contract Equation
                         +       +
        C.   = f(LAW , STATE , CITY
                                            S      I   )                   (1)
           is                    S


where C. = dumrr,r variable for contract in city i in state s

        LAWS = 0—i variable for presence of bargaining law in state
          +
        STATE       = vector of state controls
                S

        CITY. =         vector       of municipal controls

         Because the dependent contract status variable (C15) is binary we esti-

mate equation (i) with a logistic fanction. From our model we expect that the

LAW will be the major determinant of contract status of a city and, therefore,

of the proportion of cities with contracts in a state. Since LAW is a state—

level variable, however, there is danger that its effects could 'be overstated

due to possible omission of unobserved state effects correlated with LAW and

with unionization. To deal with this problem, we also estimate first difference

equations, examining the change in contract status within a city or state over

time. Such differencing removes unobserved fixed state effects:

                    =   F(LAW, STATE ,          CITY.,     STATE, CITY.)    (2)

where some state and city variables change over time and others do not.

         Figure         2 shows the changing pattern of contract status across states
over time and the relation between contract status and state laws. It documents
the   sharp increase in the number of states with laws favorable to collective

bargaining and a concordant increase in the levels of unionization. What

stands out is the movement of the police labor market from one with essentially
                                                                           —9—


                                       Figure 2:     State Laws or Policies and Percentage Contract Over Time



                1965


I of                                              I of                                                     I of
states                                            states                                                   states
     40                                                40                                                      40



                            States with                                               States with                   States with
    30                      laws                      30                              laws                     30   laws




    20                                                20                                                       20




     10                                               10                                                       10




          40   60      80   100 %   cities   in                                  80                                          cities   in

                               states with                                                   states with                   states with
                               contracts                                                     contracts                     contracts


                                                       10                                                      10




     20                                               20                                                       20



                             States without                                           States without                States without
     30                      laws                     30                              laws                     30   laws




     40                                               40                                                       40
                                         —10—




no unionization in 1965   to   a dichotomous market with high unionization in most

(though not all) states with laws and little unionization in those without laws.

       Logistic equation estimates of equations 1 and 2 are given in Table 1.

The coefficients on the LAW variable show that as hypothesized, passage of a

collective bargaining law does, indeed, lead to collective bargaining contracts

in police departments. Both the cross—section and longitudinal regressions find

significant positive effects on the law (change in law) variable. More detailed

analysis using panel data from 1955 to l9T8 on these cities reveals that much of

the growth in municipal police unionization occurs in the first few years after

the passage of state bargaining laws.8

Compensation Equation
                                          +             +
        mW        a+bC +bPC +bCITY +bSTATE +e                            (3)
             is         li 2s 3                 i   1       s   is

       Our model also suggests that in the frequent cases where state bargain-

ing laws have encouraged municipal unionization, wages of union and nonunion

departments are both raised. Therefore, in equation (3), we expect b2 to be posi-

tive and significant. In the absence of state legislation, the rare department

that has unionized will have only limited ability to raise wages. In highly

unionized states with favorable bargaining legislation, nonunion departments have

wages comparable to the wages in union departments because of the importance of

threat effects in these environments. With and without state legislation, union

and nonunion departments will have comparable salaries, so that b1      0. In this

analysis, b2 measures how much an increase in the level of state unionization

will influence both union and nonunion departments and is therefore our first

estimate of the threat effect. b1 is the additional wage premium enjoyed
                                       —11—




              Table   1: Logistic Coefficient Estimates of The Effect

                         of Bargaining LAW on Contract Statusa



                                       (1)                         (2)

Dependent Variable                  CONTRACTT8           CONTRACT78 — CONTRACT65
      observations                     822                         188


1.    iAW7
                                       (.431)
2.    LAW78 — LAW65                                                l.914***
                                                                   (.378)

3. Other control                      '0                           C
      variables


      log—likelihood                —271.94                      —94.783




a — assymptotically normal standard errors in parenthesis
b — control variables in 1978 cross—section equation included three region
dummies, two government—type dummies, a central city dumr, population,
income per capita, total revenue per capita, and the percentage of state
employment in the public sector, and the percentage of' state employment
that is unionized.
c — control variables available for 1978 and 1965 that are differenced
included change in population.


      —   indicates   significance at the .01 level, one—tailed test;
 **   —   indicates   significance at the .05 level, one—tailed test;
  *   —   incicates   significance at the .10 level, one—tailed test
                                         —12—



solely by union departments. The total effect of unionization on a union

department   is given by the sum of b1 and b2.     Estimates of how these different
kinds of union effects depend upon the presence of state legislation will be
obtained   by estimating equation (3) separately for the subsainpies of cities in

states with and without bargaining laws.

         Table 2 presents estimated coefficients on key variables for the cross—

section equation (3)9 Entering the municipal—level contract variable (ci) as

the only union measure replicates the form of the equation most commonly esti-

mated to gauge the effect of public sector unions on compensation. In 1978 the

coefficient on C indicates that union departments receive 11% higher salaries

than do nonunion departments. When this equation is replicated for 1973 (column

6) and for 1965    (column 8),   one observes a result found in some other studies on

public   sector union wage effects: the simple cross—section union effect is
modest but becomes larger in later time periods.10 The 1965 cross—section esti-
mate is in fact negative (—.029); in 1973, the contract effect is .OltO; and by
1978 it is .107.

         In column 2 and 3, one observes that the PC and LAW     coefficients,
entered separately, are both significant and positive. The coefficient on PC is

nearly two and one—half the size of the CONTRACT coefficient in column 1. When

the three union measures are entered simultaneously (column )4), only the coef-

ficient on PC remains significant and positive. The PC coefficient from the

column )4 specification suggests that both union and nonunion police departments

in states that are almost entirely organized receive salaries some 30 higher

than those paid to police departments in states that are generally unorganized.
                                                                          —13—

                                          Table 2: Cross—Section Estimates of the Effect of Union Measures
                                             on Natural Logarithm of Average Police Department Salarya


                                                (1)           (2)          ()         (14)       (5)       (6)       ('r)        (8)      ()
Sample Year                                     1978          1978         1918       1978       1978      1973      1973        1965     1965

Sample Observations                              822           822          822        822        190       2314      2314        2314     2314


1.        Contract     (c1)                     .1O7*                       --       —.012      -.0014      .0140   -.001       —.029    -.020
                                            (.015)                                   (.020)     (.0141)    (.031)   (.036)      (.036)   (.036)

2.        Percent Contract (P;)                                .2149***               .297***    .229***             .102*        ——     _.365*
                                                             (.021)                  (.0314)    (.059)              (.078)               (.2014)

3.        LAW                                                              .120***   —.022      —.0142               .063*                .139***
                                                                          (.019)     (.0214)    (.0142)             (.o14)               (.031)

14.       Other Municipal—                        b             b            b           b         c          c             c      c        c
          Level Controls

5.        Other State—Level                       d              d           d           d         d          d        d           d        d
          Controls


                                                .575           .612        .570       .613       .685       .512     .525                 .671


a     —   standard errors     in   parentheses.

b —
    municipal—level controls available for the larger samples of cities with populations over 10,000 include: natural
logarithms of total revenue per capita, income per capita, and city population; and dummy variables for central city and
three government types

c — municipal—level controls available for the smaller samples of cities with populations over 25,000 include those in

note b plus: natural logarithms of city land area, median education, and salary of craft and kindred workers; percent
black in the population; and serious crime rate.

d —       state—level controls       include:     dummies for four geographic regions; and percent of state population unionized and the
percent         in   public employment.

          —   indicates                               .10 level,   one—tailed test;
                          significance at the
    **    —   indicates   significance at the         05    level, one—tailed test;
      *   —   incicates   significance at the         .01   level, one—tailed test.
                                      — l4 —




Our interpretation of why the LAW coefficient in column   is negligible is that

a bargaining policy which, for whatever reason, does not produce an increase in

the number of negotiated contracts for municipal police departments (as in

Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, North Dakota, and Vermont) does not

itself raise salaries. An examination of regression diagnostics for multi—

collinearity for the equation in column I reveals, moreover, that the LAW and PC

(and therefore C) variables are highly collinear making It unlikely that we

would obtain well—defined estimates of both effects."

        Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the column 1 specification indi-

cates that coefficient on C is no longer significantly different from zero once

PC is also entered. The simple contract (union) effect (column 1 specification)

usually estimated in studies of public sector union wage effects seems to be

entirely due to the greater representation of organized departments (those with

a contract) in highly organized states (those with high levels of nc). These

results indicate that salaries in nonunion departments are as high as those paid

in union departments.

        Smaller samples, columns (5) through (9), give results for the smaller

sample of cities of 25,000 or more. The regression findings for 19T8 are not

changed appreciably when the more detailed set of municipal controls are added

that limit the sample to cities and towns with populations greater than 25,000

(column 5).

        Similarly, for the cities in the 1973 sample, the results are much the

same. The modest positive contract coefficient (.o10) in column 6 is reduced to

zero once the state—level union measures are also entered in the equation
                                                               —15—



 (column 7). However, in 1973 the LAW as well as the PC variable affects

 salaries, which may be attributed to its representing a period of transition or

 sorting period from an environment with very little unionization (1965) to an

environment of union states and nonunion states (1978).

            To obtain an estimate of the difference between average salaries in sta-

tes with and without laws in 1973, one can use the column 7 coefficients to

calculate:

b         + b        (Pc         )   —b    (PC            ).   In    1973 the average level of PC for the 27
    LAW         PC         LAW        PC         NO LAW

states    with a law was .520; the average value of PC for the 23 states without a

law was .122. This calculation indicates that the difference in police salaries

between the average state with a law and the average state without a law would

be iO.I% [i.e., (.063) +                   (.1o2)(.520)        —    (.1o2)(.122)].   Again, the 1973 results

indicate that even as cities and states were in this period of transition,

"union states" had significantly higher police salaries than "nonunion states",

but that within states there was no difference between the salaries of union an

nonunion departments.

           For 1965, when the state-level unionization measures, LAW and PC, are

entered in the equation (column 9), LAW has a significant positive coefficient,

while the PC variable obtains a large negative coefficient. As Figure 2 indi-

cated, police unionization by any state—level or municipal—level measure was not

yet an accepted practice. Only 4.8% of all departments had labor contracts.

Thirty five states had no police unionization (Pcro); and the maximum value of

PC in 1965 was only .375. The PC coefficient, while large and negative,
translates into very small inter—state differences in average police compen-

sation. The positive LAW coefficient is also misleading. Supplementary analy-

sis which probe at the nature of the LAW   coefficient   reveals that of the four

states with any kind of bargaining policies in 1965 (California, North Dakota,

Rhode Island, and Wisconsin) only California has high police salaries.

Taking all of these results as a whole, the cross—section estimates reveal no

consistent evidence of positive effects of any of the municipal or state—level

collective bargaining variables in 1965 —— a. period in which police unionization

was virtually nonexistant.

Splitting the sample by LAW

       The cross—section estimates so far support our model's predictions that

unionized states have higher average police salaries than nonunion states, but

that no differences exist between the pay of union and nonunion departments

within any state. Table 3 goes a step further in testing our model of spillover

effects by examining contract coefficients obtained in separate equations for

law and no law subsamples. For our 1918 large sample there are enough obser-

vations to split the sample into states with and without laws and still have

contract and noncontract cities in both subsamples. Among no law states, the

contract coefficient is modest but positive (.055). In the previous equations

that included both the C and PC variables, the point estimates of the contract

effect had 'been slightly negative. Among no law states, union departments

do appear to earn a very modest positive salary differential. However, smili

differences in the PC variable between states in the no law sample do no signi—

ficantly affect average state salaries. Among states with laws, the coef—
                                              —17—




                Table 3: Contract Effects in States Without Bargaining Laws

                              and States With Bargaining Lawsa

     IDependent Variable =    Natural   Logarithm of Average Police Department Salary)


                                                (1)                        (2)
                                          No Law States                 Law States
Sample
Observations                                   206                         616


1. Contract (ci)                                .055                      —.023
                                               (.o16)                     (.022)


2. Percent Contract (PC)                       .011                        .295***
                                              (.138)                      (.038)


3. Other Control Variables                                                b



                                               .523


a   —   standard errors in parenthesis
b —     other   control variables are those listed in footnotes h and d   in Table   2.

        —   indicates significance at the .10 level, one—tailed test;
** — indicates       significance at the .05 level, one—tailed test;
 * — incicates       significance at the .01 level, one—tailed test.
                                       —18—



ficients on C (—.023) and PC (.295) are both similar to the coefficients from

the total sample reported in Table 2 (Column 1 specification).

        In evaluating the coefficients from the no law sample, it should be

noted that only fourteen of the 206 municipalities (6.8%) in no law environments

in 1978 have contracts. In contrast, 130 of the 616 municipalities (21.1%) in

states with laws in 1978 do not have contracts. The rare occurrence of a muni-

cipality having a contract in a no law state may well indicate that without the

protection of a bargaining law and without some provision or mechanism for

becoming organized, managers need not respond to employee demands for collective

bargaining. This explanation is also supported by the fact that in nine of the

fourteen cities that have contracts in no—law states, local legislatures adopted

a local ordinance providing for collective bargaining the year before the

negotiation of the first written contract. Interviews with managers from the

other five municipalities indicated that those cities have a strong union

influence in private sector employment that has made collective bargaining a

widely accepted practice in the area. Weirton, West Virginia and Huntington,

West Virginia are communities with strong influences from the steel workers and

mine workers respectively. Pascagoula, Mississippi (the only municipality with

a contract in a state in which police collective bargaining is explicitly ille-

gal by state statute) has a number of craft unions representing workers in its

dominant industry ——   shipbuilding.   Once these rare departments are able to

obtain formal recognition and a written contract, the power of the union to

raise wages would still appear to be quite limited. In these states, public

managers do not respond to any demands for collective bargaining; in the rare
                                                         —19—



cases when formal bargaining does exist (usually with the protection of local

ordinances), public managers do not appear to respond to any appreciable extent

to demands during collective bargaining.

Longitudinal         Analyses
             While these initial cross—section results lend support to our model the
question naturally arises: to what extent is the significant coefficient on PC
evidence       of a powerful union threat effect and to what extent does it reflect

omitted state characteristics? Just as the unionization equations could suffer

from    problems of omitted variable bias, so too can equation 3. In particular,
if   E(e5PC)           0,   estimation of equation 3 will lead to an overstatement of the

coefficient on PC5. To deal with this problem we again hypothesize an omitted

city—specific effect (which may be the same for all cities in a given state) in

a cross—section equation for period 1.

                                                     +
     in W1          a1 +   X1+       PC1 +

where e1 =
           111+ 01
        +
        X    = a vector state—level and              municipal level control variable

so that E(PC1e1) * 0, but that E(PC1 u) = 0

By making use of data for a prior time period (period 0), one can difference out

the effects of the omitted variables. Let the compensation equation for period

0 be represented:
                            +                 I            +
     in W0 =     a0   +
                           0X0 + yPC     +
                                             —----

where   -4-—
               is   a scaling factor that allows the effect of the omitted variable to

be different in the two time periods. Subtracting equation (5)                   from   equation

       and   rearranging        terms, one obtains:
                                           —20—




      mW1
            =     Xa) +   X1nW0
                                  +
                                      8(— ) + ) + - (pc1 — pc0) +
                              — Ày0) PC0 +        Cu1
                                                        —
                                                            Xu0   )            (6)

In the equation (6) specification, the coefficient on the change in PC, i, pro-

vides a direct estimate of the union threat effect that is not biased by the

possibly confounding effects of omitted variables. The equation (6) specifica—

tion further allows the effects of control variables to be different In the two

time periods.

         When equation 6 is estimated, the results In Table 1 are obtained.

Column 1 presents the results when 1965 data are used as the base year; column 2

uses 1973 data for the base year. The coefficient on the change in percent

contract variable in column (1), is still positive and significant. The magni-

tude of the coefficient is only a little less than the magnitude of the

coefficients shown in the Table 2 cross—section results. However, when the 1973

data are used for the base year in column 2, the magnitude of the coefficient on

the   change-in--percentage—contract variable is only .099 —— about one—half the
magnitude of the column   1   coefficient, and only slightly larger             than the

corresponding   standard error. Still,         the point estimate of the coefficient is

postive. The column 1     results     suggest that wage growth from 1965 to 1978 was

significantly   stimulated by growth      in   state—level        unionization over the period.
The post 1965 unionization spurt did not occur in states that previously had
high relative wages that were the result of some variable not captured by the

model. However, the column 2 results suggest that the additional union growth

that occured in   states after 1973 stimulated wage growth               less. One possible
                                                 —21—




                Table 14:   Estimates of the Effect of State Unionization (PC)

                            Obtained   From "Before—After" Methodolo,ra
        Dependent Variable: Natural Logarithm of 1978 Average Department Salaryl


                                                   (i)                    (2)
                Base Year Used                    1965                     19T3




1.      Change in Percent Contract                  C'
                                                  .101                     .099
        (Pc1 — PC0)                              (.067)                   (.081)


2. Base Year Wage (w0)                            .180                     .201
                                                 (.090)                   (.o6o)

3. Other Control Variables                          b                       b

                                                  .657                     .699




a   —   standard   errors in parenthesis
b — Other control variables include: changes in the natural logarithms of total
revenue per capita, income per capita, and population; changes in contract
status, and bargaining laws. The base year values of these variables are also
entered as controls. Characteristics available only for one time period
include: three region dummies, two government type dummies, a central city
dumniy, and percentage of the state population that is in public employment and
the percentage of sta'e employment unionized.
        —   indicates significance at the .10 level, one—tailed test;
** — indicates significance at the .05 level, one—tailed test;
 * — incicates significance at the .01 level, one—tailed test.
                                                     —22—



reason is that the timing of unionization was selective with unions first orga-

nizing areas in which they could raise wages most. In both cases, the fact that

PC variable is positively correlated with salaries or salary growth suggests

that nonunion as well as unionized departments benefit from increased unioniza-

tion in the state environment.

Union Threat Equation

        According to the path model in Figure 1 of Section II, a city in a

unionized environment can remain nonunion only by raising wages. A nonunion

city that does not match union wage gains is in the unstable state depicted by

path C of Figure 1. These cities run a particularly high risk of becoming orga-

nized. It is the strength of this threat that leads to the similarity between

union and nonunion salaries in the "union states."                       This additional hypothesis

of the path model suggests the following hazard function equation:


                                             w              w
     PR(C        = 1/C            0) =   f       i(t—l) —       s(t—l)          (T)
            it           i(t—l)
                                                     0
                                                         (w)s(t—l)
where the expression on the right hand side of the equation is a standardized

measure of the difference between the wage in nonunion city I and the average

wage in state s.

       To estimate equation (i) we calculated the number of standard deviations

a particular departments salary is away from the mean salary in its own state

(DEvsAL),   then   estimated a logistic equation for the probability of negotiating

a first contract in 1978 (i.e., the hazard rate of unionization in 1978).12 The

independent variables include LAW, DEVSAL, and an interaction term LAW * DEVSAL.

The results from this analysis are shown in Table 5.                      The logit coefficient on
                                              —23-.




                   Table 5: The Effect of Low Salaries Within a State

                        on the Probability of Becoming Unionized, l9'T8-

                                [Dependent Variable: Contract I


Observations                                            368



1. LAW                                                 3.273***
                                                      (1.o3'r)



2. LAW *       DEVSAL                                 _l.285*
                                                       (e866)


3.    DEVSAL                                            .865
                                                       (.835)

.     Other Control Variables


      Log Likelihood                                  82.105



a —   Assymptotically      normal standard errors in parenthesis

b — Other control variables include those listed in footnotes b and d in Table 2.

      — indicates significance at the .10 level, one—tailed test;
**    — indicates significance at the .05 level, one—tailed test;
 *    — incicates significance at the .01 level, one—tailed test.
the law variable in line 1 reinforces the results from the unionization equation

in Table 1. A municipality that does not have a contract at the start of the

year is much more likely to get its first contract during the year if It is In a

state with a LAW. From the logit coefficient in line 2 It appears that within

states with laws, a municipality is more likely to become organized during the

year if the police salaries it is paying at the beginning of the year13 are low

relative to other police salaries in its state. From the logit coefficient on

DEVSAL in line 3 of Table 3, it appears that paying relatively low salaries does

not lead to any increased risk of unionization in no law sates. It would

therefore appear that if a municipality in the states with bargaining laws do

not continue to respond to the threat of unionization, the department is likely

to begin to bargain collectively- to raise salaries.

        Interviews provided further evidence on the threat of unionization if

salaries in nonunion departments slip below the level of union—salaries. For

example, out of thirty—one municipalities from Minnesota in this sample, only

Fairmont, Minnesota does not have a contract with its police department. In

discussing the determination of police salaries in this town, a management

representative of Fairmont said he has to match the salaries and benefits of the

unionized departments, adding: "Any one of these years, if our police don't

like the [compensation] package..., we're going to have collective bargaining."

The threat effect also appears to operate when police unionization Is at

somewhat lower levels as well. A management representative from Centerville,

Ohio (PC = .60 In 19T8) wrote on our contract status survey-: "Of all the cities

with a population over 5,000 in the Dayton area, Centerville is the only one
                                      —25--




without union representation for the police department. Management is
constantly striving to keep salary levels and work procedures current so as to

give no reason for the officers to seek formal representation." While this last

response indicates that the threat effect in Ohio operates within regions or

SMSAs (as suggested by Ehrenberg and Goldstein)1 the presence of a threat

effect is certainly supported by such comments.

Fringe Benefits

        One additional aspect of how public sector unionization affects the corn—.

pensation determination process can be addressed with our data: the effect of

the various measures of public sector unionization on fringe benefits. For

1978, we also obtained data on employer contributions to retirement and

insurance programs. While detailed change—over—time analyses are not possible,

the cross—section compensation equations of Section IV can be replicated using

the natural logarithm of fringe benefits per employee as the dependent variable.

       Table 6 presents the coefficients of the three measures of public sector

bargaining, C, pc, and LAW, in fringe benefit equations. The column 1 speci-

fication replicates the basic average salary equation (Table 2, column 14),   but
with a slightly reduced sample. The change in sample again does not affect the

basic result: states with high levels of unionization (PC9) have relatively

high salaries, but within states there is no significant difference between the

salaries in contract and non contract cities. Column 2 estimates an equation

for the determinants of total compensation (defined as salary plus fringe

benefits). The PC coefficient in the column 2 total compensation equation is

somewhat larger than the PC coefficient in the column 1 salary equation. This
                                      Table 6:          Effects of Unionization Measures on Natural Logarithm
                                                   of Fringe Benefits and Total Compensation, 1978a
                                                                         [N =   791
                             (Dependent Variables In Natural Logarithms Except for Column 7 Specification)
                                         (1)                  (2)          ()           ()           (s)         (6)        (i)
                                       Average               Total        Fringe       Fringe       Fringe      Fringe     Fringe
                                       Salary                Comp.        Benefits     Benefits     Benefits    Benefits   Benefits!
                                                                                                                           Total Comp.
1.       Contract (Ci)                —.005                  —.010         .181*                                —.068      —.003
                                      (.020)                 (.022)       (.058)                                (.079)     (.ooi)
2.       Percent Contract    (F;)      .2145***               ,271***                    81***                    54***     .023**
                                      (.035)                 (.037)                    (.o8i)                   (.138)     (.013)
3.       LAW                          —.012                   .002                                   .255***     .010       .011
                                      (.o2)                  (.037)                                 (.072)      (.o9)      (.009)
         Other   Control variables            b                 b               b         b            b           b          b
a —      standard errors    in parentheses.
b    —   other   control variables include those listed in footnotes b and d in Table 2
         —   indicates   significance at the      .10   level, one—tailed test;
    **   —   indicates   significance at the      .05   level, one—tailed test;
     *   —   incicates   significance at the      .01   level, one—tailed test.
would indicate a somewhat larger effect of state unionization on fringe benefits

than on salaries. The results from the fringe benefit equation in columns (3)

through (6) also support the hypothesis that state unionization measures have a

larger effect on fringe benefits than on salaries. Absent any state—level

measures of unionization, contract cities appear to pay significantly higher

fringe benefits than non contract cities. Once PC is also included (column 6),

one sees the same pattern observed in the salary equations in Table 2: uninici—

palities in states with high levels of unionization pay significantly higher

fringe benefits than do iminicipalities in generally 'nonunion' states but no

significant difference between fringe benefits paid in contract and noncontract

municipalities. Moreover, the PC effect on fringe benefits (column 6) is nearly

double the effect of PC on salaries. These results further suggest that cities

in states with high levels of police unionization have compensation packages

more heavily weighted toward fringe benefits than salaries. In column (T), the

ratio of fringe benefits to total compensation is used as a dependent variable

to illustrate this point more directly. The coefficient on PC is positive and

significant. The magnitude of the coefficient suggests that when a state is

entirely unionized (PC=l.O), municipal police departments in the state will have

2.3% more of their compensation package made up of fringe benefits than do

police departments in virtually nonunion states (pc=o.o).

Conclusion

        The model developed in this paper and the various empirical equations

estimated to test that model suggest that the effect of unionization on compen-

sation in the public sector depends on a number of environmental and institu-

tional features:
                             —28—



1. In environments where unionization is rare in the public sector

   (i.e. in states which do not have legal provisions permitting

    bargaining), unionization has little impact on compensation. This

    principle is illustrated by the absence of any sort of union

    effect on compensation in 1965 in the United States when only 14.8%

    of   all municipal police departments engaged in collective
    bargaining and only four states had any legal provisions for
    collective bargaining. This principle Is also illustrated by the
    very modest Impact of collective bargaining in 1978 in states
   without bargaining laws.     In   these environments, only 6.8°   of all

    departments   bargained (almost always with   the protection of

    municipal—level bargaining ordinances), and the "union effect" on

    salaries here was 5.5%.

2. In environments where collective bargaining Is the dominant mecha-

   nism by    which compensation is determined    (usually in states with
   protective     legislation), unionization exerts a strong upward

   pressure on salaries on both union and nonunion departments.

   Because of the threat effect of unionization on salaries in nonu-

   nion departments, a simple comparison of salaries in union and

   nonunion   departments does not reveal the full "union effect." Our
   cross—section    estimates for 1978   provide an upper bound of the
   estimate   of the effect of unionization on salaries in union and

   nonunion departments (29.7). Our "before—after" estimates of

   this "union effect" are somewhat more modest (9.9% to 18.1%).
                                         —29—




              While police departments in highly unionized states pay much

              higher salaries than do departments in nonunion states, there

              appears to be no salary differential enjoyed solely by unionized

              departments in the highly organized states.

          3. Finally, the "union effect" on fringe benefits appears to be even

              greater than the effect on salaries. The net result is that in

              I,ii   UILLUI1.LZU                —             ——
                                                    J)1•Q)UILO11 UI .s.t.   LIi U1UJ)CI1
              sation    packages is paid in fringe benefit contributions to health

              and retirement plans.

        The results here suggest the value of developing models specific to the

public sector for analysing union wage effect rather than simply replicating

models used in the private sector. They also point out certain interesting

puzzles, which merit further attention. In particular, while bargaining laws

almost always lead to increased municipal organIzation, there are still six sta—

tes where bargaining policies have not lead to a majority of the states' munici-

palities being organized. While these six states (Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana,

New Mexico, North Dakota, and Vermont) have "weaker" meet—and-confer sorts of

laws, other states with these weaker provisions have seen significant increases

in the proportion of police departments that harain. And finally, if' municipal

organization generally follows the passage of state laws, how do we concep-

tualize the kind of union strength in the state that may lead legislators to

enact such favorable statutes?
                                    —30—



                                 Footnotes


1.   David Lewin, "Public Sector Labor Relations," Labor History, (Winter,

     1977), p. 138.

2.   Daniel J. Mitchell, "Collective Bargaining and Wage Determination in the

     Public Sector: Is Armageddon Really at Hand?" Public Personnel

     Management, Vol. 7(2), March—April 1978, P. 89.

3.   Ronald Ehrenberg and Gerald Goldstein, "A Model of' Public Sector Wage

     Determination," 2 Journal of Urban Economics 223, July 1975.

b.   1978 compensation data are from International City- Management Association,

     "1978 Police Salary" Data Tape, Washington, D.C., 1978. 1973 compensation

     data are from International Management Association, "Personnel Policies in

     Municipal Police Departments," Washington, D.C., 1973. 1965 compensation

     data are from International City Management Association, Municipal

     Yearbook, 1965 (Chicago, Illinois: I.C.M.A.), 1965.

5.   Ronald Ehrenberg, "Municipal Government Structure, Unionization, and the

     Wages of Firefighters," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 27 (1),

     October, 1973, pp. 361i8.

6.   Bureau of National Affairs, "Summary of State Labor Laws," Washington,

     D.C., 1978. Allen Gammage and Stanley Sachs, "Digest of State Legal

     Authority-," Police Unions, (Springfield, Illinois: Charles C. Thomas),

     1972. U.S. Deparment of Labor, Summary   of   Public Sector Labor Relations,

     1978, supplemented by reference to texts of state laws, court cases and

     attorney- generals' opinions. Additionally, for several cities in states
                                                                    —31—



     where no bargaining policies or laws exist, local ordinances permit

     bargaining. The LAW variable is coded as 1 in the cases.

7.   Government—type and central city status data are from International City

     Managers Association, "Master Code" Data Tape, (Washington, D.C.:

     I.C.M.A), 1978. Crime rate and land area data are from U.S. Bureau of the

     Census City and County Data Book, 1972, (Washington, D.C.: G.P.O.), 1972.

     .1.11%) Cl ha U .L'..J1&C)...L.
                                       f'4+ R4- A.-4-4-.. '+-
                                       .I4. taJ Lzassa,C1uch2 U flOQLIL. SO.. U SLJIA   LlaO U C A 'JL/.LC   fl4 T'.-.-
                                                                                                             £JCL UC.



     (Washington, D.C.: I.C.M.A.) provides population data; International City
     Management Association, Municipal Yearbook, 1978, (Washington, D.C.:

     I.C.M.A), 1978 provides data on per capita income and per capita city reve—

     nue. U.S. Bureau of the Census, City and County Data Book, 1972,                                                      arid U.S.
     Bureau of the Census,                                    rid CData Book, 1967,                      provides data on

     average education, percentage black in population, income per capita, per

     capita          revenue, and property per capita. U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1970
     Census of the                     PopulationL         Volume 1, (Washington, D.C.: G.P.O.), 1973, and
     U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1960 Census of Pou1at1on, Volume 1,
     (Washington,                  D.C.: G.P.O.), 19614 provicde data on craftsmen and kindred

     workers salaries.

8.   Casey Ichniowski, "Bargaining Legislation and Public                                             Sector      Union Growth:

     The     Case of Police," NEER Summer Institute Conference Paper, (Summer,
     1982), Cambridge, Massachusetts.
9.   Results in Table 1 and throughout                                  the analysis are           obtained using

     average departmental salary as the dependent variable. When                                                    the   other

     salary measures are used, patrolmen's minimum                                        salary      and patrolman's
                                     —32—




      maximum salary, estimated coefficients are similar.

      For a recent study examining the relationship of unionism to police compen-

      sation, see Ann Bartel and David Lewin, "Wages and Unionism in the Public

      Sector: The Case of Police," Review of Economics and Statistics,

      (February 1981), vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 53—59. While these researchers also

      employ a two—stage procedure in which the union variable is instrumented on

      other equations, their simple cross—section union coeffIcIents using data

      on individuals in 1973 range from 2% to 1% ——   similar   to our cross—section

      union coefficient of 4.0% in 1973 (Table 2, column 6).

10. Recent evidence of this trend can be observed in William H. Baugh and Joe

      E. Stone, "Teachers, Unions, and Wages in the 19T0's: Unionism Now Pays,"

      Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35   (3),   April 1982, pp.

      372—373.

11.   One method for assessing imilticollinearity is by assessing statistics in

      the "variance decomposition matrix" and "condition indices" associated with

      that matrix. These regression diagnostics were evaluated for the column

      V4) specification for the 1978 equation. These diagnostics are developed

      and described in David Beisley, Edwin Kithn, and Roy Welsch, Regression

      Diagnostics: Identifying Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity,

      (John Wiler and Sons: New York, 1980), pp. 85—191.      According   to this

      discussion, the CONTRACT, LAW and PCT CONTRACT variables demonstrate a clear

      case of "competing collinearity."

12. Ideally, we would have also liked to use the early period data to track

      transitions into unionization for several years after paying relatively low
                                          —33—




       salaries. Unfortunately, the smaller samples for 1965 and 1973 contain
       larger      cities (populations over 25,000) which according to our 1918 data

       are relatively high—paying cities within their own states. Therefore, this

       hazard function analysis is not performed with the data from the earlier

       period.

13. The salary statistics used in this study are those in effect on January 1

      nl'   +ho Cr4 ,rnn trno p. -

14.    Ehren'berg and Goldstein, pp. 223_218.
