                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                AGRICULTURAL INNOVATION

                                          Brian D. Wright
                                          Tiffany M. Shih

                                       Working Paper 15793
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15793


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




The authors are grateful for support from the Energy Biosciences Institute, the National Institutes of
Health. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Brian D. Wright and Tiffany M. Shih. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Agricultural Innovation
Brian D. Wright and Tiffany M. Shih
NBER Working Paper No. 15793
March 2010
JEL No. O31,O34,Q1,Q18,Q55

                                              ABSTRACT

The achievements in agricultural innovation over the past century have been impressive, supporting
large increases in agricultural yields and low food prices. Critical to this success has been sustained
public sector investment combined with a decentralized and competitive research system in the US.
Recent intellectual property reforms motivated increased private investment, yet the private sector
still relies upon basic research produced by the public sector. Problems with scientific freedom to operate
as well as concentration in the agricultural biotechnology industry also emerged due to intellectual
property rights. For new technologies, the case of agriculture demonstrates that government has an
important role in antitrust, the effective and efficient regulation of technologies, and in facilitating
technology adoption.


Brian D. Wright
University of California, Berkeley
Agriculture and Resource Economics
bwright@berkeley.edu

Tiffany M. Shih
University of California, Berkeley
Agriculture and Resource Economics
tmshih@gmail.com
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation




Abstract

The achievements in agricultural innovation over the past century have been impressive, supporting large

increases in agricultural yields and low food prices. Critical to this success has been sustained public

sector investment combined with a decentralized and competitive research system in the US. Recent

intellectual property reforms motivated increased private investment, yet the private sector still relies

upon basic research produced by the public sector. Problems with scientific freedom to operate as well as

concentration in the agricultural biotechnology industry also emerged due to intellectual property rights.

For new technologies, the case of agriculture demonstrates that government has an important role in

antitrust, the effective and efficient regulation of technologies, and in facilitating technology adoption.

1. Introduction

      Agricultural production is a highly decentralized and geographically dispersed activity, dependent

upon a wide variety of technologies applied to a heterogeneous natural resource base that is changing

over time. Its principal products are necessary inputs into consumer goods essential for life, and

continuous availability at acceptable quality and price is vital.

      The history of agricultural innovation is relevant to plans for accelerating energy innovation since

energy production and use share many of the above characteristics. Many innovative energy technologies

are becoming more similar to agriculture as they revert from depletable to renewable resource bases.

Indeed, the principal currently commercialized biofuels technologies involve agricultural production.

Like agriculture, energy production critically relates to greenhouse gas production. It is widely agreed

that climate change will have a greater impact on agricultural production than on any other sector, while

in the energy sector, its effect on investment is already significant.

      The record of achievement in agricultural innovation over the past century is impressive. Increases

in agricultural productivity have fueled rates of increase in food supply that outpaced the joint effects of

growth in personal consumption and population, with only modest recruitment of new cropland (Pardey


                                                       2
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



and Beintema, 2002). Better nutrition has, in turn, transformed life expectancies, labor productivity, and

the rate of population growth. Agricultural research activities have spread around the globe with marginal

social rates of return so high that they strain credulity. Patterns of participation and technology exchange

demonstrate high interdependence both between countries and along the public-private spectrum (Table 1,

Wright et al, 2007).

        Agriculture has a long history of productive public research. Evenson’s 2001 survey of over forty

studies between 1915-1999 gives a marginal real social rate of return to U.S. public agricultural research

investments between 45-65 percent. 1 The development of an effective system for public investment in

research and knowledge dissemination critically contributed to the observed pace of agricultural

advancement. In addition, sharing of knowledge and innovation between farmers, input suppliers, and

researchers, both within agriculture and beyond, has played an important role. For example, just as

applied research in electronics, communications and nuclear energy have drawn from basic research

funded by the U.S. Department of Defense, recent innovations in agricultural biotechnology owe much to

projects on human health funded by the National Institutes of Health.

        Compared to other sectors, agricultural research investments are more geographically dispersed,

both within the United Stated and globally. Indeed, public investments in agricultural research from

developing countries have recently overtaken public agricultural investment in developed countries as a

whole (Wright et al, 2007). The fundamental influence from the natural features of the growth

environment means that adaptive research is often needed to apply agricultural biotechnological

innovations in a given local area. The U.S. institutional structure supporting agricultural research reflects

this reality, employing state and local-level research institutions and experiment stations to meet the needs

of local farmers. Since the primary benefit of innovation in agriculture is lower food prices, countries

1
 However, in a meta-analysis of nearly 300 relevant studies (including those derived from U.S. data or
foreign data), Alston et al (2000) note that the estimates for annual rates of return range from -7.4 to
5,645 percent. Few studies actually fall into the 45-65 percent category. The authors find significant
variation in the estimates derives from the different rate of return measures used, potential analyst biases
and methodologies used, and the type of research evaluated. Alston et al (2000a) instead estimate an 80
percent overall annual rate of return to research.


                                                      3
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



with large populations can internalize a larger share of the gains from more basic research that has strong

externalities across neighboring environments, Thus, large countries account for a dominant portion of

public research investments.

         Beginning in the United States in 1980, advances in biotechnology, combined with the extension

of strong intellectual property (IP) protection to agriculture, have elicited such a great private investment

response that it now exceeds public investment. The proliferstions of IP, however, has not been without

consequences. There is mounting evidence of a negative effect on freedom to operate in public sector

projects directed towards production of plant varieties and other technologies for use by farmers. The

problem arises from fragmented IP claims to technology inputs and is especially prominent in the

agricultural biotechnology field. The private sector responded to costly sharing of IP with a series of

industry purchases, leading to market concentration and the current dominance of the agricultural industry

by the firm Monsanto.

       Public interventions with other objectives also affect innovation. Public support for the incomes of

farmers and other agricultural investors moderates their opposition to policies reducing commodity prices,

revenues, and, more fundamentally, asset values. Government regulations regarding food production and

distribution, employment, environmental protection and intellectual property rights (IPRs) also affect the

level and distribution of private research and development and technology investments on and off the

farm, as well as the market structure of input industries.

       Like the energy sector, the agricultural sector is facing continued challenges posed by a growing

global population with changing demands on the amounts and kinds of resources being used, and by

evolving concerns regarding global resources and environmental constraints. Awareness about global

interdependence of the world’s food supplies has extended to concerns regarding environmental

externalities such as global warming, motivating international efforts to harmonize regulations and share

technologies. Recently, concern about food security has engendered a flurry of private investment and

strategic activity.




                                                      4
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



      In this chapter, we provide an overview of innovation policies for agriculture with the purpose of

highlighting aspects of interest to the energy sector. We proceed as follows. Section 2 provides a

summary of global agricultural research investments with particular attention to public versus private

investments and their distribution between developed and less developed countries. Section 3 provides a

brief history of U.S. public investment in agriculture. We next discuss the main intellectual property

mechanisms relevant to agriculture and their effects on research and innovation markets, followed by a

short discussion of the extent and efficacy of public-private collaborations in Section 5. Section 6

considers government regulation and its dual responsibilities of ensuring public safety and promoting

technological advances. We then describe the factors influencing technological adoption in agriculture,

followed by a brief conclusion.

2. Agricultural research investments

        According to the latest available figures, public and nonprofit funding accounts for about two-

thirds of global agricultural research expenditures, while private investments account for the other third

(Wright et al, 2007). These aggregate figures mask the fact that the types and scope of research performed

by the two sectors are neither perfectly substitutable nor independent. In general, private investments are

far more concentrated by crop and technology than public investments, and tend to rely on the latter for

the basic science inputs in order to produce applied technology (Alston et al, 1998).

2.1 Research investment trends

        Public spending on agricultural research experienced overall growth in the past few decades, from

about $US 15.2 billion (at year 2000 prices) in 1981 to $23 billion in 2000 (Table 1). During the 1990s,

public agricultural research expenditures by developing countries as a group exceeded those by developed

countries for the first time. In no other sector does research expenditure by developing countries have

comparable prominence.

         China, India, Brazil, South Africa, and Thailand now undertake over half the investment in less

developed countries. However research per capita or relative to agricultural output is far less

concentrated. Similarly, public spending by developed countries is concentrated on a small set of


                                                     5
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



countries: the U.S., Japan, France, and Germany. Developed countries spent about as much on public

agricultural research ($US 12, 577M) in 2000 as developing countries spent on public research ($US

12,819M). Private spending in developing countries was only $US 819 million., as shown in Table 1.

(Wright et al, 2007; Wright and Pardey, 2006)

        As in energy, public and private research spending tends to increase in response to periods of

high prices and go slack when low prices have restored a false sense of security. Public research

spending, strong after the food price crises of the 1970s and early 1980s, declined during the 1990s in

most areas. In developed countries, annual growth rates of 2.2% during the 1980s fell to 0.2% per year

from 1991 to 1996. In Africa, growth in agricultural research spending ground to a halt in the 1990s, with

some revival more recently. Spending in China and Latin America, on the other hand, grew in the early

1990s after stagnating in the 1980s. China has been particularly focused on the agricultural biotechnology

field, increasing spending from $17 million in 1986 to nearly $200 million by 2003 (Huang et al, 2002;

Huang et al, 2005).

      Other measures of research investments reveal sharp contrasts between wealthy and poor nations.

Both developed and less developed countries increased spending on public agricultural R&D per dollar

agricultural output in the past few decades. In developed countries, spending on public agricultural R&D

per dollar agricultural output increased to $2.64 per $100 agricultural output in 1995 from $1.53 per $100

of output in 1975. In the developing world over this interval, growth in research intensities also increased

on average, but the level was much lower and varied between countries. Growth was constant in China,

increasing in other parts of Asia and in Latin America, but decreasing significantly in Africa.

      While the rates of research expenditures are informative about recent policies, researchers have

found the accumulated stock of research capital to be a more relevant determinant of research capabilities.

Pardey and Beintema (2001) calculate that the agricultural research resource stock, as a proportion of the




                                                     6
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



value of agricultural output, is at least 12 times larger in the United States than in Africa, given reasonable

rates of interest and depreciation. 2

2.2 International funding organizations

      International funding agencies have been established to direct more research resources toward more

efficiently serving the needs of poorer nations. Most notably, 1971 saw the establishment of the

Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR or CG), an international partnership

between governments, private foundations, and civil society organizations that fund and influence the

research of 15 international agricultural research centers (IARCs). CGIAR’s roots are in the 1943

International Agriculture Program, a cooperative effort initiated by the U.S. and Mexican governments

with significant support from the Rockefeller Foundation. The Mexican Program became the

“International Center for the Improvement of Maize and Wheat.” The relatively simple funding and

managerial structure proved superior to the less focused agenda of the Food and Agricultural

Organization (FAO) in producing major agricultural innovations. It developed high-yielding semi-dwarf

wheat varieties that were more responsive to nitrogen fertilizer. Contemporaneous innovation in the

fertilizer sector enabled production of cheaper nitrogen fertilizer from natural gas. The technology

package offering cheaper nitrogen fertilizer and the wheat varieties that could exploit it laid the basis for

the Green Revolution in wheat in Mexico and Asia. Desire to broaden the scope of yield increases to

other crops prompted the establishment of similarly-structures research centers in Colombia, Nigeria, and

the Phillippines by 1971.

      The need for a broader funding base to support the new centers led the International Agriculture

Program to enlist the participation of a large range of other donors, including several national aid

organizations, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the International Fund for

Agricultural Development, the United Nations Development Program, and the World Bank, in the



2
  For further details, see Wright et al (2007) and Wright and Pardey (2006) from which this section is
largely drawn. See also Pardey et al (2006) for a discussion of agricultural research investments in less
developed countries.


                                                      7
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



establishment of the CGIAR (CGIAR, 2008). After establishment, the annual spending of the members of

the CGIAR grew rapidly, from $1.3 million supporting four centers in 1965, to $141 million supporting

eleven centers by 1980, and $305 million supporting thirteen centers by 1990. Growth slowed in the

1990s, so that spending per center during this decade declined. Between 1994-2002, and in response to

critiques of the Green Revolution, complacency regarding food supplies, and the conflicting agendas and

diverse interests of funding entities, total CGIAR funding dropped in real terms. Investments in

germplasm enhancement research declined at 6.5% per year during this time, reflecting a shifted focus to

policy and environmental objectives. This pattern was mirrored by similar declines in agricultural aid and

research funding from the European Community, the World Bank, and USAID from the mid-1980s

through the 1990s. More recently, in response to high agricultural prices and a renewed recognition of the

importance of an adequate food supply, funding has begun to trend upward again. CGIAR funding was

over $495 million in 2007, and World Bank agricultural lending increased from an annual average of $1.5

billion in 2002 to $4.6 billion between 2006-2008. (Wright et al, 2007; Lele 2003; Lele et al, 2003;

CGIAR Independent Review Panel, 2008; World Bank Group, 2009)

3. A history of US public agricultural support

      The U.S. made an early commitment to agricultural research in the form of agricultural institutional

innovations adopted from Europe. Economists have emphasized the success of the land grant college

system (National Research Council, 1995; Huffman and Evenson, 2006; Ruttan 1980; Ruttan 1982),

noting its contribution to lowered food costs, rural development, and the prominence of U.S. agriculture

globally (Adelaja, 2003). A lesson embedded in the long history of U.S. public support for agriculture is

the importance of a large buildup of research capital stock through sustained investment. In addition, the

nationwide adoption of agricultural innovations was encouraged by a decentralized institutional system

capable of adapting technology to local environmental conditions, as was incorporated in the land-grant

colleges and state agricultural experiment stations.

3.1 The establishment of U.S. agricultural institutions




                                                       8
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



      Spatial environmental variation forms the context in which technology and resources determine

agricultural productivity. The expansion of arable land followed by mechanical innovations produced by

farmers and blacksmiths drove early increases in U.S. agricultural output (Huffman and Evenson, 2006;

Sunding and Zilberman, 2001). Major increases in yields per acre were not achieved until the advances in

hybrid seed and agrichemical technology in the 1930s. Until that time, biological innovation focused on

disseminating and adapting crops to unfamiliar frontier environments (Olmstead and Rhode, 1993).

      Human efforts to locate and distribute plant genetic material appropriate for given production

environments or meeting particular consumer needs, originated long before the groundbreaking

discoveries of Mendel and Darwin, not to mention recent work in genetically engineered crops. 3

Heightened recognition of the economic value of plants in the context of the Industrial Revolution and

their scientific documentation and classification encouraged the spread of botanic gardens across Europe
            th            th
in the 18        and 19        centuries. In particular, Britain’s Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew excelled in the

acquisition, development, and dissemination of economically important plants (Juma, 1989). A

physician’s experimentation with urban plant cultivation in the polluted atmosphere of London during the

Industrial Revolution led to the invention of the Wardian case or terrarium, an enclosed container that

vastly increased the reliability of international transportation of live plants between the new and old

worlds (Schoenermarck, 1974).

      In the U.S., prominent figures such as George Washington, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas

Jefferson all recognized the benefits of acquiring diverse plant resources and endeavored to introduce

improved plant varieties into the country. Jefferson himself once wrote, “The greatest service which can

be rendered any country is to add a useful plant to its culture,” 4 and went so far as to smuggle rice from

the Piedmont region of Italy into the U.S., sewn into the lining of his coat pockets, when such a crime was

punishable by death (Fowler, 1994). His enthusiasm for the importance of plant resources was shared by

3
  Juma (1989) gives several examples of early plant-collecting expeditions and gardens spanning Ancient
Egypt to Japan to colonial explorations of the Americas.
4
  Thomas Jefferson, The Works of Thomas Jefferson, Federal Edition. New York and London: G.P.
Putnam’s Sons, 1904-5. Vol. 8. Accessed from http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/805 on 6 September 2009.


                                                               9
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



Henry Ellsworth, the first commissioner of the Patent Office and founder of what ultimately became the

United States Department of Agriculture. Without Congressional approval, Ellsworth distributed seeds

and plant material from other lands in order to test and promote their benefits. The U.S. Patent Office thus

became the main repository for plant genetic material in the country, relying on the U.S. Navy to import

foreign seed and the U.S. Post office to distribute seeds to farmers through the mail. Producing a number

of documents on proven and potential economic benefits of plant resources, Ellsworth championed

federal support for agriculture and the creation of an independent national agricultural research bureau.

As a result, in 1839 Congress began to formally support seed collection, distribution, and research efforts

by establishing the Agricultural Division of the Patent Office, which became the Department of

Agriculture in 1862. (Harding, 1940; Huffman and Evenson, 2006).

      This widespread recognition of plant resource benefits plus the dominance of the U.S. farmer

population created a favorable political climate in support of the passage of the foundational 1862 Morrill

(Land Grant Colleges) Act (7 U.S.C. § 301 et seq) and the 1887 Hatch Act (7 U.S.C. § 361a et seq). The

Morrill Act allotted federal land to each state to support the development of a college focused on

instruction in “agriculture and the mechanic arts.” (7 U.S.C. § 304). Originally blocked by southern states

where education was viewed as a threat to the cheap labor supply, the Morrill Act was passed after the

South seceded. The Hatch Act provided additional federal lands to conduct and disseminate research in

SAESs associated with land grant colleges. In recognition of the importance of technology transfer

mechanisms for realizing the benefits of research, the 1914 Smith-Lever Act established the Cooperative

Extension Service to distribute knowledge relevant for the local adoption and application of innovations.

These key acts balanced federal and state roles by combining federal financial support with state

management for the administration and direction of research. The resulting structure provided an avenue

to address local research needs while also exploiting interstate competition to motivate fruitful research.

As early as 1888, states began to establish substations that addressed needs distributed at even finer

geographic scales. (Huffman and Evenson, 2006; Ruttan, 1982)




                                                     10
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



      The case of hybrid corn exemplifies the advantage of regionally-focused agricultural research that

benefited both local farmers and consumers generally. This innovation, which originated as a by-product

of basic research in genetics conducted at Harvard decades earlier (Troyer, 2009), required additional

decades of adaptive research after its initial adoption in the heart of the mid-west corn belt, to spread

across the states in which it was ultimately established (Griliches, 1957).

      The establishment of the SAES system in the U.S. borrowed heavily from European developments

that firmly established the central role of universities and scientists in agricultural development. Justus

von Leibig, a German chemist who founded the first modern chemistry laboratory, became one of the

forefathers of agricultural science with his 1840 publication, Organic Chemistry in Its Relation to

Agriculture and Physiology (Brock, 1997). During this time, agricultural research institutions in the states

that eventually formed Germany demonstrated the potential power of a group of experts working on a

focused field, highlighted the importance of consistent funding, provided valuable experience navigating

the link between science and practice, and demonstrated the merits of inter-institutional competition. By

the time of Liebig’s death in 1873, the newly united Germany had 25 agricultural research stations. The

German development of successful university-based agricultural chemistry research laboratories and

experiment stations became the model followed throughout the U.S. and Europe, where numerous

agricultural experiment stations were also established during the second half of the nineteenth century. In

particular, Rothamsted Agricultural Experiment Station in England, currently the oldest continuously

operating agricultural experiment station, was founded by a fertilizer manufacturer in 1843. (Huffman and

Evenson, 2006; Finlay, 1988).

      The first U.S. stations continued the heavy emphasis on agricultural chemistry established in

Germany, and Samuel W. Johnson, the first director of a U.S. agricultural experiment station, was trained

by a founder of the German system. By the time the Hatch Act was passed, 15 primarily state-funded

experiment stations were already in operation.

      Major benefits of public research for agricultural productivity in the U.S. began to accrue only after

the research establishment had accumulated a substantial stock of knowledge. Evenson (1980) found that


                                                      11
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



during 1870-1925, agricultural productivity was strongly correlated with the total real public-agricultural

research spending over the preceding 18 years. Early advances in U.S. agriculture were largely borrowed

from progress made in Europe. It took several decades of development and learning before the U.S. land

grant/SAES system had acquired the scientific capacity and research base necessary to become an

efficient system of innovation (Huffman and Evenson, 2006). Subsequent research has confirmed that

stable agricultural funding promotes persistent gains in agricultural productivity (White and Havlicek

(1982).

3.2 Private interests and the allocation of public funding

      Since private research focuses mainly on commercializable technologies with appropriable benefits,

the onus is on the public sector to produce basic science and undertake research that may be high in risk,

have long lag times, or create unpredictable and non-excludable benefits (Alston et al, 1998; Stokes,

1997; Huffman and Evenson, 2006; Just and Huffman, 1992). High rates of return to investments in

different types of agricultural technologies persist, implying that those investments have overall made

excellent use of public funds, but also that the level of funding has been inadequate (Judd et al, 1986;

Huffman and Evenson, 2006). In addition, in cases where public support for research has declined and

there are private incentives or IPRs for innovation, some observers have concluded that public research

funds have been increasingly directed toward the development of private goods (for example, Knudson

and Pray, 1991). Economists have warned that heightened private influence over public research agendas

may further erode public support for research, thus damaging the system by which basic science and

public goods research is produced (Just and Huffman, 1992). However, Foltz et al (2007) found evidence

of economies of scale and scope in life science research production of patents and journal articles,

particularly in land grant universities, implying synergies may exist in university production of private

and public goods.

      A second concern related to public funding has been discussed in a number of empirical studies that

suggest interregional externalities in the U.S. significantly affect state research investment levels

(Guttman, 1978; Huffman and Mirankowski, 1981; Rose-Ackerman and Evenson, 1985). For example,


                                                      12
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



citing unpublished work, Alston (2002) purports that averaging across U.S. states, over half the measured

within-state productivity gains may be derived from the benefits of research investments made elsewhere.

Such spillovers, both within and among nations, may contribute to underinvestments in research. In

addition, studies by Hayami and Ruttan (1971) and Binswanger and Ruttan (1978) suggest that nationally

or globally, consumers are the main beneficiaries of agricultural research since low price elasticity of

demand for agricultural products means that higher productivity achieved by innovation will translate into

lower prices (Guttman, 1978). However, in a world of highly efficient global transportation, the relatively

small share of benefits from lower prices that accrues to consumers in a single state tends to limit within-

state consumer support for agricultural research that increases national or global productivity (Rose-

Ackerman and Evenson, 1985).

      For region-specific production-oriented research (especially on crops as opposed to animals), the

negative price response on international markets may be negligible. Local farmers tend to get a substantial

share of the benefits of this type of research, given the level of other research activity. Political support

tends to be high for region-specific innovation, suggesting that farmers have substantial influence on

relevant research spending. Empirical studies have found that U.S. state spending on agricultural research

significantly and positively correlates with state characteristics such as per capita income, the share of

rural population, the number of large farms, the political influence of farmers, and the number of firms

producing agricultural inputs, while spending is negatively influenced by the ability to adopt technology

produced in other states (Rose-Ackerman and Evenson, 1985; Guttman, 1971; Huffman and

Mirankowski, 1981). In developing countries, on the other hand, underinvestment in regionally specific

crops such as cassava and sweet potatoes in the 1970s relates to the relatively low influence of staple food

producers and small farmers on research agendas (Judd et al, 1987).

4. Intellectual property for agricultural innovations

4.1 Methods for protecting intellectual property rights in agriculture

        Beginning with the 1930 Plant Patent Act, the United States has created a number of institutional

innovations in the form of intellectual property rights, to accommodate the needs of different agricultural


                                                      13
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



technologies. The eligibility criteria, duration, and nature of rights conferred vary across these IPRs, and a

single innovation may be protected under multiple mechanisms under the same or different legal

jurisdictions. The first IPR specifically for plants was introduced by the 1930 Plant Patent Act, allowing

plant patents for new and distinct varieties of most asexually propagated plants, while the USDA

administers the separate Plant Variety Protection Certificates (PVPCs) for sexually reproduced plant

varieties, in accordance with the 1970 Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA). U.S. legislators based the

PVPA on the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) – an

agreement established in 1961 by a group of Western European countries that lays out a model system for

plant breeders’ rights, which was itself influenced by the United States Plant Patent Act of 1930.

         Subsequently, the controversial ruling of the 1980 Diamond v. Chakrabarty case (Diamond v.

Chakrabarty 447 US 303, 1980) confirmed the applicability of utility patents for living organisms in the

U.S. (Ex parte Hibberd 227 USPQ 433 (Bd. Pat. App. & Int. 1985)). Since the decision, utility patents

have been applied to plant varieties, genetically engineered organisms, processes for expressing

transformations, genes, traits, and materials. The 2001 J.E.M. v. Pioneer Supreme Court case confirmed

the legality of joint protection under utility patents and a PVPC or a plant patent (J.E.M. AG Supply v.

Pioneer Hi-Bred International 122 S. Ct. 593, 2001).

         Trade secrets, trademarks and geographical indications (GIs) may also apply to agricultural

innovations. Legally a right based on state common law, trade secrecy can be invoked by firms that can

demonstrate sufficient efforts to protect proprietary information of commercial value. It is frequently

relied upon by innovators prior to obtaining a patent or other IP protection (Friedman et al, 1991), but has

high value independent of patenting; important surveys have shown that innovators in most industries

rank secrecy higher than patenting for effectively appropriating commercial value (Levin et al, 1987;

Cohen et al, 2000). The model trade secret law, known as the Uniform Trade Secrets Act, has been

adopted by 46 states. Trade secrecy has been more important recently in agricultural biotechnology

research, since advances in biotechnology have improved detection of infringement (Boettiger et al,

2004).


                                                     14
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



        To the extent that bioenergy development relies upon plant innovation, we can expect most of the

above mechanisms (and their drawbacks, discussed below) to be relevant for energy technology. A

common area of confusion concerns the jurisdiction of IPRs. It is important to note that a patent or PVPC

can be enforced only in the jurisdiction in which it is granted. 5 While the Trade-Related Aspects of

Intellectual Property Rights agreement (TRIPs) among the World Trade Organization (WTO) members

mandates minimal standards for all types of IPRs, only copyright has virtually global reach, under the

Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, which is largely incorporated in the

WTO TRIPs agreement.

4.2 The private sector response
The private sector response to the new opportunities and incentives in agricultural biotechnology has been

focused and forceful. Since 1987, over 55% of all field trials for genetically modified (“GM”) crops have

been on corn and soybean varieties. Global GM crop value and planted area is almost entirely in

soybeans, corn, cotton, and canola (James, 2008). Monsanto has become the dominant firm in generation

and diffusion of agricultural biotechnology, concentrating its activities on corn, soybeans, and cotton

incorporating herbicide resistant “Roundup Ready” technology and pest-resistant traits based on crystal

proteins derived from samples of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). It is unlikely that public research institutions

could have matched the efficiency and scale of Monsanto and other leading firms in these activities. For

example, in 1998, Monsanto spent $1.26 billion in agricultural biotechnology research and development,

eclipsing the total CGIAR investment of $25 million in agricultural biotechnology that same year (Pardey

and Beintema, 2005).

4.3 IPR limitations and drawbacks




5
  The well-publicized case of “Golden Rice,” transformed to include pro-vitamin A, has been
characterized as subject to scores of widely-held patents and as an excellent example of private-sector
collaboration in licensing these patents for use in poor rice-consuming countries. In fact, few if any of the
patents were relevant to production or use of the technology in major poor rice-consuming countries;
licenses related mainly to material transfer agreements. (See Binenbaum et al, 2003).


                                                     15
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


        While the most popular modern rationale for granting IPRs is that they motivate technological

innovation and dissemination by at least partially privatizing associated social benefits, the experience in

agriculture shows both the strengths and the limitations of IPRs in a well-balanced system of dynamic,

creative research. First, private research has not been (and likely never will be) a complete substitute for

public agricultural research (Alston et al, 1995). While the recent strengthening of intellectual property

rights in the U.S. opened the way for increased private participation in basic plant breeding research by

major firms such as Monsanto and Pioneer (Falck-Zepeda and Traxler, 2000), the private sector primarily

performs applied research with the goal of producing a profitable technology or product. Private sector

research critically depends on the public sector to produce the “building blocks” for technology. (Alston

et al, 1998; Stokes, 1997; Huffman and Evenson, 2006; Just and Huffman, 1992)

        Economists have recognized that the intellectual property protection of research at public

institutions might erode the provision of such public goods. For example, Just and Huffman (2009) note

that while the 1980 Bayh-Dole Act led to a jump in university patenting (from less than 400 patents per

year before Bayh-Dole to 1100 per year by 1989 and over 3000 per year in the 1990s), the act may have

reduced the pool of basic research supporting private research, shifting the focus of public research

towards shorter-term incentives such as patents, at the expense of future public goods research.

        Furthermore, there appears to be great variation in private responses to different forms of

intellectual property. While Fuglie et al (1996) found that in the U.S., private investments in agricultural

biotechnology increased fourfold (nominal) in the first twelve years after the Diamond v. Chakrabarty

ruling, Alston and Venner (2002) were unable to find evidence of increased private-sector investments in

wheat breeding as a response to the PVPA, which they conclude is more relevant to marketing than

research.

4.3 Anticommons in agricultural research and market concentration

        There is mounting evidence that multiple, mutually blocking intellectual property claims on

inputs are hindering access to research tools that can be incorporated in the marketed products of


                                                     16
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


agricultural research (Wright and Pardey, 2006; Pardey et al, 2007). The rising application of IPRs to

plant components and processes imposes high transaction costs for researchers who must acquire or

license fragmented proprietary inputs to develop and commercialize a single downstream innovation.

         Agricultural economists have long been concerned that patents on locked-in but otherwise non-

crucial genetic technologies have been retarding innovation and affecting the market structure of private

research. In the field of plant biotechnology in particular, where ownership of the genes, markers, or

promoters incorporated in a single innovation is fragmented, upstream IPR-holders, unwilling to allow

commercialization of varieties using their property, have in some instances foreclosed university

development of new crops or technologies. 6 The broader economics profession has become focused on

these issues more recently, due to growing problems with blocking patents on embedded software (Besen

and Hunt, 2004; Lemley and Shapiro, 2005; Lemley and Shapiro, 2007; Cohen et al, 2000). The Supreme

Court appears to have acknowledged this problem in its eBay decision (eBay Inc v. MercExchange,

L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388 (2006)), which reduced the ability of holders of blocking patents to use the threat of

injunction to extract high royalties from infringers.

         In a 2003 Science article signed by fourteen university presidents, chancellors, and foundation

presidents, the authors highlight the negative effect of intellectual property rights on “freedom to operate”

in agricultural research (Atkinson et al, 2003). In fact, universities themselves appear to have contributed

to the problem by insisting on the use of material transfer agreements (MTAs) governing exchanges of

research materials between researchers, to protect university intellectual property rights and limit

university liability.



6
  For example, the cases of the GE tomato and herbicide-resistant strawberry at the University of
California at Berkeley, an herbicide tolerant barley, and an herbicide tolerant turf grass at the University
of Michigan (Wright, 1998; Wright et al, 2007; Erbisch, 2000). More recently, commercialization of
transgenic hypoallergenic wheat technology has been blocked by a combination of patent protection and
regulatory costs. (P. Lemaux, personal communication) Generation of further examples is unlikely, given
that independent university implementation of new transgenic technologies is widely regarded as
economically infeasible due to the combined effects of blocking patents and regulatory costs and delays.


                                                        17
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


        A recent survey indicates that, for scientists focused on their own research goals rather than

commercialization of innovations, the problems associated with MTAs are more salient than concerns

about patent infringement. Over a third of agricultural biologists at Land Grant Universities reported

delays in obtaining access to research tools in the five years preceding the survey, with a mean of two

delays and a mean duration of over eight months (Lei et al, 2009). They attributed the vast majority of

these delays to problems experienced by university administrators in negotiating MTAs. Researchers

reported responding to hold-ups by substituting tools, sometimes of lower efficacy, and in some cases by

abandoning the project altogether. Although a substantial portion of the sample were patentees, most

respondents view intellectual property protection as a net negative for progress of research in their fields.

        Follow-up interviews revealed that scientists view university administrators as principally

concerned with protecting their institutions’ financial interestsm including protecting claims to potential

intellectual property value and reducing exposure to potential liability. Indeed, Glenna et al’s 2007 survey

reveals that land-grant university administrators, on average, rate the provision of new funds and research

support as the greatest advantage of university-industry research collaborations, but believe that scientists

choose projects based on research enjoyment and scientific curiosity.

        Private firms in agricultural biotechnology, unlike bench scientists, cannot ignore infringement

issues. Often, firms have to commit to commercializing a product involving many patents, subject to

time-consuming development and regulatory approval processes, and thus exposed to holdup even by

owners of non-essential technologies that become “locked in” as innovation progresses. Firms have

established freedom to operate largely by merger and acquisition of patentees, rather than by in-licensing.

        Since the mid-1990s, a relatively dramatic series of industry purchases led to concentration of the

agricultural biotechnology sector. As a result, a relatively modest number of private hands controls a

major portion of patents in the field (Murray and Stern, 2007; Marco and Rausser, 2008). In effect, the

threat of an anticommons with many parties capable of stopping a line of business in progress via an

injunction has been avoided by a strategy that does not rely solely on in-licensing, but instead deals with


                                                     18
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


potential hold-ups by acquisition or merger. The European conglomerate AgrEvo acquired Plant Genetic

Systems (PGS) for $730 million, $700 million of which accounted for the estimated value of PGS-owned

patents on plant traits. Perhaps more extreme was Monsanto’s 1997 purchase of Holden’s Foundation

Seeds for $1.1 billion, when Holden’s gross revenues were just $40 million. In 1998, Monsanto paid $2.3

billion to acquire the 60% of DeKalb Genetics Corporation which it did not already own. DeKalb, the

owner of a major corn transformation technology, had a 1997 total revenue of $450 million (United States

Department of Justice, 1998; Marco and Rausser, 2008). The following year, DuPont Co. purchased the

remaining 80% of Pioneer Hi-Bred International that it did not already own for $7.7 billion (Marco and

Rausser, 2008).

        Based on USDA data between 1988-2000, Brennan et al (2005) found that when including

mergers and acquisitions, the top ten firms (rated by number of patents held) owned more than half of the

agricultural biotech patents granted through 2000, whereas if patents acquired via purchases and mergers

are excluded, the share owned by the top ten firms would be only one third. One firm (Monsanto)

currently accounts for almost two-thirds of all public and private plant biotech field trials in the United

States. King and Schimmelpfennig (2005) show that by 2002, six firms (Monsanto, Dow, Dupont, BASF,

Bayer, and Syngenta) controlled over 40% of the agricultural biotech patents owned by the private sector,

with the subsidiaries acquired by these firms through mergers and acquisitions responsible for 70% of

their total patent stocks. Concentration in the innovation market has continued to increase; USDA data on

field releases of new genetically modified organisms show Monsanto’s dominance in the testing of new

GM products (Figure 1).

        Thus the need to ensure freedom to operate in an environment of initially fragmented and

decentralized proprietary claims enhanced the normal tendency of firms in a new industry to consolidate

in order to avoid transaction costs, exploit increasing returns to scale, and establish market power

(Rausser, 1999). Notably, Marco and Rausser (2008) empirically show that in the plant biotechnology

industry, the enforceability of a firm’s patent portfolio is a good predictor of participation in


                                                      19
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


consolidation. Additionally, the authors note that a number of mergers, including Monsanto-Calgene and

Monsanto-DeKalb, occurred in the context of patent infringement litigation.

        It appears to be true that IP-induced consolidation in agricultural biotechnology is negatively

affecting the very same innovation and dissemination incentives that justified IPRs in the first place. By

blocking new firms from entering, market consolidation may suppress future innovation (Barton, 1998;

Graff et al, 2004). Lack o f freedom to operate particularly affects nonprofit research institutions, which

cannot solve the problem by merger or acquisition of blocking firms.

4.4 Attempts to alleviate the anticommons: BiOS and PIPRA

        Early recognizing the threat from lack of freedom to operate, public and nonprofit parties have

formed institutions which endeavored to construct alternative technologies that could circumvent patents

blocking key transformation technologies. These include the Biological Innovation for Open Society

(BiOS) and Public-Sector Intellectual Property for Agriculture (PIPRA) initiatives, which have both

attracted widespread attention from biologists in the biomedical sector.

        Inspired by the successful open source models in software, BiOS, an open source initiative arising

out of the nonprofit biotechnology firm CAMBIA, was formed to license rights to use protected

innovations, including those that could substitute for technologies protected by blocking patents, in

exchange for a commitment to share any downstream technologies with all BiOS members (Jefferson,

2006). It appears that this bold initiative has not functioned as anticipated. Participants willing to access

CAMBIA technologies offered by BiOS are apparently reluctant to follow the lead of CAMBIA and offer

their own technologies under an “open source” license. 7 A more fundamental problem might be that any

success achieved in open source software using copyright licenses to prevent appropriation of the core

technology might be difficult to replicate in a system that relies on patent protection (Boettiger and

Wright, 2006).


7
  Stricly speaking the license was not open source as participants are charged on a sliding scale based on
size.


                                                      20
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


        PIPRA, founded with support from the University of California and the Rockefeller and

McKnight Foundations, was intended to act as a clearinghouse for information about patenting and

licensing of technologies originating in the public and nonprofit sector. The goal was to facilitate

commercialization and adoption of new technologies in less developed countries and of “minor” crops

such as the fruits and vegetables produced in California. The common problem of both target groups was

that their markets were too small to attract much interest from the major agricultural biotechnology

corporations. PIPRA’s intellectual property strategy, similar to that of CAMBIA, was to protect

proprietary claims for commercial use in developed countries (consistent with federal policy expressed in

the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and with the aims of university licensing objectives), while simultaneously

providing access to users in less developed countries and producers of minor crops, and reserving public

and nonprofit institutions’ rights to use the inventions in developing country applications.


        While these initiatives yielded notable scientific advances (see for example Broothaerts et al

2005), neither has yet furnished an efficient and completely unencumbered biotechnology package that is

a good substitute for proprietary blocking technologies that received wide market acceptance. Indeed, the

experience of these initiatives constitutes strong evidence of the blocking capacity of proprietary claims

over key elements of plant transformation. The lack of attractive unencumbered alternative technology

sets may be the main reason why efforts to encourage collaboration in open-source type ventures have not

made more headway. However, had they already succeeded at this level, the regulatory hurdles would

still have loomed large.

        Although attempts to offer unencumbered alternatives to key technologies are continuing, both

CAMBIA and PIPRA are currently emphasizing provision of easily accessible information to researchers

in developing countries and non-profit institutions regarding freedom to operate within the context of

patenting as the dominant paradigm. They offer other services that can assist public and nonprofit

research institutions in navigating patent thickets and identifying intellectual property issues before they

become serious problems. PIPRA provides educational and informational services to facilitate navigation



                                                     21
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



of the IP landscape and promote innovation-enabling collaboration, as well as a valuable IP handbook.

CAMBIA offers, among other services, its “Patent Lens” to provide accessible guidance as to the patent

landscape relevant to the plans of researchers in biotechnology (Graff et al, 2001; Atkinson et al, 2003;

Delmer et al, 2003).

5. Public-private collaborations

        Channeling fruitful basic research from the public sector into applied research efforts by the

private sector is a key, though problematic, step in the innovation “pipeline.” Economists have often

highlighted the potential for public-private collaborations to bridge this gap and have argued for their

critical role in spreading agricultural biotech innovations for consumers in developing countries (Rausser

et al, 2000; Byerlee and Fischer, 2002; Tollens et al 2004; Parker and Zilberman, 1993). In light of

slowed federal research support between 1980 and 2000, collaborations with the private sector have

become increasingly attractive for public sector researchers. However, public-private collaborations do

not currently account for a large portion of agricultural research in practice. A few examples illustrate of

the potential benefits and drawbacks of these agreements.

        Overcoming conflicts between private sector interests and public responsibilities is a key

challenge to fruitful public/private collaboration. In their 1986 analysis of the Canadian malting barley

industry, Ulrich et al (1986) find that the availability of grants from and collaborative work with the

brewing industry led the public sector to pursue traits to improve malting quality. Although the research

yielded both public and private benefits, the collaboration siphoned public resources away from yield-

related traits. Ulrich et al calculate social gains would have been 40% higher or more had public

researchers focused only on yield-related traits. Note that this example is drawn from an era when

intellectual property protection had yet to strongly influence the direction of research activity in

agriculture.

        The subsequent proliferation of patenting in universities has increased the potential for diversion

of the university agenda toward private monetary returns and away from the direct public interest. Such a

real or apparent shift in focus of public institutions away from public goods research might further reduce


                                                      22
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



public support for universities (Just and Huffman, 2009), even if the ultimate motive is to ensure survival

of the institution in an era of public cutbacks. Supporting this argument are Glenna et al’s (2007) findings

that land grant university administrators rate further support for research and increased funding as the

main benefits from university-industry collaborations, and potential for conflicts of interest as their main

drawback.

        An innovation in private support for public agricultural research was established by the 1998

agreement between the University of California at Berkeley and the Novartis Foundation. The latter was

selected by Berkeley as partner after competitive bids from several firms. The agreement generated much

opposition, motivated by opposition to the genetic transformation technologies involved in the research

to be funded, by objections to the decision-making procedures that led to the partnership, and by concern

that the university was selling its plant biology agenda to the highest bidder and that new private-sector

influence might distort the direction of university research. The Novartis Foundation had the right to a

vaguely-specified subset of the research results in plant and molecular biology and had a minority of seats

on the committee allocating project resources. (Busch et al, 2004; Rausser, 1999)

        In hindsight, the $25 million received from the Novartis (later Syngenta) Foundation appears to

have been associated with an increase in the level and the diversity of funding of Plant and Molecular

Biology at Berekeley, with little if any affect on research direction. It appears that no valuable patents

were obtained by the funder. Indeed a similarly generous arrangement is unlikely to be achieved in future

public-private partnerships in biotechnology. Nevertheless an ex post review (Busch et al, 2004)

concluded, among other things, that the agreement did affect the processes leading to the initial denial of

tenure (later reversed) to a prominent critic of the agreement. Even relatively hands-off funders, it seems,

create the hazard of a threat to academic freedom in the university.

        Subsequently, Berkeley has become the lead partner (with Lawrence Berkeley National

Laboratory and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) in the $500 million Environmental

Biosciences Initiative (EBI), funded by British Petroleum and aimed at developing means of converting

cellulosic biomass to a substitute for petroleum. Some of the intellectual property provisions of this


                                                     23
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



agreement are more favorable to the funder than in the Berkeley-Novartis agreement, but the EBI has not

generated the same degree of opposition on campus.

        In another model of public-private collaboration known as Cooperative Research and

Development Agreements (CRADAs), the U.S. provides research funds to national laboratories

contributing non-financial resources in order to produce a commercial technology in collaboration with a

private firm. Any proprietary material may be owned by both parties, but the private collaborator gets

priority in licensing (Day-Rubenstein and Fuglie, 2000). Since 1987, the USDA has formed at least 700

CRADAs with private firms. CRADAs have produced and commercialized at least a handful of important

innovations (Day-Rubenstein and Fuglie, 2000). 8 In accordance with the goal of connecting the basic and

applied ends, CRADA research focuses on a “middle ground” between public and private goods (Day-

Rubenstein and Fuglie, 2000). However, concerns that CRADAs and other public-private collaborations

divert funds from public goods or basic research to more applied research highlight the need to carefully

design collaboration agreements and to consider the unintended effects of undertaking collaborations

(Just and Rausser, 1993). In addition, claims that CRADAs provide unfair advantages for the private

partner (even if, as in the case of Taxol, the contract was awarded by auction), illustrate that any

agreement mechanism providing profits high enough to incentivize private investment in a risky

enterprise will be met with critical political comment if the CRADA succeeds. 9

        Public-private collaborations also tend to be a target of public scrutiny that can negatively

influence the credibility of government or other public entities to uphold their public responsibilities. In

particular, public-private collaborations that do not convincingly protect public decision-making from


8
  Most notably, a CRADA is responsible for production of the anti-cancer drug Taxol, based on the bark
of the Pacific yew tree, and involving the USDA and its Forest Service (Koo and Wright, 1999). This
highly successful drug is used in treatment of ovarian and breast cancers. In the agricultural field,
CRADAs have been associated with the development of a number of pest and disease controls, a chicken
vaccine for Marek’s disease, and a chemical compound to reduce soil erosion (Day-Rubenstein and
Fuglie, 2000).
9
  Even prominent economists will make such comments. See for example the claim by Boldrin and
Levine (2008, Chapter 1) that any returns above “break-even” were superfluous to the incentive needed
for Boulton and Watt to produce their celebrated steam engine.


                                                     24
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



improper influence weaken the regulatory role of government. For example, widespread public distrust of

government’s ability to regulate genetically modified organisms in Europe must be considered in the

context of several major government failures to protect consumer safety. In particular, concerns that

governments might prioritize industry welfare over public safety were fueled by poor regulation both

paving the way for and in response to incidents such as the Chernobyl disaster and the spread of BSE

(bovine spongiform encephalopathy, commonly known as “mad cow disease”) (Park, 1989; BBC News,

2000; CNN, 2001).

        On the other hand, research consortium models such as those adopted by the Latin American

Maize Project (LAMP) and the Germplasm Enhancement of Maize Project (GEM) have been lauded for

productively balancing public goods research with commercial viability (Knudson, 2000). Initiated by

then Pioneer CEO William Brown, LAMP was established in 1987 as a cooperative effort to regenerate

and utilize maize landraces, supported by funding from Pioneer and resources from the U.S., 11 Latin

American countries, and the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) (Knudson,

2000; CIMMYT, 1997). Of the 12,000 accessions evaluated by LAMP, 51 accessions plus 7 donated

from DeKalb formed the source material for the USDA-ARS GEM Project. Jointly funded by an array of

private, public, and non-profit collaborators and utilizing research from federal programs, state programs,

and private industry, GEM’s structure recognized needs from the local to national levels and maintained

industry support through appropriate IPR provisions (Knudson, 2000).

6. Government regulation

      From an economic perspective, government regulation is necessary to correct for externalities such

as those related to environmental quality, food safety, and public security. Aside from immediate social,

environmental, and economic costs, past regulatory disasters and their aftermaths demonstrate that

ineffective or disingenuous government practices create a secondary problem of reduced public

confidence and support. On the other hand, the costs of regulatory compliance can discourage innovation

and technology adoption. The challenge to government is to strike a balance between supporting

technological improvement and protecting public safety.


                                                    25
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



6.1 Public trust

      Experience in agriculture demonstrates that a poor track record or a handful of extreme cases may

durably erode public confidence in the government’s ability to prudently select and monitor new

technologies. The U.S. Three Mile Island incident and the Ukrainian Chernobyl disaster caused

significant curtailment of nuclear power projects in Sweden and Italy, respectively, and weakened public

trust in government officials and scientists alike (Weingart, 2002). Studies of government regulation and

public perceptions drew parallels between the cases of nuclear power and agricultural biotechnology

(Sjoberg, 2001; Poortinga and Pidgeon, 2005). Indeed, Chernpbyl’s contamination of European foods

was initially denied by many governments, and Chernobyl’s effect on public perceptions of technological

risks, government competence, and the reliability of public assurances has contributed to the prohibition

of genetically modified foods in Europe (Vogel, 2001; Lusk et al, 2003).

      Past crises in food safety have also demonstrated the consequences for public health, government

reputation, and industry. After the BSE outbreak was recognized in Britain, European regulatory systems

were further discredited by the British Ministry of Agriculture’s insistence that BSE posed no threat to

human health and the French government’s slow response to BSE (Vogel, 2001; Daley, 2001). The direct

effects of BSE on beef consumtion and the subsequent trade bans caused heavy losses to beef producers.

The containment costs borne by the British government reached £700 million per year in 1996, or about

0.1% of GDP (Gollier et al, 2001). Another example is the release by the European multinational firm

Aventis of genetically engineered corn, StarLink, into the U.S. food supplies, when the corn was

approved only for feed. Fortunately no health damage to consumers was detected. Aventis agreed to pay

$110 million plus interest to farmers whose crops were contaminated (O’Hanlon, 2004; Pollack, 2001;

Shuren, 2008) to compensate for adverse effects on prices of exports due to fears of harmful

contamination.

      The StarLink case not withstanding, the lack of major food-related regulatory disasters in recent

U.S. experience likely has contributed to greater public acceptance and employment of agricultural

biotechnology in the U.S. relative to Europe (Vogel, 2001; Nelson, 2001). Note that the effects on public


                                                    26
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



perception are not confined by national boundaries and can become confounded with strategic market

maneuvers. For example, China changed its plans to approve GM foods when the StarLink incident

cooled demand for GM corn by importers Japan and South Korea (Cohen and Paarlberg, 2004). In North

America, the U.S. wheat industry compelled the agricultural biotech firm Monsanto to release the first

genetically engineered spring wheat in the U.S. and Canada, or not at all. The technology was shelved in

both countries when Canada rejected the product (Berwald et al, 2006).

      Considering the commonalities of the above cases, we would expect public trust problems to be

most influential for technologies related to foods, with uncertain but potentially widespread and

irreversible risks, and in cases where the benefits are dubious from the consumer viewpoint (Arrow and

Fischer, 1974; Brush et al, 1992). Bioenergy products, especially if they are not related to foods or feeds,

might be better accepted due to the widespread recognition of the benefits of a cleaner and more secure

energy supply.

6.2 Non-adaptive regulatory systems and unintended consequences

       While negligent regulatory systems can precipitate public safety disasters, the costs of extremely

restrictive regulatory systems are less transparent but may also be severe. They can impede the

application of technology, implying missed opportunities to realize the benefits of research and

innovation. Cases in various countries show that both lack of regulatory capacity and public distrust may

lead to regulatory procedures that slow adoption of technology. In addition, relatively stringent

regulatory standards for a particular set of technologies create an advantage for substitutes. 10 Thus,

government safety standards have indirect but important effects on market structure.

      The case of U.S. agricultural chemical regulation illustrates some of the tradeoffs related to

standard setting. Ollinger and Fernandez-Cornejo (1995) found that between 1972 and 1989, in response

to three amendments tightening regulatory requirements, industry-wide research spending increased, but

the share of regulatory costs in total R&D increased from 18% to an astounding 60%. The authors also


10
   Graff and Zilberman (2007) argue that the interests of European pesticide and herbicide producers have
influenced the development of negative attitudes on that continent to agricultural biotechnology.


                                                     27
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



found that each 10% increase in regulatory costs corresponded to a 2.7% reduction in the number of new

pesticides products, but also decreased the negative environmental qualities of the pesticides produced.

Regulatory costs affected the market by increasing foreign capture of market share, reducing the number

of small firms and broadening opportunities for biological pesticides and GMOs. As this example shows,

the net effects of regulation are hard to pin down.

      Many governments have recently enacted regulatory standards for the release of agricultural

biotechnology to address concerns about potential ecological and food safety risks. While some scientists

fear the standards for transgenic crops do not adequately inform us about potential risks, economists have

argued that these regulations hinder implementation of important technologies (Fuglie et al, 2006;

Zilberman, 2006; Pardey et al, 2007; Cohen and Paarlberg, 2004). For example, lack of mutual

recognition of regulatory standards and test results requires duplication of field trials for transgenic crops

in some East and South African countries, without generation of new information between test trials, and

has slowed commercialization (Pardey et al, 2007; Thomson, 2004).

      In India, regulatory authorities approved the first field trials for Bt transgenic cotton in 1998.

Although the crop had been grown as early as 1996 in countries such U.S., Australia, South Africa,

Mexico, Argentina, and China, outcry by NGO groups claiming to represent farmers influenced

regulatory officials to delay final approval for Bt cotton until 2002 – about six months after authorities

discovered some 500 Gujarati farmers had already illegally planted Bt cotton seeds. Public plans to

destroy the standing crop were abandoned after demonstrations by thousands of farmers. Even more

extreme is the case of a transgenic mustard variety which underwent field trials in India for at least nine

years (Cohen and Paarlberg, 2004), but is yet to be commercialized. If biofuel technology utilizes

transgenic crop innovations, inflexible and inefficient regulatory systems could significantly defer this

alternative fuel’s production and utilization.

      For transgenic food crops in the U.S., the Food and Drug Administration, Environmental Protection

Agency, and USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service all have regulatory authority concerning

potential risks related to food safety, pesticidal properties (if applicable), and field testing, respectively


                                                       28
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



(Vogt and Parish, 1999; Fuglie et al, 1996). While public opinion and government policy create a less

hostile environment for GMOs relative to the regulatory environments in areas such as Europe and Africa,

some economists maintain that U.S. regulation for transgenic crops is unduly restrictive, relative to

regulations for competing technologies (Miller and Conko, 2005).

      In industries subject to market concentration, such as the agricultural biotech industry, insights

from capture theory suggest pushes for regulatory reform are likely not forthcoming. High compliance

costs associated with stringent regulatory standards may even be preferred by firms with market power

since such standards create barriers to entry and build consumer approval (Zilberman, 2006). For

example, in 1925 California adopted the One-Variety Cotton Law, requiring nearly all California cotton

growers to plant a single USDA-controlled cotton variety in the interests of quality control. In their 1994

analysis of the regulation, Constantine et al (1994) argue that any initial benefits were lost over time due

to unforeseen technological changes, institutional reforms, and regulatory cost increases. While the

industry was partially deregulated in 1978, private beneficiaries of the regulation successfully resisted

further reform for a number of years, despite the regulation’s large social costs.

      Economists have critiqued the precautionary principle (cited by European GMO regulators) for

failing to respond to new information (Gollier et al, 2001; Vogel, 2001). In agricultural biotechnology,

the firm bears the costs of regulatory compliance. Although farming of biotech food crops has grown

rapidly in recent years, the still narrow breadth of the market may be influenced by regulations slowing

commercialization of new transgenic traits beyond herbicide tolerance and Bt-based insect resistance in

corn, soybeans, canola and cotton (Pardey et al, 2007).

7. Technology adoption

      Timely adoption is necessary in order to realize the benefits of innovation. The most relevant aspect

of adoption in the agricultural sector is the dispersed application and management of technologies adapted

to local environments. The period between technology development and widespread adoption by farmers

can be quite long (and infinite for technologies that never take hold). Griliches’ (1957) work on hybrid




                                                     29
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



corn adoption and subsequent empirical studies 11 showed that the rate of technology diffusion increased

with profitability from its adoption. A multitude of economic studies has taught us that factors such as

risk and heterogeneity are crucial determinants of adoption. In addition, the canon of relevant political

economic work highlights the dependence of adoption on consumer preferences, political interests, and

the appropriateness of technology. With respect to energy innovations, we might expect analogous issues

to arise for technologies with similarly dispersed applications. Again, production of biofuel crop

technologies is a clear example, but prior adoption research might also be relevant for technologies like

cookstoves for less developed countries, mini or micro hydroelectric systems, wind farms and building

efficiency innovations, all of which could well have user-dependent outcomes affected by the

heterogeneity of regulations and of the natural environment.

7.1 Profitability and heterogeneity

        The recent increases in market concentration due to strengthened IPRs in agriculture (as discussed

above) might well imply oligopoly pricing that reduces adoption of technologies integrating proprietary

components. However, the dispersed use of agricultural technologies in heterogeneous environments

constrains the extent of non-competitive pricing if spatial price discrimination is costly. Thus, even firms

exercising market power may have to employ low-price policies in order to encourage rates of

technological exposure and adoption that make the discounted value of the innovation positive and

attractive to investors. The empirical study by Falck-Zepeda et al (2000) on markets for transgenic

soybeans and cotton estimated that firms Monsanto and Delta & Pine Land (D&PL) adjust price to keep

about 21% of the benefits generated from these innovations, while about 59% of these benefits flow to

farmers, despite essential monopoly power by Monsanto and D&PL. A follow-up study by Oehmke and

Wolf (2004) estimated heterogeneity in technology adopters to account for 80% of farmer rents. Although

the question has yet to be addressed seriously, it appears that if “degraded” lands are favored for biofuels

production due to low carbon release upon cultivation, their heterogeneity could well reduce the speed of

technology adoption, thus reducing monopoly rents and perhaps investment in optimizing the technology.

11
     Feder, Just, and Zilberman (1985) provide a summary of empirical work


                                                     30
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



      When the newest technology is a substitute for their current technology, farmers will not adopt the

new technology unless the net benefits of switching are positive, leading to an additional constraint on

oligopoly pricing for the new technology (Pray and Fuglie, 2001). If the current rate of innovation is

rapid, the loss of the option to wait and use an even better prospective technology may increase the cost

of adopting the current best technology when the sunk costs of learning or complementary investment are

significant.

      A large body of research on heterogeneity and adoption demonstrates that a number of other factors

moderate the profitability of adoption at a given time. While a full review is beyond the scope of this

paper, we briefly provide a few examples to illustrate the diversity of this work. Studies such as those by

David (1969), Feder (1980), and Ruttan (1977) discuss the influence of farm size (perhaps as a proxy for

wealth or increased access to credit, information, or production inputs) on the rate of technology diffusion

or level of individual adoption, for various types of technology and institutional frameworks (Feder, Just,

and Zilberman 1985). The findings from a recent paper by Fernandez-Cornejo et al (2005) imply that

small U.S. farms that supplement farm income with off-farm activities are more likely to adopt time-

saving technologies such as herbicide-tolerant crops or conservation tillage. Examples of research

evaluating the effect of heterogeneity in land quality on adoption decisions include Caswell and

Zilberman’s (1986) analysis of water-holding capacity and irrigation technology and Rahm and

Huffman’s (1984) article relating soil quality to adoption of corn varieties. Recently, access to

information and social capital have been highlighted as determinants of adoption of crop varieties such as

hybrid corn and wheat, mechanical innovations such as tractors, and livestock technologies, to name a

few (Skinner and Staiger, 2005; Matuschke et al, 2007; Abdulai and Huffman, 2005). Finally, a plethora

of research discusses the role of risk and uncertainty associated with adopting new technologies.

      Another important insight is that technologies that reduce input use per unit output may, via price

effects, increase total input demand with respect to the efficiency-adjusted unit, as observed in studies of

water or energy use in modern irrigation technology (Caswell and Zilberman, 1986). Thus, yield-

enhancing varieties of biofuels crops may increase, rather than reduce, the area planted to such crops.


                                                     31
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



7.2 Policy implications

        Given the heterogeneity of the myriad of moderating factors, the adoption of agricultural

technologies over extensive geographic areas is enhanced by directed local efforts and adaptations

(Knowler and Bradshaw, 2007). Key decisions for government are whether and how to alleviate risks and

high fixed costs associated with adoption. The relevance of risk is dependent upon farmer perceptions and

the type of technology (for example, see Fernandez-Cornejo et al, 1994). The adoption of crop

technologies is scale-neural in the sense that farmers can test the new crop on a small portion of land, thus

reducing risk problems and allowing farmers to learn through use (Feder, 1982; Feder, Just, and

Zilberman, 1985). This strategy might be less relevant for biofuels, if their introduction depends upon a

large investment in local processing facilities. In this case, extra attention should be paid to spatially

dispersed adaptive and evaluative research (Judd et al, 1986), and appropriate extension services, public

or private.

        Agricultural extension systems are designed to provide farmers information about new

technologies and thus facilitate technology transfer or adoption. Researchers have estimated high rates of

return to extension work in the U.S. and have demonstrated that, provided there are attractive

technologies awaiting adoption, contact between farmers and extension agents promotes technology

adoption in some less developed countries (Huffman and Evenson, 2006; Abdulai and Huffman, 2005;

Polson and Spencer, 1990).

      In industries requiring high up-front investments in infrastructure or regulatory compliance,

adoption may be retarded by lock-in of old technologies. In agricultural biotechnology, regulatory

requirements for testing a new variety, and fragmented IP claims on inputs for a single new technology,

create high costs of entry for followers once a leading innovation has become approved established.

Private firms owning IP might raise their prices for access to proprietary technology after strategically

pricing low to induce diffusion and dependence. 12 This issue is akin to a problem of patented technology


12
  For example, in the years before United States patents were generally published 18 months after
application, Monsanto encouraged widespread use of their 35S promoter in plant transformation. The fact


                                                      32
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



incorporated in regulatory standards, familiar from the literature in electronics and communications

technology, although the connections between the relative literatures have not, as far as we are aware,

been fully explored.

        Note, however, that if farmers perceive a technology to be extremely attractive or to provide

significant benefits, they will not only adopt at impressive rates but may also perform adaptive innovation

themselves, regardless of the policy regime in place. A case in point is the exchange and development of

unapproved genetically modified seeds by Gujarati farmers, and the success of these farmers’ opposition

to federal attempts to destroy the unapproved standing crop (Pray et al, 2005). The case of “no-tillage”

agriculture in the U.S., one of the prominent agricultural innovations in the late twentieth century, is also

a striking example of users innovating and adopting in response to prices and practical environmental

problems. The first no-till planting is credited to Kentucky grain grower Harry Young, an extension

specialist who successfully applied his knowledge of scientific trials for new herbicides to develop this

new method of crop growing in 1962 (Coughenour and Chamala, 2001). Due to such benefits as

increased yield and reduced requirements for labor, water, fuel, and machinery, the word about no-tillage

spread rapidly between farmers, who traveled from neighboring states to learn about Young’s technique.

The ensuing years saw rapid diffusion of the technique between farmers, 13 who adapted the technology

for other crops such as soybeans. In view of the many complex legal and institutional innovation systems

developed by governments, these examples are important reminders of the time-honored role of

practitioners participating in technological development, with motivations ranging from necessity to

curiosity.

8. Conclusion


that Monsanto had a patent on the technology was revealed only after 35S had been diffused widely,
when the patent was granted and published. Innovators could commercialize their technologies
incorporating the promoter only if they had a license from Monsanto, since switching promoters would
have required producing new transgenic technologies using a non-infringing promoter, followed by
transformation of relevant cultivars, testing, and dissemination (Joly and de Looze, 1996), an alternative
so time-consuming as to preclude serious consideration.
13
   By 1970, 35% of farmers in southwest Kentucky had tried no-tillage for corn (Coughenour and
Chamala, 2001)


                                                     33
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



       In both the energy and the agricultural sectors, the demand for the services and goods produced

extends across all the populated areas of the world, where heterogeneity in consumer preferences,

environmental conditions, economic structures and governmental policies mediate the applicability and

appropriateness of innovations. For agriculture, the need for local adaptive technology has created global

dispersion of research efforts and support. However, investments are by no means evenly dispersed

across the globe. Instead, the majority of global spending comes from large countries that can internalize

the benefits of research. The high rates of return to agricultural research in the United States were

achieved through sustained public investment oriented by a clear mission. The establishment of
                                     th
institutional mechanisms in the 19        Century created a public commitment to agriculture, but the extent

and direction of public investments has been and will continue to be influenced by interest groups

operating at multiple geographic scales.

       The experience in agriculture should be of interest to those assessing the appropriate roles of

public and private research. In agriculture, (1) IPRs have not strongly encouraged the private production

of basic, essential research that is risky and often only pays off in the long run, (2) IPRs on key research

inputs can impede freedom to operate in public research, and (3) IPRs on research inputs have led to

market concentration and price markups, which should discourage or delay adoption. However it appears

that leading firms in the private sector have been particularly efficient in developing, promoting and

disseminating commercial technology packages, relative to what one might reasonably expect of a

typically competent public or non-profit entity, especially in the context of a disruptive and controversial

technology.

       For governments, experience in agriculture illustrates the importance of effective consumer

protection, administration of standards and grades, and antitrust. With respect to innovations,

governments face the challenge of balancing public trust and safety with exploiting the advantages

produced by a changing technological environment. Critiques of the shortcomings of regulatory

performance in the United States and elsewhere draw attention to the need for further scientific study

directed to the achievement of effective and dynamically adaptive regulation.


                                                        34
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation




9. Appendix
 Table 1: Estimated global public and private agricultural R&D investments, 2000
                                            Agricultural R&D spending            Shares in global total
                                             (million 2000 intl. dollars)                 (%)
                                              1981                2000           1981             2000

Public
   Asia and Pacific (28)                     3047             7523                 20.0           32.7
   Latin America and Caribbean (27)          1897             2454                 12.5           10.8
   Sub-Saharan Africa (44)                   1196             1461                 7.9            6.3
   West Asia and North Africa (18)           764              1382                 5.0            6.0
   Subtotal, less developed countries        6904             12819                45.4           55.8
   (117)
   USA                                       2533             3828                 16.7           16.6
   Subtotal, High Income Countries           8293             10191                54.6           44.2
   (22)
   Total (139)                               15197            23010               100.0           100.0
Private
   Developing                                  -               869                  -              6.5
   High Income                                 -              12577                 -             93.5
   Total                                       -              13446                 -             100.0
Public and private
   Developing                                  -              13688                 -             37.5
   High Income                                 -              22767                 -             62.5
Total                                          -              36456                 -             100.0
Source: Pardey et al. (2006a)




                                               35
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



                                            Yearly shares of genetically engineered organism controlled
                                                               open air field releases

                                         100%
      Share of open air field releases




                                         90%

                                         80%

                                         70%

                                         60%
                                                                                                                               Other Private
                                         50%                                                                                   Public
                                                                                                                               Monsanto
                                         40%

                                         30%

                                         20%

                                         10%

                                          0%
                                             87


                                                    89


                                                           91


                                                                  93


                                                                         95


                                                                                97


                                                                                       99


                                                                                              01


                                                                                                     03


                                                                                                            05


                                                                                                                   07


                                                                                                                          09
                                           19


                                                  19


                                                         19


                                                                19


                                                                       19


                                                                              19


                                                                                     19


                                                                                            20


                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                     Year

 Source: Source data from U.S. Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. Available
 http://www.aphis.usda.gov/biotechnology/status.shtml. Accessed 17 July 2009.




10. References
Abdulai A, WE Huffman. (2005) “The diffusion of new agricultural technologies: the case of crossbred-
        cow technology in Tanzania.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87(3): 645–659.

Adelaja AO. (2003) “The 21st century land grant economist.” Agricultural and Resource Economics
        Review, 32(2): 159–170.

Alston JM. (2002) “Spillovers.” The Australian Journal of Agriculture and Resource Economics, 46(3):
        315-346.

Alston JM, C Chan-Kang, MC Marra, PG Pardey, and TJ Wyatt. (2000) “A meta-analysis of the rates of
        return to agricultural R & D: ex pede herculem?” Washington DC, IFPRI.

Alston JM, MC Marra, PG Pardey, and TJ Wyatt. (2000a) “Research returns redux: a meta-analysis of the
        returns to agricultural R&D.” The Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics,
        44(2): 185-215.




                                                                                     36
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Alston JM, PG Pardey, and J Roseboom. (1998) “Financing agricultural research: international
        investment patterns and policy perspectives.” World Development 26(6): 1057-1071.

Alston JM, GW Norton, and PG Pardey. (1995) Science under scarcity: Principles and practice for
agricultural research evaluation and priority setting. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Alston JM, and PG Pardey. (1999) “The economics of agricultural R&D Policy.” In JM Alston, PG
        Pardey, VH Smith (eds) Paying for Agricultural Productivity. Baltimore: John Hopkins
        University Press, pp. 6-30.

Alston JM, and RJ Venner. (2002) “The effects of the US Plant Variety Protection Act on wheat genetic
        improvement.” Research Policy 31: 527-542.

Atkinson RC, RN Beachy, G Conway, FA Cordova, MA Fox, KA Holbrook, DF Klessig, RL
       McCormick, PM McPherson, HR Rawlings III, et al. (2003) “Intellectual property rights: public
       sector collaboration for agricultural IP management.” Science, 301(5630): 174–175.

Barton, J. (1998) “The impact of contemporary patent law on plant biotechnology research.” In SA
        Eberhardt, HL Shands, W Collins, and RL Lower (eds) Intellectual Property Rights III, Global
        Genetic Resources: Access and Property Rights. Madison, WI: Crop Sciences Society of
        America.

BBC News. (26 October 2000). “Ministers ‘misled’ public on BSE.” BBC News. Available:
      http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/992020.stm. Accessed 10 July 2009.

Berwald D, CA Carter, and GP Gruère. (2006) “Rejecting new technology: the case of genetically
       modified wheat.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 88(2): 432–447.

Bessen J, RM Hunt. (2003) “An Empirical Look at Software Patents.” Working Paper No. 03-17, Federal
        Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Available at http://www.researchoninnovation.org/swpat.pdf.

Binenbaum E, C Nottenburg, PG Pardey, BD Wright, P Zambrano. (2003) “South-north trade, intellectual
       property jurisdictions, and freedom to operate in agricultural research on staple crops.” Economic
       Development and Cultural Change, 51(2): 309-336.

Binswanger HP, VW Ruttan. (1978) Induced Innovation: Technology, Institutions and Development,
       Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Boettiger S, GD Graff, PG Pardey, E Van Dusen, BD Wright (2004) “Intellectual property rights for plant
        biotechnology: International Aspects.” In P Christou, H Klee (eds) Handbook of Plant
        Biotechnology. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Chapter 56, pp. 1089-1113.

Boettiger S, and BD Wright. (2006) “Open source in biotechnology: Open questions.” Innovations:
        Technology, Governance, and Globalization, 1(4): 45–57.

Boldrin M, and DK Levine. Against Intellectual Monopoly. Cambridge University Press. Available:
        http://www.dklevine.com/general/intellectual/againstfinal.htm.




                                                   37
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Brennan M, CE Pray, A Naseem, and JF Oehmke. (2005) “An innovation market approach to analyzing
       impacts of mergers and acquisitions in the plant biotechnology industry.” AgBioForum, 8(2&3):
       89–99.

Brock WH. (1997) Justus von Liebig: The Chemical Gatekeeper. Cambridge: Cambridge University
       Press.

Brookes G, and P Barfoot. (2005) “GM Crops: the global economic and environmental impact: the first
       nine years 1996-2004.” AgBioForum, 8(2&3): 187-196.

Broothaerts W, HJ Mitchell, B Weir, S Kaines, LMA Smith, W Yang, JE Mayer, C Roa-Rodriguez, RA
       Jefferson. (2005) “Gene transfer to plants by diverse species of bacteria.” Nature, 433: 629-633.

Busch L, R Allison, A Rudy, BT Shaw, T Ten Eyck, D Coppin, J Konefal, C Oliver, and
       J Fairweather. (2004) External review of the collaborative research agreement between Novartis
       Agricultural Discovery Institute, Inc. and the Regents of the University of California.

Byerlee, D, and K Fischer. (2002) “Accessing Modern Science: Policy and Institutional Options for
        Agricultural Biotechnology in Developing Countries.” World Development, 30: 931-48.

Caswell MF, and D Zilberman. (1986) “The effects of well depth and land quality on the choice of
       irrigation technology.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 68(4): 798–811.

CGIAR. (2008) “The origins of the CGIAR.” Consultative Group on International Research. Available:
      http://www.cgiar.org/who/history/origins.html.

CGIAR Independent Review Panel. Bringing Together the Best of Science and the Best of Development.
      Independent Review of the CGIAR System. Report to the Executive Council. Washington, DC.
      Available: http://www.cgiar.org/externalreview/

CIMMYT. 1997. CIMMYT in 1995-1996: The Next 30 Years. Mexico, D.F.: CIMMYT.

CNN. (18 January 2001) “French police in BSE government raid.” CNN News. Available:
       http://premium.asia.cnn.com/2001/WORLD/europe/france/01/17/france.madcow.02/index.html.
       Accessed: 10 July 2009.

Cohen JI, R Paarlberg. (2004) “Unlocking crop biotechnology in developing countries – a report from the
       field.” World Development, 32(9): 1563-1577.

Cohen WM, RR Nelson, and JP Walsh. (2000) “Protecting their intellectual assets: appropriability
      conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent (or not).” NBER Working Paper no. 7552.

Constantine JH, JM Alston, and VH Smith. (1994) “Economic impacts of the California One-Variety
       Cotton Law.” The Journal of Political Economy, 102(5): 951-974.

Daily S. (18 May 2001). “French report faults response to mad cow crisis.” The New York Times.
        Available: http://www.nytimes.com/2001/05/18/world/french-report-faults-response-to-mad-cow-
        crisis.html. Accessed 10 July 2009.



                                                   38
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


David PA. (1969) A Contribution to the Theory of Diffusion, Stanford Center for Research in Economic
       Growth, Memorandum no. 71.

Day-Rubenstein K, and KO. (2000) “The CRADA model for public-private research and technology
      transfer in agriculture.” In KO Fuglie and DE Schimmelpfennig (eds) Public-Private
      Collaboration in Agricultural Research: New Institutional Arrangements and Economic
      Implications, Chapter 8, pp. 155–174. Ames: Iowa State University Press.

Delmer DP, C Nottenburg, GD Graff, and AB Bennett. (2003) “Intellectual property resources for
       international development in agriculture.” Plant Physiology, 133: 1666–1670.

Erbisch FH. (2000) “Challenges of plant protection: how a semi-public agricultural research institution
        protects its new plant varieties and markets them”, presented at the workshop on The Impact on
        Research and Development of Sui Generis Approaches to Plant Variety Protection of Rice in
        Developing Countries, International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, The Philippines, 16-18th
        February.

Evenson, RE. (1980) “A century of agricultural research and productivity change research, invention,
       extension, and productivity change in U.S. agriculture: an historical decomposition analysis.” In
       AA Araji (ed) Research and extension productivity in agriculture. Moscow, ID: Department of
       Agricultural Economics, University of Idaho.

Evenson RE (2001). “Economic impacts of agricultural research and extension.” In BL Gardner, GC
       Rausser (eds) Handbook of Agricultural Economics. Vol. 1A (Agricultural Production), New
       York: Elsevier Science/ North Holland.

Falck-Zepeda JB, and G Traxler. (2000) “The role of federal, state, and private institutions in seed
       technology generation.” In KO Fuglie, DE Schimmelpfennig (eds) Public-Private Collaboration
       in Agricultural Research: New Institutional Arrangements and Economic Implications, Chapter
       6, pp. 99–115. Ames: Iowa State University Press.

Falck-Zepeda JB, G Traxler, and RG Nelson. (2000) “Surplus distribution from the introduction of a
       biotechnology innovation.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 82(2): 360-369.

Feder G. (1980) "Farm Size, Risk Aversion and the Adoption of New Technology under Uncertainty."
       Oxford Economic Papers, 32(July): 263-83.

Feder G. (1982) "Adoption of Interrelated Agricultural Innovations: Complementarity and Impact of
       Risk, Scale, and Credit." American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 64(February): 94-101.

Feder G, RE Just, and D Zilberman. (1985) “Adoption of agricultural innovations in developing
       countries: a survey.” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 33(2): 255-298.

Fernandez-Cornejo J, Ed Beach, W Huang. (1994) “The adoption of IPM techniques by vegetable
       growers in Florida, Michigan, and Texas.” Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics,
       26(1): 158-172.




                                                   39
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Fernandez-Cornejo J, C Hendricks, A Mishra. (2005) “Technology Adoption and Off-Farm Household
       Income: The Case of Herbicide-Tolerant Soybeans.” Journal of Agricultural and Applied
       Economics, 37(3): 549-563.

Fisher AC, and WM Hanemann. (1998) "The impact of global warming on agriculture: rethinking the
        Ricardian approach." CUDARE Working Paper Series 842, University of California at Berkeley,
        Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Policy.

Friedman DD, WM Landes, and RA Posner (1991). “Some economics of trade secret law”. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 5(1): 61-72.

Finlay MR. (1988) “The German agricultural experiment Stations and the beginnings of American
        agricultural research.” Agricultural History, 62(2), Publicly Sponsored Agricultural Research in
        the United States: Past, Present, and Future: 41-50.

Foltz JD, BL Barham, and K Kim. (2007) “Synergies or Trade-Offs in University Life Sciences
        Research.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 89(2): 353-367.

Fowler C. (1994) Unnatural Selection: Technology, Politics, and Plant Evolution. Yverdon, Switzerland:
       Gordon and Breach.

Fuglie K, N Ballenger, K Day, C Klotz, M Ollinger, J Reilly, U Vasavada, J Yee. (1996) Agricultural
        research and development: public and private investments under alternative markets and
        institutions. Agricultural Economic Report Number 735. Washington, DC: Economic Research
        Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Glenna, LL, R Welsh, WB Lacy, and D Biscotti. (2007) “University administrators, agricultural
        biotechnology and academic capitalism: defining the public good to promote university-industry
        relationships.” The Sociological Quarterly, 48: 141-63.

Gollier C, B Moldovanu, T Ellingsen. (2001) “Should we beware of the precautionary principle?”
        Economic Policy, 16(33): 303-327.

Graff GD, SE Cullen, KJ Bradford, D Zilberman, and AB Bennett. (2003) “The public–private structure
       of intellectual property ownership in agricultural biotechnology.” Nature Biotechnology, 21(9):
       989–995.

Graff GD, BD Wright, A Bennett, and D Zilberman. (2004). “Access to intellectual property is a major
       obstacle to developing transgenic horticulture crops.” California Agriculture, 58(2): 120-126.

Graff GD, and D Zilberman. (2007) “The political economy of intellectual property: reexamining
       European policy on plant biotechnology.” In J Kesan (ed) Agricultural Biotechnology and
       Intellectual Property: Seeds of Change. Washington D.C. and London: CAB International.
       Chapter 17, pp. 244-267.

Griliches Z. (1957) “Hybrid corn: an exploration in the economics of technological change.”
        Econometrica, 25(4): 501-522.




                                                   40
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Guttman J. (1978) “Interest groups and the demand for agricultural research.” Journal of Political
       Economy, 86: 467–484.

Harding TS. (1940) “Henry L. Ellsworth, commissioner of patents.” Journal of Farm Economics, 22(3):
       621-627.

Hayami Y, and VW Ruttan. (1971) Agricultural Development. Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University
      Press.

Huang J, S Rozelle, C Pray, and Q Wang (2002) “Plant biotechnology in China.” Science, 295: 674–677.

Huang J, R Hu, S Rozelle, and C Pray. (2005) Development, policy, and impacts of genetically modified
       crops in China: A comprehensive review of China’s agricultural biotechnology sector. Paper for
       the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Kennedy School of Government at
       Harvard University, 1–58.

Huffman WE, and RE Evenson. (2006) Science for Agriculture: A Long-Term Perspective. Ames: Iowa
      State University Press.

Huffman WE, and JA Miranowski. (1981) “An economic analysis of expenditures on agricultural
      experiment station research.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 63(1): 104-118.

James C. (2008) Global Status of Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 2008. ISAAA Brief No. 39.
       ISAAA: Ithaca, NY.

Jefferson R. (2006) “Science as social enterprise: the Cambia Bios initiative.” Innovations: Technology,
        Governance, and Globalization, 1(4): 13–44.

Joly P, and M de Looze. (1996) “An analysis of innovation strategies and industrial differentiation
         through patent applications: the case of plant biotechnology.” Research Policy, 25: 1027-1046.

Judd MA, JK Boyce, and RE Evenson. (1986). “Investing in agricultural supply: the determinants of
      agricultural research and extension investment.” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
      3(1): 77-113.

Judd MA, JK Boyce, and RE Evenson. (1987) “Investment in agricultural research and extension.” In
      VW Ruttan and CE Pray (eds) Policy for Agricultural Research. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
      Chapter 1, pp. 7–38.

Juma C. (1989) The Gene Hunters: Biotechnology and the Scramble for Seeds. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
       University Press.

Just RE, and WE Huffman. (1992) “Economic principles and incentives: structure, management, and
        funding of agricultural in the United States.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 74(5):
        1101-1108.

Just RE, and WE Huffman. (2009) "The economics of universities in a new age of funding options."
        Research Policy, 38(7): 1102-1116.



                                                   41
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Just RE, and GC Rausser. (1993) “The governance structure of agriculture science and agricultural
        economics: a call to arms.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 75(October): 69-83.

King JL, and D Schimmelpfennig. (2005) “Mergers, acquisitions, and stocks of agricultural
       biotechnology intellectual property.” AgBioForum, 8(2&3): 83-88.

Knowler D, and B Bradshaw. (2006) “Farmers’ adoption of conservation agriculture: a review and
      synthesis of recent research.” Food Policy, 32(1): 25-48.

Knudson MK. (2000) “The research consortium model for agricultural research.” In KO Fuglie and DE
      Schimmelpfennig (eds) Agricultural Policy in an Era of Privatization. Iowa State University
      Press: Chapter 9, pp 175–198.

Knudson MK and CE Pray. (1991) “Plant variety protection, private funding, and public sector research
      priorities.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 73(3): 882–886.

Koo B, and BD Wright. (1999) “The role of biodiversity products as incentives for conserving biological
       diversity: some instructive examples.” The Science of the Total Environment, 240(1-3): 21–30.

Lee D. (2005) “Agricultural Sustainability and Technology Adoption: Issues and Policies for Developing
        Countries.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, (87)5: 1325-1334.

Lei A, R Juneja, and BD Wright. (2009) “Patents vs. Patenting: Implications of Intellectual Property
        Protection for Biological Research.” Nature Biotechnology, 27: 36-40.

Lele U. (2003) “Biotechnology: opportunities and challenges for developing countries.” American
        Journal of Agricultural Economics, 85(5): 1119-1125

Lele U, C Barrett, CK Eicher, B Garnde, C Gerrard, L Kelly, W Lesser, K Perkins, S Rana, M Rukuni,
        and DJ Speilman. (2003) The CGIAR at 31: an independent meta-evaluation of the Consultative
        Group on International Agricultural Research. Operations Evaluation Department, the World
        Bank, Washington D.C.

Lemarié S. (2001). “How will US-based companies make it in Europe? An insight from Pioneer and
       Monsanto.” AgBioForum, 4(1): 74-78. Available on the World Wide Web:
       http://www.agbioforum.org.

Lemley MA, and C Shapiro. (2005) “Probabilistic Patents.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(2): 75-
       98.

Lemley MA, and C Shapiro. (2007) “Patent Hold-Up and Royalty Stacking.” Texas Law Review, 85(7):
       1991-2049.

Levin RC, AK Klevorick, RR Nelson, SG Winter, R Gilbert, and Z Griliches. (1987) “Appropriating the
       returns from industrial research and development.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
       1987(3) Special Issue On Microeconomics: pp. 783-831.




                                                   42
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Lusk JL, J Roosen, and JA Fox. (2003) “Demand for beef from cattle administered growth hormone or
       fed genetically modified corn: a comparison of consumers in France, Germany, the United
       Kingdom, and the United States.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 85(1): 16-29.

Marco AC, and GC Rausser. (2008) “The role of patent rights in mergers: consolidation in plant
       biotechnology.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 90(1): 133–151.

Matuschke I, RR Mishra, and M Qaim. (2007) “Adoption and Impact of Hybrid Wheat in India.” World
       Development. 35(8): 1422-1435.

Mendelsohn R, W Nordhaus, and D Shaw. (1994) "The Impact of Global Warming on Agriculture: A
       Ricardian Approach" American Economic Review, 84(4): 753-771.

Miller HI, and G Conko. (2000) “The science of biotechnology meets the politics of global regulation.”
        Issues in Science and Technology, (Fall): 47-54.

Murray F, and S Stern. (2007) “Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the freedom of scientific
       knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis.” Journal of Economic Behavior
       and Organization, 63(4): 648-687.

National Research Council. (1995) Colleges of agriculture at the land grant universities: a profile.
       Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Nelson CH. (2001) “Risk perception, behavior, and consumer response to genetically modified
       organisms: toward understanding American and European public reaction.” American Behavioral
       Scientist, 44(8): 1371-1388.

Oehmke JF, and CA Wolf. (2004) “Is Monsanto leaving money on the table? Monopoly pricing and Bt
      cotton value with heterogeneous adopters.” Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics,
      36(3): 705-718.

O’Hanlon K. (23 August 2004) “Starlink corn settlement also to include interest.” USA Today.

Ollinger M, and J Fernandez-Cornejo. (1995) “Regulation, innovation, and market structure in the U.S.
        pesticide industry.” AER-719. Economic Research Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
        June 1995.

Olmstead AL, and P Rhode. (1993) “Induced innovation in American agriculture: a reconsideration.” The
       Journal of Political Economy, 101(1): 100-118.

Pardey PG, JM Alston, and RR Piggott, eds. (2006) Agricultural R&D in the Developing World: Too
       Little, Too Late?. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).

Pardey PG, and NK Beintema. (2001) Slow magic: agricultural R&D a century after Mendel. Food
       Policy Report. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).

Pardey PG, NK Beintema, S Dehmer, and S Wood. (2006a) Agricultural research: a growing global
       divide? Food Policy Report. Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators Initiative.
       Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).


                                                    43
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



Pardey PG, J James, J Alston, S Wood, B Koo, E Binenbaum, T Hurley, and P Glewwe. (2007) Science,
       Technology, and Skills [International Science and Technology Practice and Policy (INSTEPP).
       Rome: CGIAR and Department of Applied Economics, University of Minnesota, for FAO.

Park CC. (1989) Chernobyl: the long shadow. London and New York: Routledge.

Parker DD, and D Zilberman D. (1993) “University technology transfers: impacts on local and U.S.
        economies.” Contemporary Policy Issues, 11(2): 87-100.

Pollack A. (4 September 2001) “Altered corn surfaced earlier.” New York Times.

Pollak LM. (2003) “The history and success of the public-private project on germplasm enhancement of
        maize (GEM).” Advances in Agronomy, 78:45–87.

Polson RA, and DSC Spencer. (1991) “The technology adoption process in subsistence agriculture: the
       case of cassave in southwestern Nigeria.” Agricultural Systems, 36(1): 65-78.

Poortinga W, and NF Pidgeon. (2005) “Trust in Risk Regulation: Cause or Consequence of the
        Acceptability of GM Food?” Risk Analysis, 25(1): 199-209.

Pray CE, P Bengali, and B Ramaswami. (2005) “The cost of biosafety regulations: the Indian
       experience.” Quarterly Journal of International Agriculture, 44(3): 267-289.

Pray CE, and K Fuglie. (2001) Private Investment in Agricultural Research and International Technology
       Transfer in Asia. Economic Research Service Technical Report 805, Washington, D.C.: US
       Department of Agriculture.

Qaim M, A Subramanian, G Naik, and D Zilberman. (2006) “Adoption of bt cotton and impact
      variability: insights from India.” Review of Agricultural Economics, 28(1): 48–58.

Rausser G. (1999) “Private/Public Research: Knowledge Assets and Future Scenarios.” American Journal
       of Agricultural Econonomics, 81(5): 1011-27.

Rausser G, L Simon, and H Ameden. (2000) “Public-Private Alliances in Biotechnology: Can They
       Narrow the Knowledge Gaps between Rich and Poor?” Food Policy, 25: 499-513.

Rogers E. (1962) Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.

Rose-Ackerman S, and RE Evenson. (1985) “The political economy of agricultural research and
       extension: grants, votes, and reapportionment.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 67:
       1-14.

Runge CF, and BM Ryan. (2004) The Global Diffusion of Plant Biotechnology: International Adoption
       and Research in 2004, Department of Applied Economics, University of Minnesota, St. Paul.

Ruttan V. (1977) "The Green Revolution: Seven Generalizations." International Development Review, 19
       (December): 16-23.



                                                 44
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Ruttan V. (1980) “Bureaucratic productivity: the case of agricultural research.” Public Choice, 35: 529-
       49.

Ruttan V. (1982) Agricultural Research Policy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Schoenermarck H. (1974). “Nathaniel Bagshaw Ward: How a Sphinx Moth altered the ecology of earth.”
       Garden Journal, 24: 148-154.

Sen AK. (1981) Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation, Oxford: Clarendon
      Press.

Shuren J. (2008) “Guidance for industry on the food and drug administration: Recommendations for
       sampling and testing yellow corn and dry-milled yellow corn shipments intended for human food
       use for cry9c protein residues; withdrawal of guidance.” Docket No. FDA-2008-D-0229, April
       2008.

Sjöberg L. (2002) “Limits of knowledge and the limited importance of trust.” Risk Analysis, 21(1) 189-
        198.

Stokes D. (1997) Pasteur’s quadrant: basic science and technological innovation. Washington, D.C.: The
       Brookings Institution.

Sunding D, and D Zilberman. (2001) “The agricultural innovation process: research and technology
       adoption in a changing agricultural sector.” In BL Gardner and GC Rausser (eds) Handbook of
       Agricultural Economics, Vol. 1. Elsevier, Chapter 4, pp. 201–261.

Taylor MR, and J Cayford. (2002) “The U.S. patent system and developing country access to
       biotechnology: does the balance need adjusting?” Discussion Paper.

Tollens E, M Demont, and R Swennen. (2004) “Agrobiotechnology in Developing Countries: North-
        South Partnerships are the Key.” Outlook on Agriculture, 33: 231-8.

Troyer AF. (2009) “Development of hybrid corn and the seed corn industry.” In JL Bennetzen and S
       Hake (eds) Handbook of Maize - Volume II: Genetics and Genomics. New York: Springer
       Science + Business Media, LLC.

United States Department of Justice. (1998). Justice department approves Monsanto’s acquisition of
        DeKalb Genetics Corporation (press release 98-570). Washington, DC: USDOJ. Available on the
        World Wide Web: http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/press_releases/1998/2103.htm.

Venner RJ. (1997) An economic analysis of the U.S. Plant Variety Protection Act: the case of wheat.
       Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Agriculture and Resource Economics, University of California
       at Davis, Davis, California, U.S.A.

Vogel D. (2001) The New Politics of Risk Regulation in Europe. London: Centre for Analysis of Risk and
       Regulation, London School of Economics and Political Science.




                                                   45
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation


Vogt DU, and M Parish. (1999) “Food biotechnology in the united states: science, regulation, and issues.”
      Congressional Research Service Reports and Issue Briefs, Domestic Social Policy Division, U.S.
      Department of State.

Weingart P. (2002) “The moment of truth for science.” European Molecular Biology Organization, 3(8)
      703-706.

White FC, and J Havlicek. (1982) “Optimal expenditures for agricultural research and extension:
       implications for underfunding.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 64: 47-55.

World Bank Group. (30 July 2009). Implementing Agriculture for Development, the World Bank Group
       Agriculture Action Plan: FY2010-12. Available:
       http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTARD/0,,contentMDK:22273089~
       pagePK:210058~piPK:210062~theSitePK:336682,00.html

Wright BD. (1998) “Public germplasm development at a crossroads: Biotechnology and intellectual
       property.” California Agriculture, 52(6): 8–13.

Wright BD, and PG Pardey. (2007) “Changing intellectual property regimes: implications for developing
       country agriculture.” International Journal of Technology and Globalization, 2(1/2):93–114.

Wright BD, PG Pardey, C Nottenburg, and B Koo. (2007) “Agricultural innovation: Investments and
Incentives.” In R Evenson and P Pingali (eds) Handbook of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 3, Elsevier
        B.V., pp 2535–2605.

Zilberman D. (2006) “The economics of biotechnology regulation.” In RE Just, JM Alston, and D
       Zilberman (eds) Regulating Agricultural Biotechnology: Economics and Policy, Vol. 30 of
       Natural Resource Management and Policy, U.S.: Springer. Chapter 12, pp. 243–261. Springer,
       U.S.




                                                   46
Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih
Agricultural Innovation



        In both sectors, the spatial effects will be important. The geographic distribution of agricultural

production will necessarily respond to climate change, and important activities such as milk and meat

production and land clearing might be highly constrained by regulations to mitigate greenhouse gas

emissions. (Mendelsohn et al, 1994; Fisher and Hanemann, 1998). The spatial distribution of important

types of energy usage are also likely to respond to climate change, and local, national and international

regulations aimed at mitigating greenhouse gases and other environmental effects are already affecting the

allocation of productive investment.




                                                     47
