                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PUBLIC VS. PRIVATE PROVISION OF CHARITY CARE? EVIDENCE FROM THE
          EXPIRATION OF HILL-BURTON REQUIREMENTS IN FLORIDA

                                        Douglas Almond
                                          Janet Currie
                                        Emilia Simeonova

                                       Working Paper 15798
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15798


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Douglas Almond, Janet Currie, and Emilia Simeonova. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public vs. Private Provision of Charity Care? Evidence from the Expiration of Hill-Burton
Requirements in Florida
Douglas Almond, Janet Currie, and Emilia Simeonova
NBER Working Paper No. 15798
March 2010
JEL No. I1,I11,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper explores the consequences of the expiration of charity care requirements imposed on private
hospitals by the Hill-Burton Act. We examine delivery care and the health of newborns using the
universe of Florida births from 1989-2003 combined with hospital data from the American Hospital
Association. We find that charity care requirements were binding on hospitals, but that private hospitals
under obligation “cream skimmed” the least risky maternity patients. Conditional on patient characteristics,
they provided less intensive maternity services but without compromising patient health. When obligations
expired, private hospitals quickly reduced their charity caseloads, shifting maternity patients to public
hospitals. There they received more intensive services, but did not experience improvements in health.
These results suggest that public hospitals provided services less efficiently than private hospitals
constrained to provide charity care.


Douglas Almond                                       Emilia Simeonova
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Columbia University                                  Tufts University
International Affairs Building, MC 3308              Medford, MA 02155
420 West 118th Street                                and IIES, University of Stockholm
New York, NY 10027                                   emilia.simeonova@gmail.com
and NBER
da2152@columbia.edu

Janet Currie
International Affairs Building
Department of Economics
Columbia University - Mail code 3308
420 W 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jc2663@columbia.edu
I. Introduction

       The provision of charity care, medical care for those who lack insurance and cannot

afford to pay for it, is a central issue in the current debate over health care reform in the U.S..

This is not surprising given that the number of U.S. residents without health insurance is

projected to increase to 52 million or 19% of the population this year (Gilmer and Kronick,

2009). At the same time, the proportion of U.S. physicians providing charity care dropped 8

percentage points in the last decade, falling to 68 percent of physicians in 2004-05. Among

physicians who practice in a hospital setting, the drop is even larger – from 66% in 1996-1997 to

54 percent in 2004-2005 (Cunningham and May, 2006).

       Historically, different solutions to the charity care problem have been implemented for

specific groups. For example, the elderly all receive public health insurance under the Medicare

program.    Most children are now eligible for insurance coverage under a mix of private and

public insurance plans, where the coverage of the public insurance plan (Medicaid) is sometimes

substantially better or worse than that of most private plans. And many indigent patients receive

charity care, often at public hospitals.    Private non-profit hospitals receive substantial tax

subsidies in return for an implicit agreement that the hospitals provide public services including

the provision of charity care.

       One proposal that has been discussed in the context of health care reform is to place

explicit requirements to provide charity care on these hospitals.        Pear (2009) describes a

bipartisan proposal sponsored by Senators Baucus and Grassley to require an explicit amount of

charity care in return for getting or keeping tax exempt status.        This provision has been

vigorously opposed by organizations representing hospitals on the grounds that the current




                                                                                                 2
system of tax subsidies already successfully encourages hospitals to provide charity care so that

quotas would increase the burden on hospital administrators without creating any social benefit.

           This paper studies the effects of an earlier program that required private hospitals to

provide a fixed percentage of charity care to “pay back” construction subsidies. The Hospital

Survey and Construction Act of 1946 was intended to improve hospital infrastructure in

underserved areas. It is often referred to as the Hill-Burton Act after its two senate sponsors.

The Act provided grants and low-interest loans for hospital construction, and specified that

recipients would be obligated to provide charity care for 20 years after the initial funds had been

disbursed (see Almond et al., 2007 and Almond, Chay, and Greenstone, 2007 for further

discussion). An important point is that over our sample period, Hill-Burton requirements took

the form of explicit quotas on the amount of charity care to be provided.

           We examine hospitals’ responses to the expiration of these requirements using a unique

data set of all births in hospitals in Florida between 1989 and 2003. An important feature of

these data is that we can track the same mothers over time, and hence we can control for the

selection of mothers into different types of hospitals by estimating models with mother fixed

effects.      We investigate the effects of contract expirations on the services offered by the

facilities, the mix of mothers served, procedures, and health outcomes. Furthermore, Florida is a

state with an especially large number of uninsured persons. In 2006, 25.3% of the non-elderly

population did not have health insurance coverage compared to 18.1% nationally. 1

           We find that private hospitals under obligation were indeed constrained by the charity

care provisions. However, they selected low risk patients and offered less aggressive (and

therefore less expensive) maternity services. When their obligations expired, private hospitals

quickly adjusted the mix of services and their caseloads and reduced the amount of charity care
1
    Authors’ calculations based on the Current Population Survey


                                                                                                    3
provided. Hence, the tax subsidy for non-profit hospitals, which remained in place, was not

enough to encourage hospitals to maintain previous levels of charity care.

       Private hospitals whose obligations expired reduced the provision of maternity care, and

shifted mothers to public hospitals. Perhaps surprisingly, mothers in public hospitals received

additional services, but did not benefit from any measureable improvements in outcomes. Thus,

the public hospitals provided maternity services to the marginal patient less efficiently than

private hospitals that were constrained to serve charity patients. These results provide additional

support for solutions to the charity care problem that integrate the uninsured into the mainstream

of health care delivery.

       If health care reform is successful, the numbers of people without insurance, and thus the

need for outright charity care, will be reduced. However, the need will not be eliminated since,

for example, undocumented immigrants will not be covered by any current proposals. Moreover,

differences in the generosity of health insurance coverage are likely to remain. Our results

indicate that it may be socially advantageous to provide public incentives or mandates for private

providers to treat those who are underinsured, rather than expanding public provision of care.

However it is likely key to our results that, as we discuss below, private hospitals had strong

incentives to keep the costs of charity care down, and these incentives may have spilled over

onto their treatment of other patients. Another reading of our results is that private hospitals are

quick to adjust practices and caseloads in response to financial incentives, so that appropriate

incentives are essential to control health care costs.

       The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. The next section provides important

background information and a discussion of hospital incentives. Section III describes the data




                                                                                                       4
and Section IV describes our methods. Results are shown in Section V, with some extensions in

Section VI. Section VII concludes.



II. Background on the Hill-Burton Program and Hospital Incentives

          The Hill-Burton Act authorized Federal grants, loans, and loan guarantees to assist states

and communities in constructing hospitals and public health centers. By 2000 the Hill-Burton

Act had dispensed more than $4.6 billion in grants as well as $1.5 billion in loans to nearly 6,800

healthcare facilities in over 4,000 communities (Hill and Hill, 2004).      To be eligible for Hill-

Burton funds, the hospital could be either a public or not for profit entity. Facilities were

initially obliged to make a “reasonable volume” of free services available to persons unable to

pay for a period of 20 years. In 1979, “reasonable volume” was defined to be “not less than the

lesser of (i) Three percent of its operating costs for the most recent fiscal year for which an

audited financial statement is available; or (ii) Ten percent of all Federal assistance provided to

or on behalf of the facility, adjusted by a percentage equal to the percentage change in the

national Consumer Price Index for medical care between the year in which the facility received

assistance or 1979, whichever is later, and the most recent year for which a published index is

available.” 2

          The obligation begins when construction of any facility built with Hill-Burton funds is

completed. If a facility does not provide the required volume of uncompensated care in any year,

then it must make up the difference even if that takes more than 20 years. Over the period under




2
    42 C.F.R. $124.503 (1979)


                                                                                                  5
consideration, many hospitals converted from non-profit to for-profit status. Nervetheless, these

hospitals continued to be obligated by their Hill-Burton requirements 3.

         Although some public hospitals also received funding under Hill-Burton, we focus on the

responses of private hospitals. Previous studies have suggested little difference in the behavior

of non-profit and for-profit private hospitals (Duggan, 2000; Needleman et al., 1999; Norton and

Staiger, 1994; Pauly, 1987); both are constrained by market forces. On the other hand, public

hospitals are paid for by the state, city or county, and have an obligation to serve the indigent. If

they have a bad year financially, it is likely that their subsidy will be increased, whereas if they

have a good year, their subsidy may be decreased. Thus, we expect public hospitals to be much

less aggressive in managing their caseloads than private hospitals. In fact, we show below that

public hospitals passively adjusted to a reduction in maternity care on the part of private

hospitals whose Hill-Burton obligations had expired by increasing their own provision of

maternity care.

         We can think of private hospitals (hereafter “hospitals”) as having a target level of charity

care. Frank and Salkever (1991) and Frank, Salkever, and Mitchell (1990) point out that this

level can be greater than zero, if for example, providing charity care improves relationships with

regulatory agencies, or increases donations to the hospital. These hospital goals may be better

served by spreading the same Hill-Burton expenditure over more patients, either because

variance in expenditures is reduced or because more patients benefit. If this is the case, then

Hill-Burton hospitals will have an incentive to select the lowest expected cost patients for charity


3
  The Hill-Burton regulations’ provision in such cases is that either the hospital continued to comply with the initial
obligations stipulated by the contact signed with the non-profit entity or the federal loan is returned in full to the
federal government. The same rule applied to hospital mergers in which one of the entities is under obligation at the
time of the merger. The HRSA assured us that there were no cases in Florida in which the for-profit (or merged)
hospital opted to return the grant money rather than take on the obligations. The updated list of Hill-Burton facilities
and expiration dates was cross-checked with the list of hospital mergers and hospitals that changed to for-profit
status to confirm this statement. No discrepancies were found.


                                                                                                                       6
care. If the optimal level of charity care is greater than the Hill-Burton requirement, then the

obligation’s expiration should have no effect. Alternatively, if it is binding then hospitals will

reduce charity care when the obligations expire.

         It is clear that the obligations were binding. Data on hospitals’ financial performance for

the period 1979-2003 were obtained from the Agency for Health Care and Administration for the

state of Florida. These data include the amounts spent by hospitals every year to meet their Hill

Burton requirements and other funds donated or devoted to charity. Figure 1 shows the fraction

of total patient revenue devoted to Hill-Burton care by participating hospitals before and after

their obligations expired. 4 The figure shows that hospitals spent close to the expected level of 3

percent of operating costs on Hill-Burton patients in each fiscal year. Since the operating costs

generally increase from year to year, it is reasonable to expect that in current-year terms the

fraction of costs devoted to Hill-Burton care would be slightly lower than three percent. 5

         One way to change the fraction of charity care patients is to change the mix of services

provided. In his analysis of California’s Disproportionate Share (DSH) Program, Duggan (2000)

shows that private hospitals that wished to increase their share of indigent patients in order to

qualify for payments under the DSH program greatly expanded the number of maternity patients

they served. Hospitals preferred maternity patients for two reasons. First, they are generally

young healthy women with short expected stays, low expected costs, and a low variance of costs



4
  Hospitals that have not finished all of their obligations by the year of the expiration are expected to continue
providing Hill-Burton care until those full obligations are met, which accounts for non-zero contributions in the
years immediately following expiration. That explains the residual amounts contributed to Hill-Burton charity cases
for the first couple of years after the expiration. See 42 C.F.R § 124.503 Compliance levels: (b) Deficits. If in any
fiscal year a facility fails to meet its annual compliance level, it shall provide uncompensated services in an amount
sufficient to make up that deficit in subsequent years, and its period of obligation shall be extended until the deficit
is made up.
5
  A close examination of other sources of charity care in hospitals’ financial reports showed no discernible change
associated with the expiration of Hill-Burton obligations. There is no evidence that hospitals re-directed
uncompensated care cases through other charity programs to offset the lack of Hill-Burton designated funds.


                                                                                                                       7
relative to (for example) elderly diabetics or heart patients. Second, expanded Medicaid coverage

of pregnant women made them more lucrative than other categories of indigent patients. In

Florida, the fraction of deliveries paid for my Medicaid rose from 25% to 36% between 1988 and

1991 when the income threshold for Medicaid was raised from 100% to 150% of poverty

(Marquis and Long, 1999).

         A simple calculation illustrates that by expanding maternity care, a hospital could meet

its Hill-Burton requirements without bearing much risk of having to provide any additional

uncompensated care above the requirement. On average, hospitals in our sample devoted about

$ 221,100 (2008 US dollars) per year to Hill-Burton charity care. 6 In 2008, the average inpatient

charge for a delivery in Florida hospitals was approximately $2500, ranging from an average low

charge of $1670 to an average high charge of $3340. 7 The average number of deliveries in

hospitals under Hill-Burton obligation in our sample is 760. If all Hill-Burton funds were used

for maternity care, between 9% (using the average high charge) and 17% (using the average low

charge) of deliveries would be accounted by the Hill-Burton program while the deliveries of

most other low income mothers would be compensated by Medicaid. 8 A hospital might even be

strategic about which cases it classified under Hill-Burton, placing women who did not qualify

for Medicaid, or patients who did not cooperate with hospital efforts to help them to become

covered, under Hill-Burton.




6
  Authors’ calculations based on hospital financial reports.
7
  The Florida Agency for Health Care Administration reports low and high charge averages for each hospital in the
year. The “low” value is represented by the 25th percentile and the “high” value is represented by the 75th percentile
of charges. 50 percent of the charges billed are between the 25th and 75th percentile. All charges data come from
the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration Report, and are available at http://www.floridahealthfinder.gov
8
  Even deliveries to undocumented women were covered by Medicaid.


                                                                                                                    8
       In keeping with Duggan’s results and this illustration, Figure 2 shows that private

hospitals in Florida that were initially covered by Hill-Burton were much less likely to offer

maternity services after their Hill-Burton obligation expired.

       Finally, it may be difficult for hospitals to offer a different menu of services to different

groups of women. Suppose, for example, that a hospital may choose to offer aggressive or

conservative maternity services. Aggressive hospitals will routinely conduct additional tests and

will perform C-sections in marginal cases. Conservative hospitals will conduct fewer tests and

will be less likely to perform C-sections in marginal cases. There is a good deal of evidence that

doctors and hospitals are responsive to financial incentives, and are more likely to perform C-

sections when C-sections are more highly compensated relative to normal deliveries (Currie,

Gruber and Fischer 1995, Gruber, Kim, and Mayzlin 1998, Currie and MacLeod, 2008). Further,

it is thought that the marginal C-section in the U.S. is unnecessary: A Healthy People 2010 goal

is to reduce the rate of C-sections from over 30 percent to 15 percent. Baicker, Buckles and

Chandra (2005) find that the marginal C-section is performed on a medically less appropriate

patient and that only 25 percent of the geographical variation in C-section rates can be explained

by differences in risk factors.

       To capture the idea that hospitals choose to offer either aggressive or conservative

maternity services in order to maximize profits, suppose that it is profitable for a hospital serving

privately insured women to offer aggressive services to maternity patients:

       (1) M(pa – ca) > M(pc – cc),

where M is the number of privately insured maternity patients, pa is the market price of

aggressive services, ca is the cost of providing aggressive services, pc is the market price of a




                                                                                                       9
conservative bundle of maternity services and cc is the cost of providing conservative maternity

services. Moreover, pa > pc and ca > cc.

         If it is necessary to offer the same menu of services to all patients, then as the number of

Hill-Burton (HB) patients rises, it may become profitable for the hospital to switch to the

conservative bundle of services. This will be the case if:

         (2) M(pc – cc) - HB cc > M(pa – ca) - HB ca.

The cross-over occurs when (HB/M)(ca -cc) = (pa – ca) - (pc – cc); That is, when the share of Hill-

Burton patients, (HB/M) exceeds [(pa – pc) – (ca -cc)]/ (ca -cc). This situation is illustrated in

Figure 3.

         The situation is slightly complicated by the presence of Medicaid patients. In Florida,

Medicaid reimburses at the same rate for C-sections and for vaginal deliveries. We can capture

the role of Medicaid patients by assuming that hospitals are always paid pc for Medicaid patients

whether they provide conservative or aggressive care. In this case, whenever condition (2) holds

hospitals will still prefer to offer conservative care even with Medicaid patients since (pc – cc) >

(pc – ca).

         This simple model assumes that faced with two women with the same indications,

different hospitals can make different choices about the bundle of services to be offered and that

the marginal woman does not choose the hospital on the basis of the aggressiveness of the care,

other things being equal.

         Figures 4 and 5 examine the use of primary C-section, and the admission of high risk

maternity cases in hospitals that ever had Hill-Burton obligations, before and after the expiration

of those obligations. The figures show an increase in the admission of high risk patients, and an

increase in the use of C-sections after expiration, as the model would predict.




                                                                                                     10
       In summary, we expect that Hill-Burton obligations will be associated with a higher

probability that a hospital has a maternity ward and with fewer aggressive procedures for

maternity patients. The expiration of Hill-Burton requirements are therefore likely to be

accompanied by a rapid shifting of indigent patients from private to public hospitals and with the

closure of maternity care units. Whether this results in individuals receiving more aggressive

services or not depends on whether the public hospitals that absorb the indigent patients are more

likely to be conservative or aggressive compared to the private hospitals. And whether changes

in procedures affect health will depend on whether the marginal procedures are necessary or not:

Increases in the use of necessary procedures will improve infant health outcomes, while

increases in the use of unnecessary procedures are likely to have little effect on infant health.



       III. Data

       Data for this study were drawn from the American Hospital Association’s (AHA)

hospital files, the Florida vital statistics and the federal Health Resources and Services

Administration (HRSA) Hill Burton registry files. The AHA files contain data on the total

number of admissions in the hospital, hospital ownership status, the number of Medicaid patients

and whether the hospital offers maternity services. Many hospitals change names over time, but

the AHA files conveniently maintain a unique hospital identifier that allows tracking the same

hospital across different names.

       HRSA provided us with the latest list of Hill-Burton expiration dates for hospitals in

Florida. It is important to work with the most updated information on hospital obligations since

the periods may be extended if a facility is found to have been out of compliance in some years.

Obligations only start once the hospital has initiated the project for which the funds were




                                                                                                    11
provided initially. The funds intended to reach the hospitals were slow to arrive from D.C. and

even slower to process through the local authorities. The hospitals then had to start their own

construction and expansion plans, which created further delays. We found that a number of

hospitals that should have finished their 20-year obligation periods based on the year in which

the contract was signed were still under obligation a few years later.

       Hospitals are coded as being under Hill-Burton obligation if the year when the birth

occurred is before or the same as the calendar year in which the obligation expired. Hence the

last births that are considered to have occurred in a hospital under obligation are in the last

calendar year of the Hill-Burton contract. Table 1 shows the number of expirations of Hill-

Burton obligations and the number of births in hospitals covered by Hill-Burton obligations from

1989 to 2003. Over our sample period the fraction of births in hospitals covered by Hill-Burton

obligations declined from almost 18 to just over 2 percent of all births, due to these expirations.

       The Florida Vital Statistics record all live births between 1989 and 2003. Confidential

data including mothers’ names and birth dates were used to construct a panel data set linking

births to the same mother over time. The Natality data are very rich, and include information

about the mother’s age, education, race and ethnicity; the child’s gender, birth order, and birth

spacing; whether it was a multiple birth; prenatal care; risk factors for the pregnancy;

complications of labor and delivery; and procedures used at the time of the birth in addition to

information about infant outcomes including gestational age and APGAR scores. Natality data

has been matched to data on infant mortality so that we can also identify infants who die before

age one. We restrict the sample to singleton births and in most of our analyses, we focus on

mothers with at least two births in the sample.




                                                                                                  12
         The Vital Statistics Natality data contain the name and the county of the hospital in which

the birth took place. We use these fields to match the natality data with the AHA hospital level

data and the HRSA data about Hill-Burton expiration dates. 9

         Table 2 provides an overview of our data.             The first two columns show a comparison of

means for the full sample of all singleton births in our sample, and means for births to mothers

who have two or more singleton births in the sample. It is the latter group that we will focus on

in the remainder of the paper. Children born to mothers with more than one birth in the sample

are likely to have had better birth outcomes, and are somewhat less likely to have had a C-section

(15.3% vs. 12.0%). Women with more than one birth are slightly younger, but more educated.

They are more likely to deliver in hospitals with Hill-Burton obligations.

         Columns 3 through 5 show means for private hospitals and then for two subsets of private

hospitals:     Those that ever had Hill-Burton obligations, and those that had Hill-Burton

obligations at the time of the birth. Means are shown only for mothers with more than 1 birth in

the sample. Mothers giving birth in hospitals under obligation are less likely to be black and

Hispanic and more likely to have less than a high school education than other mothers giving

birth in private hospitals. They are also a little younger on average and less likely to have

received adequate prenatal care.

         However, they are also less likely to be high risk. We consider a pregnancy to be high

risk if one of the following 15 conditions was indicated as a pregnancy risk factor on the birth

certificate: maternal anemia, cardiac conditions, lung disease, diabetes, genital herpes,

hydramnios (too much amniotic fluid), haemorraging, hypercalemia (elevated potassium levels

9
  As a check on the consistency of the merge, the number of births in each facility was cross-checked between the
Florida Vital Statistics and the AHA records. Every hospital listed in the Vital Statistics files was found in the AHA
files. When there were two hospitals with the same names we used the number of births and the city of birth to
establish the identity of the hospital. Data from the naval hospitals system in Florida were dropped because the Vital
statistics data did not contain enough information on the facility to determine which naval hospital hosted the birth.


                                                                                                                   13
in the blood), eclampsia (elevated blood pressure during or before labor), incompetent cervix,

previous infant over 4000 grams, renal failure, previous preterm pregnancies, uterine infections,

and other maternal risks not classified above.

        Mothers in hospitals under obligation have similar rates of complications of labor and

delivery to other mothers in private hospitals. We consider the following conditions to be

complications of labor and delivery: premature rupture of membranes, abruptio placenta

(separation of the normally located placenta after the 20th week of gestation and prior to birth),

placenta previa (placenta is lying unusually low in the uterus), precipitous labor, breech (when

the baby is not head down), fetal distress, excessive bleeding, prolonged labor, meconium (the

baby inhales a mixture of amniotic fluid and fetal excretion), seizures during labor, dysfunctional

labor, febrile labor, cephalopelvic disproportion (when a baby’s head or body is too large to fit

through the mother’s pelvis), complications related to anesthesia, other complications not

mentioned above.

        If the mothers giving birth in hospitals under Hill-Burton obligation are relatively low

risk, then perhaps it is unsurprising that their outcomes in terms of low birth weight and low

APGAR scores are similar to those in other private hospitals (although there is a slightly elevated

risk of infant mortality). A comparison of the last two columns suggests that once the Hill-

Burton obligation expired, hospitals were more willing to accept high risk patients who were

more likely to give birth to premature and/or low birth weight babies with low APGAR scores. 10




10
  An infant is considered to be of low birth weight if the weight at birth is lower than 2500 grams. A birth is
considered premature if the gestation period was less than 37 weeks. An APGAR score or less than 9 is considered
low.


                                                                                                              14
        IV. Methods

        We first examine responses to Hill-Burton expiration at the hospital level, and then

examine the consequences for individual-level outcomes. Hospital-level data is formed by

aggregating the individual birth records to the hospital level and merging it with information

about the hospital. The hospital-level regressions take the following form:

    (1) HospCharht = α + β*OBLIGATIONht + ηt + μh + εht,

where HospCharht is a hospital characteristic such as whether it offers maternity care, or the

fraction of minority maternity patients that it serves, OBLIGATION is an indicator equal to one

if the hospital is under Hill-Burton obligation to provide uncompensated care and 0 otherwise, ηt

is a vector of year indicators and μh is a vector of hospital indicators and εht is a hospital-year

specific error term.    Year indicators control for unrestricted year-to-year variation in average

hospital characteristics. The inclusion of hospital fixed effects allows us to compare the same

hospitals before and after the expiration of Hill-Burton obligations.

        In order to examine individual-level outcomes we first estimate maternal fixed effects

models of the following form:

    (2) Outcomeit = αi + β*OBLIGATIONit + Xit + ηt + εit,

where Outcomeit is an individual-level outcome such as whether the baby was premature, or

whether there was an infant death, OBLIGATION and ηt are defined as above, αi is a vector of

indicators for each mother and εit is an individual and year specific error term. The vector Xit

includes time-varying characteristics of the birth including the child’s gender; birth order

indicators (1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th or higher order birth); and indicators for birth interval.

        The inclusion of maternal fixed effects (the αi) allows us to control for constant

unobserved characteristics of mothers that might affect both their choice of hospital and birth




                                                                                                   15
outcomes. For example, a woman might have a health condition that made all of her

pregnancies high risk. However, it is possible that a woman will have risk factors for one

pregnancy and not another. Our hospital-level investigations will show that Hill-Burton

hospitals are less likely to admit high-risk mothers. If hospitals can observe information about

whether a particular pregnancy is likely to be high risk, then a woman with one high risk and one

low risk pregnancy may be less likely to deliver the high risk baby in a Hill-Burton hospital.

Such a pattern would tend to bias the estimated effects of Hill-Burton obligations towards

finding positive effects on infant health outcomes. Moreover, fixed effects models can produce

coefficients that are biased towards zero in the presence of measurement error, and there is likely

to be measurement error in gestational age.

       In order to take account of these potential issues, our preferred estimates are based on

instrumental variables models with maternal fixed effects. These models are of the form:

   (3) Outcomeit = αi + β*P(OBLIGATIONit) + Xit + ηt + εit,

where P(OBLIGATIONit) is the predicted probability that the baby was born in a hospital under

obligation from a first stage regression of the form:

   (4) P(OBLIGATIONit) = αi + β*FRAC_HBit + Xit + ηt + εit,

where FRAC_HBit is the fraction of births that are in Hill-Burton obligated hospitals at time t in

the county in which we first observed the mother giving birth.

       The idea behind this instrument is that while the mother’s current county is endogenous,

the county in which we first observe her is controlled for by the inclusion of the mother fixed

effects. The fraction of births in Hill-Burton obligated hospitals in this county will vary over

time primarily because of Hill-Burton expirations, which are exogenous to the characteristics of

any particular mother. Hence, FRAC_HBit should satisfy the criterion for a valid instrument in




                                                                                                   16
that it should be predictive of P(OBLIGATIONit) without having any direct effect on birth

outcomes other than through its effects on the probability that a particular birth takes place in a

hospital under obligation.

         For ease of computation, we have estimated (3) using a two step method in which we first

calculate P(OBLIGATIONit), and then insert it in the regression. Standard errors are calculated

using the bootstrap and are clustered at the hospital level in order to take account of potential

correlation in the unobservables within the same hospital.



V. Results

         Estimates of the effects of Hill-Burton obligations on hospital behavior from models with

hospital fixed effects (equation (1)) are shown in Table 3. 11 The first column shows estimates

from a model estimated over all hospital-years, examining the probability that a private hospital

offers maternity care. Consistent with Duggan (2000), hospitals that were constrained to offer

charity care were more likely to have a maternity ward than other hospitals. The next two

columns provide some evidence about the types of services offered to patients for all hospitals

that had 100 or more deliveries in a year. Conditional on accepting maternity patients, Hill-

Burton hospitals were less likely to perform primary C-sections, and much less likely to report

that mothers had any complications. We focus on primary C-sections because doctors have less

discretion about whether to perform a repeat C-section. 12


11
   For reference, ordinary least squares models of health outcomes without fixed effects are show in Appendix
Table 1. They show a similar pattern with reductions in prematurity, but no change in infant deaths, low birth
weight, or low apgar scores.
12
   It is possible to have a vaginal birth after C-section (VBAC). However, an anesthetist must stand by in case the
VBAC fails and an emergency C-section becomes necessary. Many hospitals are unable or unwilling to offer this
service. Moreover, given the risk attendant on VBAC, it is not sure whether a secondary C-section or a VBAC is
the more “aggressive” procedure in terms of our model. In our data, we observe 107,218 mothers who had a
primary C-section and went on to have a second birth in our sample. Of these, 82% had another C-section.
Alternatively, since the method of delivery after a primary C-section can only be listed as a secondary C-section or a


                                                                                                                   17
        A natural question to ask is whether these differences in procedures reflect differences in

the mothers admitted to the hospitals. As Table 2 suggested, it appears that hospitals under

obligation were much less likely to admit patients with known risk factors for the pregnancy.

We do not find evidence however, that hospitals screened patients on the basis of race, ethnicity,

or education. Hence, it appears that Hill-Burton hospitals were selecting patients primarily on

the basis of medical risk rather than demographics. Consistent then with the model outlined

above, hospitals subject to Hill-Burton requirements welcomed maternity patients, but only

relatively healthy ones.

        These findings about patient selection suggest that we need to look to individual-level

data in order to understand the implications of Hill-Burton for changes in the treatment of an

individual mother. Table 4 examines the sub-sample of mothers who had at least one delivery in

a Hill-Burton hospital and looks at what happens to their choice of provider if the Hill-Burton

requirement expires before a subsequent birth. The models include mother fixed effects. Table

4 shows that these women are very likely to have had to change hospitals, and that a considerable

fraction of them switched to public hospitals. These results show clearly that the expiration of

Hill-Burton obligations compelled many women who had delivered in private hospitals to switch

to the public sector for their deliveries.

        Table 5 shows some initial results for individual-level outcomes.           The odd numbered

columns show mother fixed effects estimates, while the even numbered columns show mother

fixed effects-instrumental variables estimates. The estimated first stage showed that the fraction

of births in Hill-Burton obligated hospitals in the mother’s first observed county of residence is

strongly predictive of her current birth being covered by Hill-Burton. The coefficient of .984


VBAC, we can calculate Secondary/(Secondary+VBAC). This rate is 80.5% confirming that most mothers who
have a primary C-section have subsequent deliveries by C-section.


                                                                                                         18
(standard error .002) in the first stage implies that a 10 percentage point increase in the fraction

of births covered would increase the probability of the index birth being in a covered hospital by

about 10%.

       The first panel of Table 5 suggests that giving birth in a Hill-Burton obligated hospital

had no effect on most birth outcomes: There is no significant effect on the incidence of low birth

weight or the probability of infant death. The probability of an APGAR score less than 9 falls

with Hill-Burton in the fixed effects, but the standard errors increase in the fixed effects-IV

model to the extent that the estimate is no longer statistically significant. Surprisingly, given the

other results, there does appear to be a substantial negative effect on the probability of

prematurity. Moreover, the estimated coefficient is larger in absolute value in the fixed effects-

IV model, which is consistent with our conjecture about the direction of potential bias in the

mother fixed effects models. (Appendix Table 1 shows that the same result obtains in OLS

regressions – Hill Burton seems to be associated with a decrease in prematurity).

       The second panel probes the prematurity result by asking whether prematurity is reduced

in each of several categories: Less than 32 weeks; between 32 weeks and 35 weeks, or between

35 and 37 weeks. It appears that the reduction occurs only between 35 and 37 weeks. The last

two columns also show that the reduction in prematurity is entirely among infants who are not

low birth weight.

       This pattern suggests that the reduction in prematurity at Hill-Burton hospitals that occurs

without improvement in any other infant health outcome could be reflective of a reduction in C-

sections. Scheduled C-sections are normally performed slightly before full term to avoid the

possibility that a woman will go into labor before the C-section can be performed.




                                                                                                  19
       Table 6 confirms that children born in a hospital subject to Hill-Burton obligations are

less likely to be delivered via primary C-section. Table 6 also shows that there is no effect of

Hill-Burton obligations on the prevalence of complications or risk factors once the characteristics

of mothers are adequately controlled. That is, Table 3 showed that hospitals subject to Hill-

Burton were more likely to admit uncomplicated, low-risk cases. Table 5 controls for this type

of selection using our fixed effects-IV specification. The results in Table 6 suggest that as

Baicker, Buckles and Chandra (2005) argue, the marginal C-section that is foregone in the Hill-

Burton hospital would have been conducted on a medically inappropriate patient—i.e. one who

had no complications or risk factors!



VI. Extensions

We have estimated separate models for African-Americans and Hispanics. These groups may be

of particular interest since African-Americans tend to have worse average birth outcomes other

things being equal, while Hispanics tend to have better outcomes, other things being equal but

are more likely to be undocumented. Since undocumented immigrants are not eligible for

Medicaid coverage of their pregnancies in Florida (though labor and delivery is covered), access

to charity care under Hill-Burton may have been particularly important for Hispanic mothers.

       Appendix Tables 2 through 4 indicate that the effects for African-Americans are quite

similar qualitatively to those we have discussed above.        Hill-Burton is associated with a

reduction in prematurity which is concentrated among infants who were between 35 and 37

weeks gestation, and which may be accounted for by a decrease in C-section rates when hospitals

are under Hill-Burton obligation.




                                                                                                20
       The effects for Hispanics are less clear. There is a much larger decrease in prematurity,

(coefficient of -.042 compared to -.017 for the full sample). The reduction is statistically

significant only for infants between 32 and 35 weeks gestation, although the point estimate is

much larger for the reduction in prematurity between 35 and 37 weeks (-.017 for 32-35 vs. -.033

for 35-37). However, in contrast to the results for blacks and non-Hispanic whites, there is no

change in primary C-section rates associated with Hill-Burton for Hispanics.              A possible

explanation is that hospitals have little incentive to perform C-sections on mothers without

insurance with or without Hill-Burton.



VII. Conclusions

       If health care reform is successful, then in future there will be many fewer uninsured

patients. However, given rising health care costs, it is likely that a considerable number of

people will remain underinsured and it is of interest to consider how their medical needs can best

be served. The results in this paper suggest, perhaps surprisingly, that it can be better to require

private providers to serve the underinsured, rather than serving them in separate public facilities.

Private providers confronted with charity patients have an incentive to provide care in the most

efficient way possible. Moreover, changes in procedures that are adopted in order to cope with

charity patients may spillover to fully-insured patients, resulting in further efficiencies.     It is

striking to see how quickly private hospitals responded to changes in their incentives upon the

expiration of Hill-Burton requirements.

       On the other hand, public facilities have little incentive to provide care in the lowest cost

manner. Still, it is clear that private providers steer clear of the highest risk charity patients, so




                                                                                                   21
that a public safety net may remain necessary even when private providers handle many of the

lower risk charity cases.

       An important caveat is that we focus on one condition and one procedure (C-section).

While child birth is a common and important cause of hospitalization, it will be important to

determine whether the same pattern is observed for others conditions and procedures.




                                                                                          22
       References

Almond, Douglas Kenneth Y. Chay, Michael Greenstone, Stacy Sneeringer, and Melissa
Thomasson (2007) “The 1946 Hospital Construction Act and Infant Mortality in the United
States after World War II,” Working Paper

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay and Michael Greenstone (2007) “Civil Rights, the War on
Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and Mississippi,”
MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 07-04 .

Baicker, Katherine, Kasey S. Buckles, and Amitabh Chandra (2006) “Geographic Variation in
the Appropriate Use of Cesarean Delivery.” Health Affairs, Vol 25 (5), pp. 355-367.

CBO TESTIMONY Statement of Robert D. Reischauer Deputy Director Congressional Budget
Office Before the Subcommittee on Housing and Community Development Committee on
Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs U.S. House of Representatives May 17, 1979

Cunningham, Peter J. and Jessica H. May (2006) “A Growing Hole in the Safety Net: Physician
Charity Care Declines Again” Center for Studying Health System Change Tracking Report No.
13 March 2006

Currie, Janet and Bentley McLeod (2007) “ First Do no Harm? Tort Reform and Birth
Outcomes,” forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics

Currie, Janet and John Fahr “Hospitals, Managed Care, and the Charity Caseload in California,“
UCLA Mimeo October 2001

Currie, Janet & Gruber, Jonathan & Fischer, Michael, 1995. "Physician Payments and Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid Fee Policy," American Economic Review, American
Economic Association, vol. 85(2), May 1995

Denise M. Oleske, Marta L. Branca, Julie B. Schmidt, Richard Ferguson, Edward S. Linn “A
comparison of capitated and fee-for-service Medicaid reimbursement methods on pregnancy
outcomes” Health Services Research, April, 1998

Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General “Public Health Service’s
Oversight of the Hill-Burton Program” August, 1992; OIE-05-90-00260

Dorn, Stan (2008) “Uninsured and Dying Because of It: Updating the Institute of Medicine
Analysis on the Impact of Uninsurance on Mortality,” Urban Institute, February 2008
(http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/411588_uninsured_dying.pdf)

Duggan, Mark (2000) “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 115, No. 4 (Nov., 2000), pp. 1343-1373




                                                                                            23
Frank, Richard G and David S. Salkever (1991) “The Supply of Charity Services by Nonprofit
Hospitals: Motives and Market Structure“The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 22, No. 3
(Autumn, 1991), pp. 430-445 Frank and Salkever, 1991

Frank, Richard, David Salkever, and Jean Mitchell. "Market Forces and the Public Good:
Competition Among Hospitals and Provision of Indigent Care", Advances in Health Economics
and Health Services Research, 11, 1990, 159-183.


Gruber, Jonathan, John Kim, and Dina Mayzlin “Physician fees and procedure intensity: the case
of cesarean delivery” Journal of Health Economics 18, 1999.473–490

Guendelman , D . Thornton , J . Gould , N . Hosang (2006) “Obstetric complications during
labor and delivery: Assessing ethnic differences in California” Women's Health Issues , Volume
16 , Issue 4, Pages 189 - 197 S .

Hill, Kathleen and Gerald N. Hill Encyclopedia of Federal Agencies and Commissions, Facts on
File, Washington, DC, 2004

Lamphere J. et al., “Reforming the Health Care System: State Profiles, 1998” Washington:
AARP, 1998, 38-43

Marquis MS and Long SH, Medicaid eligibility expansion in Florida: effects on maternity care
financing and the delivery system, Family Planning Perspectives, 1999, 31(3):112-116 & 121.

Needleman, Jack et al (1999) “Uncompensated Care and Hospital Conversions in Florida,”
Health Affairs; July/August 1999, 18, 4

Norton, Edward and Douglas Staiger (1994) “How Hospital Ownership Affects Access to Care
for the Uninsured” The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, No. 1 (Spring, 1994), pp. 171-185

Pauly, Mark (1987) “Nonprofit Firms in Medical Markets” The American Economic Review,
Vol. 77, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Ninety-Ninth Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association (May, 1987), pp. 257-262

Pear, Robert. “Hospitals Mobilizing to Fight Proposed Charity Care Rules,” New York Times,
June 1, 2009. www.nytimes.com/2009/06/01/us/politics/01health.html.

Perlstadt, Harry. "The Development of the Hill-Burton Legislation: Interests, Issues and Compromises."
Journal of Health and Social Policy 6, no. 3 (1995): 77–96

Public Citizen. Public Citizen’s Research Group Report on Questionable Hospitals (Washington
D.C.: Public Citizen) July 2001

The University of Pennsylvania Law Review, “The Propriety of Reimbursement by Medicare for
Hill-Burton Free Care” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol. 130, No. 4 (Apr., 1982),



                                                                                                     24
pp. 892-918




              25
Figure 1: Hill-Burton as proportion of total patient expenses




Note: The figure is constructed based on ratios of Hill Burton expenses to lagged total patient
expense from hospitals’ financial data. Data on hospitals’ financial statements come from the
Florida Agency for Health Care Administration. Data on two hospitals that had Hill-Burton
obligations were excluded from the sample because recorded rates of Hill-Burton expenditures in
the 4th year after expiration of the obligations were 33% and 66% respectively. HRSA overseers
confirmed that these were data entry errors.




                                                                                            26
Figure 2: Presence of maternity ward as a function of Hill Burton obligations status




Note: The figure is based on mean residuals relative to the time that Hill Burton obligations
expired. The residuals were obtained from a linear probability regression of the outcome variable
(0 if there are no births in the hospital-year observation, 1 if there are births) on hospital and year
fixed effects. The sample of hospitals included in the regression is restricted to 1495 private
hospitals and the time period is 1989-2003. Only residuals for hospitals that experienced a Hill-
Burton expiration are included. Data on hospital operations come from the Florida Vital
statistics and the American Hospital Association Hospital Survey.




                                                                                                    27
Figure 3: Share of Hill Burton patients and Hospital Care Regime Choice




                                                                          28
Figure 4: Primary C-Section Rates and Hill Burton Expiration




Note: Plots based on yearly averages of residuals from hospital-level regression of
outcome on hospital and year fixed effects. Residuals are averaged across hospitals for
every year of Hill-Burton obligation; balanced sample for -3 to +4 years after HB
expiration.




                                                                                          29
Figure 5: Fraction of High Risk Cases and Hill-Burton Expiration




Note: Plots based on yearly averages of residuals from hospital-level regression of
outcome on hospital and year fixed effects. Residuals are averaged across hospitals for
every year of Hill-Burton obligation; balanced sample for -3 to +4 years after HB
expiration.




                                                                                          30
Table 1: Distribution of Births in Hill-Burton Hospitals and Hill-Burton Obligation Expirations by Year

Year                      Percent births in HB         N HB births                 N hospitals with obligations
                          hospitals                                                expiring during the year
1989                      17.72                        14,529                                    6
1990                      14.83                        13,922                                    1
1991                      11.67                        11,169                                    2
1992                      10.71                        10,493                                    1
1993                      8.7                          8,840                                     5
1994                      4.98                         5,018                                     2
1995                      3.59                         3,623                                     1
1996                      2.96                         3,002                                     2
1997                      2.8                          2,919                                     1
1998                      2.71                         2,862                                     -
1999                      2.74                         2,822                                     -
2000                      2.64                         2,690                                     1
2001                      1.98                         1,894                                     -
2002                      2.04                         1,767                                     -
2003                      1.94                         1,497                                     1




                                                                                                            31
   Table 2: Means of key variables

                                                                                             Ever Hill Burton
                                                                         Private Hospitals      Hospitals       Hill Burton births
                                     All singleton   Birth to Mothers        (moms >2          (moms.>2              (moms>2
                                         births      with > 2 children        children)         children)             children)
                                     N= 2321729        N=1447624            N=1084734          N=276419              N=87060
                                                                            Outcomes
                                        Mean              Mean               Mean                 Mean               Mean
Infant death                            0.009             0.010              0.009                0.011              0.011
Low birth weight                        0.069             0.064              0.059                0.067              0.067
Apgar score <=8                         0.025             0.023              0.020                0.023              0.023
prenatal care in 1st trimester          0.704             0.778              0.804                0.754              0.754
High risk pregnancy                     0.235             0.233              0.240                0.269              0.269
Complications of labor                  0.299             0.284              0.278                0.260              0.260
Premature child                         0.087             0.084              0.077                0.084              0.084
B/n 35 and 37 weeks                     0.051             0.050              0.048                0.049              0.042
B/n 32 and 35 weeks                     0.019             0.018              0.016                0.015              0.015
Less than 32 weeks                      0.015             0.015              0.013                0.016              0.012
Primary cesarean                        0.152             0.120              0.122                0.121              0.129
Premature but not LBW                   0.040             0.041              0.038                0.038              0.032
                                                                             Control
                                                                            Variables
                                        Mean              Mean               Mean                 Mean
Hill-Burton birth                       0.056             0.060              0.080                0.315               1.00
Ratio HB in first county of
residence                                0.061             0.060               0.067              0.138               0.362
                                        [0.140]           [0.138]             [0.150]            [0.228]             [0.275]
Maternal age                            26.932            26.550              26.911             26.439              25.936
                                        [6.292]           [5.933]             [5.849]            [5.957]             [5.711]
Interval previous birth                 37.278            37.585              37.848             37.398              35.770
                                       [12.264]          [16.194]            [16.471]           [15.885]            [11.050]
Black mother                             0.216             0.242               0.227              0.250               0.208
Hispanic mother                          0.172             0.178               0.180              0.128               0.140
< high school education                  0.192             0.156               0.138              0.173               0.174
Total fertility                          2.125             2.623               2.754              2.824                 2.896
                                         [1.18]           [1.127]             [1.133]            [1.182]             [1.205]
Private hospital                         0.739             0.748               1.000              1.000               1.000




                                                                                                           32
 Table 3: Hospital services by Hill-Burton status, Hospital Fixed Effects Regressions
                                                                 Panel A: Hospital services
                                           (1)                   (2)                   (3)                    (4)
                                     Have Maternity      Primary c-          Ratio with                  Ratio high
                                     ward                section rate        complications                   risk
Under HB obligation                     0.145***              -0.018**              -0.066**              -0.076**
                                         (0.049)               (0.007)               (0.028)               (0.031)
Constant                                0.776***              0.197***              0.382***              0.290***
                                         (0.040)               (0.007)               (0.024)               (0.029)
Observations                              1495                  1272                  1272                  1272
Mean of dep variable                      0.914                 0.156                 0.303                 0.261

                                                             Panel B: Patient Demographics
                                       Ratio <high          Ratio Black        Ratio Hispanic
                                         school
Under HB obligation                      0.007                 0.024                  -0.002
                                        (0.020)               (0.016)                (0.012)
Constant                                0.194***              0.131***               0.110***
                                        (0.009)               (0.015)                (0.010)
Observations                              1272                  1272                   1272
Mean of dep. Variable                    0.212                 0.183                   0.162

 Notes: All regressions include year effects as well as hospital fixed effects. Hospitals are coded as
 under Hill-Burton obligations (Hill-Burton=1) if the year of delivery is prior to or equal to the year of expiration
 of hospital Hill-Burton obligations as reported by HRSA. The unit of observation is a hospital-year cell. Some
 hospital-year cell are missing data on NICU availability. The model for maternity wards includes all hospital-
 year cells. The remaining models only hospital-year cells containing at least 100 births. Robust standard
 errors in parentheses. A * indicates significance at the 10% level; ** significance at the 5% level.




                                                                                                                 33
Table 4: Fixed Effects Estimates of Hospital Selection Among Mothers who First Delivered in a Hill
Burton Hospital

All Hill-Burton         Change of hospital      Delivery in
mothers                 between births          private hospital
                        FE                      FE
Birth is first post     0.332***                -0.088***
HB expiration
                        (0.065)                 (0.030)
R-squared               0.501                   0.666
Mean of dep             0.223                   0.923
variable

Notes: There are 175,255 individual-level observations. The sample is restricted to mothers who had at
least one delivery in a Hill-Burton hospital. Post Hill-Burton expiration is coded as 1 if the birth happened
after the expiration of Hill- Burton obligations in the first Hill-Burton hospital of delivery and 0 otherwise. In
addition to siblings fixed effects, all regressions include controls for male sex of the child, calendar year
fixed effects, total birth order dummies, and birth interval dummies. Standard errors are bootstrapped and
clustered on the hospital level. A * indicates significance at the 10% level; ** indicates significance at 5%.




                                                                                                                 34
Table 5: Fixed Effects and Fixed Effects-IV Estimates of the Effect of Delivery in a Hill-Burton Obligated
Hospital and Infant Health

                       Infant death                LBW              Low Apgar Score             Premature

                        1          2           3           4          5            6           7            8
Panel 1                FE        FE-IV        FE        FE-IV        FE         FE-IV         FE          FE-IV
Hill Burton birth    -0.000      0.001      -0.004      -0.004     -0.002*      -0.002     -0.009***    -0.017**
                    (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.001)     (0.005)      (0.003)      (0.007)
Mean of dep.          0.010      0.010       0.064       0.064      0.023        0.023       0.084        0.084
variable
                    Less than 32           >= 32 and <35              >=35 and <37          Premature but not
                    weeks                  weeks                         weeks                   LBW

Hill-Burton birth    -0.002      -0.003     -0.002      -0.002     -0.006*    -0.011**     -0.006**     -0.011**
                    (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.001)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.003)      (0.005)
Mean of dep.          0.015       0.015      0.018       0.018     0.050        0.050        0.041        0.041
variable

Notes: There are 1,446,624 individual-level observations. The first stage for the fixed effects-IV regressions
has a coefficient estimate of 0.984 (.002) on the instrument (FRAC_HBit ) which is the fraction of births that
are in Hill-Burton obligated hospitals at time t in the county in which we first observe the mother giving birth.
Hospitals are coded as under Hill Burton obligations (Hill Burton=1) if the year of delivery is prior to or equal
to the year of expiration of hospital Hill Burton obligations as reported by HRSA. In FE-IV regressions the
Hill Burton treatment dummy is instrumented with the ratio of Hill Burton births in the first county of maternal
residence. In addition to siblings fixed effects, all regressions include controls for male sex of the child,
calendar year fixed effects, total birth order dummies, and birth interval dummies. Standard errors are
bootstrapped and clustered on the hospital level. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                              35
Table 6: Fixed Effects and Fixed Effects-IV Estimates of Differences in Procedure Rates and
Maternal Selection by Hill Burton Status

  All births                 Primary C-        Complications        High Risk mother        Prenatal care visit in
                              section                                                          the 1st trimester
                            1         2          3          4          5           6             7              8
                           FE       FE-IV       FE       FE-IV        FE        FE-IV           FE             IV
Hill-Burton              -0.005 -0.026*       -0.025     -0.027     -0.024      -0.065       -0.018*         .010
Birth                   (0.009) (0.015)      (0.024)    (0.031)    (0.026)     (0.050)       (0.010)        (0.011)
Mean of dep.              0.120     0.120      0.284      0.284      0.233       0.233     0.778           0.778
variable

Notes: There are 1,447,624 individual-level observations. The first stage for the fixed effects-IV
regressions has a coefficient estimate of 0.984 (.002) on the instrument (FRAC_HBit ) which is the fraction of
births that are in Hill-Burton obligated hospitals at time t in the county in which we first observe the mother
giving birth. Hospitals are coded as under Hill Burton obligations (Hill Burton=1) if the year of delivery is
prior to or equal to the year of expiration of hospital Hill Burton obligations as reported by HRSA. In addition
to siblings fixed effects, all regressions include controls for male sex of the child, calendar year fixed effects,
total birth order dummies, and birth interval dummies. Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses. A *
indicates significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%. Standard errors are bootstrapped and clustered at the
hospital level.




                                                                                                                36
Appendix Tables:

Table A1 Hill Burton and Individual Health Outcomes – OLS Regressions

                                              Infant death          LBW           Low Apgar         Premature
                                                                                    Score
                                                 OLS                OLS              OLS               OLS
Hill Burton                                      -.000              -.005            -.003           -.013**
                                                (.001)             (.004)           (.003)            (.005)
# Observations                                1447624             1447624          1447624          1447624

Notes: Hospitals are coded as under Hill Burton obligations (Hill Burton=1) if the year of delivery is prior to or
equal to the year of expiration of hospital Hill Burton obligations as reported by HRSA. All regressions
include controls for male sex of the child, calendar year fixed effects, total birth order dummies, birth interval
dummies, controls for black race and Hispanic ethnicity, a dummy indicating less than high school
education, and total fertility dummies. Standard errors are bootstrapped and clustered on the hospital level.
Standard errors in parentheses. A * indicates significance at 10%, ** significance at 5%, *** significance at
1%.




                                                                                                               37
      Table A2: Hill Burton and Individual Health Outcomes
      Hispanics only
                           Infant Death                    LBW                         Low Apgar score                 Premature
                        1               2              3           4                    5            6                7           8
                       FE             FE-IV           FE         FE-IV                 FE          FE-IV             FE         FE-IV
Hill Burton      0.002            -0.011          -0.003     -0.002                -0.002       -0.009           -0.011*     -0.042*
                 (0.004)          (0.008)         (0.006)    (0.018)               (0.005)      (0.009)          (0.006)     (0.022)
                                                                                                                    Premature but not
                  Less than 32 weeks               >= 32 and <35 weeks               >=35 and <37 weeks                  LBW
Hill Burton       -0.002        -0.004             -0.002      -0.017**            -0.007       -0.033           -0.008      -0.033
                  (0.006)       (0.010)            (0.003)     (0.009)             (0.008)        (0.021)        (0.007)       (0.021)
# Obs.            258774        258774             258774      258774              258774       258774           258774      258774
    Blacks only
                          Infant Death                        LBW                     Low Apgar score                 Premature
Hill Burton       -0.001         0.003             -0.011       -0.013            -0.004       -0.005           -0.020**    -0.029*
                  (0.002)        (0.005)           (0.008)      (0.010)           (0.004)      (0.008)          (0.010)     (0.016)
                                                                                                                Premature but not
                  Less than 32 weeks               >= 32 and <35 weeks            >=35 and <37 weeks            LBW
Hill Burton       -0.005        -0.004             -0.005      -0.008             -0.011*      -0.016*          -0.010**    -0.013*
                  (0.004)       (0.005)            (0.004)     (0.007)            (0.006)      (0.009)          (0.004)     (0.007)
# Obs.            380160        380160             380160      380160             380160       380160           380160      380160

Notes: Hospitals are coded as under Hill Burton obligations (Hill Burton=1) if the year of delivery is prior to or equal to the year
of expiration of hospital Hill Burton obligations as reported by HRSA. In FE-IV regressions the Hill Burton treatment dummy is
instrumented with the ratio of Hill Burton births in the first county of maternal residence. In addition to siblings fixed effects, all
regressions include controls for male sex of the child, calendar year fixed effects, total birth order dummies, and birth interval
dummies. Standard errors are bootstrapped and clustered on the hospital level.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. A * indicates significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                     38
      Table A3: Differences in procedure rates by Hill Burton status
              Primary C-section           Complications              High Risk mother               Prenat care visit 1st
                                                                                                         trimester
                 1            2             3              4             5             6              7             8
Hispanics       FE          FE-IV          FE            FE-IV          FE           FE-IV           FE           FE-IV
HB Child     0.023        0.012        0.051*         0.010         0.050*        -0.124         -0.060***     -0.029
             (0.023)      (0.044)      (0.029)        (0.073)       (0.029)       (0.079)        (0.019)       (0.050)
Obs          258774       258774       258774         258774        258774        258774         258774        258774

Blacks
HB Child     -0.010       -0.024**     -0.024         0.009         -0.037        -0.077         -0.000        0.039*
             (0.009)      (0.011)      (0.035)        (0.048)       (0.041)       (0.081)        (0.015)       (0.022)
Obs          380160       380160       380160         380160        380160        380160         380160        380160

      Notes: The first stage for the fixed effects-IV regressions has a coefficient estimate of 0.984 (.002) on the
      instrument (FRAC_HBit ) which is the fraction of births that are in Hill-Burton obligated hospitals at time t in
      the county in which we first observe the mother giving birth. Hospitals are coded as under Hill Burton
      obligations (Hill Burton=1) if the year of delivery is prior to or equal to the year of expiration of hospital Hill
      Burton obligations as reported by HRSA. In addition to siblings fixed effects, all regressions include controls
      for male sex of the child, calendar year fixed effects, total birth order dummies, and birth interval dummies. :
      Robust standard errors in parentheses. A * indicates significance at 10%; ** significant at 5%. Standard
      errors are bootstrapped and clustered at the hospital level.




                                                                                                                      39
Table A4: Sibling Fixed Effects Models of Hospital selection
                      Change of hospital Delivery in private   Change of          Delivery in private
                      - Hispanics           hospital -         hospital- Blacks   hospital - Blacks
                                            Hispanics
Post first HB         0.425***              -0.126***          0.305***           -0.106**
expiration
                      (0.063)               (0.047)            (0.091)            (0.048)
Observations          22927                 22927              43126              43126
R-squared             0.485                 0.596              0.519              0.663

Notes: The sample is restricted to mothers who had at least one delivery in a Hill Burton
hospital. Post Hill Burton expiration is coded as 1 if the birth happened after the
expiration of Hill Burton obligations in the first Hill Burton hospital of delivery and 0
otherwise. In addition to siblings fixed effects, all regressions include controls for male
sex of the child, calendar year fixed effects, total birth order dummies, and birth interval
dummies. Standard errors are bootstrapped and clustered on the hospital level. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. A * indicates significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%.




                                                                                                   40
