NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CASH FLOW MULTIPLIERS AND OPTIMAL INVESTMENT DECISIONS
Holger Kraft
Eduardo S. Schwartz
Working Paper 15807
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15807

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

We thank David Aboody, Saurabh Ahluwalia, Mark Garmaise, Daniel Hoechle, Hanno Lustig, and
Geoff Tate for helpful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are of course our own. Holger
Kraft gratefully acknowledges financial support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Holger Kraft and Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Cash Flow Multipliers and Optimal Investment Decisions
Holger Kraft and Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 15807
March 2010
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
By postulating a simple stochastic process for the firm's cash flows in which the drift and the variance
of the process depend on the investment policy of the firm, we develop a theoretical model, determine
the optimal investment policy and, given this policy, calculate the ratio of the current value of the firm
and the current cash flow which we call the "cash flow multiplier''. The main contribution of the paper,
however, is empirical. Using a very extensive data set comprised of more than 13,000 fims over 44
years we examine the determinants of the cash flow multiplier using as explanatory variables macro
and firm specific variables suggested by the theoretical model. We find strong support for the variables
suggested by the model. Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the paper is the formulation of a parsimonious
empirical asset pricing model, based on the fundamental discounted cash flow approach but using
current macroeconomic variables and firm specific variables easily observable for its implementation.
We obtain valuation equations that could potentially form part of a new valuation framework which
does not require estimating future cash flows nor risk adjusted discount rates.
Holger Kraft
*RHWKH8QLYHUVLW\
Grueneburgplatz 1
65323 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
holgerkaft@finance.uni-frankfurt.de
Eduardo S. Schwartz
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

It is a well established idea in Financial Economics that the current value of a firm should be
the discounted expected future cash flows, and that these future cash flows should depend on
the investment policy of the firm. In this paper we give content to this idea by postulating a
simple stochastic process for the firm’s cash flows (before investment) in which the drift and
the variance of the process depend on the investment policy of the firm. This framework allows
us to estimate the optimal investment policy and, given this policy, determine the ratio of the
current value of the firm and the current cash flow which we call the ”cash flow multiplier”.
We develop a valuation model which in its simplest form has only one exogenous state variable
(the risk free short interest rate) and quantitatively shows how the cash flow multiplier is
(negatively) related to the discount rate and (positively related) to optimal investment. We are
then able to show that the cash flow multiplier has two components: the first part corresponds
to the situation with no (zero) investments and the second to the real option to invest optimally
in the future.
Furthermore, firms in certain industrial sectors require more investment because obsolescence in
the sector is faster, or because the sector is more competitive. In our theoretical model the drift
of the cash flow process (without investments) can proxy for this phenomenon. The smaller (or
more negative) is this drift without investments, the more investment will be required to keep
or increase the level of cash flows. This would imply that, even though the cash flow multiplier
for a give firm is positively related to the proportion of its cash flow invested, the multiplier
should be negatively related to the average investment proportion of the industry to which it
belongs since it would be a more intensive investment industry. We find evidence of this in the
data.
Using a very extensive data set comprised of more than 13,000 firms over 44 years we examine the determinants of the cash flow multiplier, using as explanatory variables the variables
suggested by the theoretical model. We find strong support for the variables suggested by the
model. In the empirical analysis we include four macro variables that affect all firms at a given
point in time and three firm specific variables. The macro variables affect the discount rate and
include the short rate interest rate, the slope of the term structure of interest rates, a credit
spread (spread of BBB bonds over Treasuries) and the volatility of the S&P500 index. Increases
in all of these variables have a positive effect on the discount rate, and therefore should have
a negative effect on the cash flow multiplier. As firm specific variables we include a measure
of liquidity, size and the proportion of cash flows invested. We would expect that more liquid

1

firms and larger firms have higher cash flow multipliers. The fraction of cash flow invested is
a variable that comes directly from our theoretical model and should, if investment is optimal,
be positively related to the cash flow multiplier. In addition to these explanatory variables,
in most of the regressions we also include dummy variables to take into account firm and/or
industry fixed effects.
Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. In a series of papers, Ang and Liu
(2001, 2004, and 2007) address theoretical issues related to our paper. For example, Ang and
Liu (2001) derive a model that relates firm value to accounting data under stochastic interest
rates, heteroskedasticity and adjustments for risk aversion. Ang and Liu (2004) develop a model
that consistently values cash flows with changing riskfree rates, predictable risk premiums, and
conditional betas in the context of a conditional CAPM. Finally, Ang and Liu (2007) show
theoretically that a given dividend process and any of the variables – expected return, return
volatility, and the price-dividend ratio – determines the other two. Although they do not model
investment decisions explicitly, they derive a partial differential equation for the price-dividend
ratio that is also satisfied by the cash flow multiplier in our paper given that the corresponding
firm invests optimally.
Berk, Green, and Naik (1999) develop a model that values the firm as the sum of the present
value of its current cash flows and its growth options and is thus similar in spirit to the
theoretical model in our paper. But their main interest is to study the dynamics for conditional
expected returns. In a related paper, Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004) derive two
theoretical models that relate endogenous firm investment to expected return. Titman, Wei,
and Xie (2004) document a negative relation between abnormal capital investments and future
stock returns. Similarly, Anderson and Garcia-Feijoo (2006) find in an empirical study over the
time period from 1976 to 1999 that growth in capital expenditures explains returns to portfolios
and the cross section of future stock returns.
Our theoretical findings concerning the value of a firm’s option to invest are related to the real
options literature that started with the papers by Brennan and Schwartz (1985) and McDonald
and Siegel (1986). More recently, Grenadier (2002) and Aguerrevere (2009) have shown that in
competitive markets the value of the option to invest can decrease substantially.
Our paper also contributes to an extensive literature on multiples. For instance, Baker and
Ruback (1999) study how to estimate industry multiples and how to choose a measure of financial performance as a basis of substitutability. They find that EBITDA is a better single basis
of substitutability than EBIT or revenue. They analyze the valuation properties of a comprehensive list of multiples and also examine related issues such as the variation in performance

2

across industries and over time. Liu and Thomas (2002) analyze the valuation properties of a
comprehensive list of multiples. They also examine related issues such as the variation in performance across industries and over time. This analysis is extended by Liu and Thomas (2007).
Bhojraj and Ng (2007) examine the relative importance of industry and country membership
in explaining cross-sectional variation in firm multiples. These papers, however, do not include
macroeconomic variables in the analysis.
To summarize, this paper makes contributions in several dimensions. In the theoretical front
we develop a discounted cash flow valuation model that takes into account optimal investment
and how this investment affects future cash flows. Using a data set covering 44 years from 1962
to 2005 and including over 13,000 firms we then regress the cash flow multiplier onto a set of
explanatory variables, which include both macroeconomic variables as well as variables related
to individual firms, and obtain results that are broadly consistent with the theoretical model.
All the explanatory variables related to the discount rate - the short term interest rate, the
slope of the term structure, the spread of BBB bonds over Treasuries, and the volatility of the
S&P500 - have the correct sign and most of them are significantly negative. The proportion of
cash flow invested is always highly significant and positive as predicted by the model.
Since the cash flow multiplier is simply the ratio of the current value of the firm and the
current cash flow, perhaps the most interesting contribution of the paper is the formulation
of a parsimonious empirical asset pricing model based on the fundamental discounted cash
flow approach but using current macroeconomic variables and firm specific variables easily
observable for its implementation. We obtain valuation equations using a very large sample of
firms over a very long period of time. These could potentially form part of a new valuation
framework based on discounted cash flows which does not require estimating future expected
cash flows nor risk adjusted discount rates.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops the theoretical model. Section 3 solves for the
optimal investment and the optimal cash flow multiplier. Section 4 illustrates the implications
of the model taking IBM as an example. Section 5 describes the data used in the empirical
testing and Section 6 presents the results of the panel regressions. Section 7 reports results of
several robustness checks on the basic results. Section 8 provides insights into the value of the
option to invest using the data available. Finally, Section 9 concludes. Some of the proofs and
technical details, including an extension to two state variables, are given in the appendices.

3

2

Model

We develop a parsimonious model where firm value naturally arises as the present value of the
firm’s free cash flows before investments. Investment decisions are made endogenously affecting
the expected growth rate and the volatility of the cash flow stream. The value of the firm is
defined as the net present value of the free cash flows. This implies that the firm value is given
by
V (c, x) = max E
π

hZ

∞

e−

Rs
0

Ru du

i
(Cs − Is )ds ,

(2.1)

0

where C denotes the firm’s free cash flows before investments and I = πC denotes the dollar
amount of the cash flow that is invested. The variable π stands for the percentage of the cash
flow that the firm invests. The variable x denotes the initial value of a state process X that
captures economic variables that impact the firm value, such as interest rates. The risk-adjusted
discount rate R is assumed to be a function of this state process, i.e. with a slight abuse of
notation R = R(X). For the moment, suppose for simplicity that X is equal to the default-free
short interest rate and that the risk-adjusted discount rate is linear in the short rate, i.e.
R = ϕ + ψr

(2.2)

with ϕ and ψ being constants. A simple model that would fit into this framework is the
following: Suppose that the risk-adjusted discount rate is given by R = r + βλ, where λ is the
risk premium and β is the firm’s beta that is constant. If the default-free interest rate predicts
the risk premium, then the premium could be linear in the interest rate, λ = λ + λr r, with
constants λ and λr such that ϕ = βλ and ψ = 1 + βλr in our parametrization (2.2). We assume
the cash flow to follow the dynamics1
dC = C[µ(π, X)dt + σ(π, X)dW ],

C(0) = c,

where expected growth rate and volatility, µ and σ, are functions of the state process and the
percentage of the firm’s cash flow reinvested. The process W is a Brownian motion. This
specification implies the following result:
Proposition 2.1 (Linearity of Firm Value). Firm value is linear in the cash flow, i.e.
V (c, x) = f (x)c,

(2.3)

where f (x) = V (1, x).
1

This builds on the ideas of Merton (1974), Duffie and Lando (2001), and Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001),
among others, who use lognormal models in which the firm cannot control for investment.

4

Notice that V /c is the firm-value-cash-flow ratio (for short: cash flow multiplier), which is
similar to, but not the same as the price-dividend ratio. In our model, f is equal to the cash
flow multiplier which will be central in our further analysis. One can think of the firm-valuecash-flow ratio as the multiplier by which the current cash flow is multiplied to obtain the current
firm value. In the literature on the dividend-discount model and its generalization, usually this
multiplier is assumed to be beyond the control of the firm and thus to be exogenously given.
In contrast, we explicitly model the firm’s opportunity to change its risk-return tradeoff by
allowing the firm to control the expected growth rate and the volatility of the cash flow stream
by its investment policy. To illustrate our approach and unless otherwise stated, we use the
following specification of these parameters
√
µ(π, x) = µ0 (x) + µ1 π + µ2 π,

√
σ(π) = σ0 + σ1 π + σ2 π,

where all coefficients except for µ0 are constants and µ0 is a linear function of the state process,
µ0 (x) = µ0 + µ
b0 x. The function µ0 characterizes the expected growth rate if the firm does not
invest at all (π = 0). If no investment implies that future cash flows decrease, we expect µ0
on average to be negative. We also expect µ0 to depend on the industry and the environment
in which the firm operates. The parameters µ1 and µ2 capture the firm’s impact on its future
growth rate when the firm invests part of its cash flows. Since the second derivative of the
expected growth rate with respect to π is −µ1 π −1.5 /4, the coefficient µ1 captures the curvature
of the growth rate with respect to the firm’s investments. If µ1 is positive, then the expected
growth rate is concave implying decreasing returns to investment. Finally, to avoid explosion
of the model, µ2 is assumed to be negative.2 This implies that there is a point beyond which
additional investments are not beneficial any more since the growth rate then decreases in π.
Furthermore, we allow the investment decisions to have an impact on the riskiness of the firms
cash flow stream and thus the volatility σ can depend on π as well. Clearly, if a firm invests
in a new product, then we would expect this investment to increase both the firm’s expected
growth rate, but also the volatility of its cash flow stream. Figure 1 illustrates two possible
forms of the drift when the investment proportion is varied between zero and one. The drift
starts below zero and then increases until it reaches its peak. For the lower curve the peak is
reached around π = 0.7, whereas for the upper curve the peak is reached for some π that is
greater than one. We emphasize that the peak is in general not equal to the optimal expected
growth rate; the firm chooses an expected growth rate that is smaller than the maximum. This
is because investments are not for free, but consume some of the firms cash flows. The actual
2

Loosely speaking, this ensures that a transversality condition is satisfied.

5

optimal investment strategy thus depends on the tradeoff between additional expected growth
and the fraction of the cash flows that must be spent to achieve this growth. Therefore, the
steepness of the expected growth rate as a function of the investment strategy π is crucial.
[INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]

3

Solving for the Optimal Cash-Flow Multiplier

The firm’s decision problem (2.1) is a dynamic optimization problem that can be solved using
stochastic control methods. This is the first goal of this section. We assume that the state of
the economy is characterized by the short rate that has Vasicek dynamics3
dr = (θ − κr)dt + ηdWr ,

(3.4)

where Wr is a Brownian motion that is correlated with the Brownian motion W that drives
cash flows, i.e. d < W, Wr >= ρdt with constant correlation ρ. As motivated in the previous
section, the expected growth rate, the volatility of the cash flow stream, and the risk-adjusted
√
√
interest rate are assumed to be µ(π, r) = µ0 + µ
b0 r + µ1 π + µ2 π, σ(π) = σ0 + σ1 π + σ2 π, and
R = ϕ + ψr. In the Appendix, it is shown that the cash flow multiplier satisfies the following
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation
√
0 = max{(µ0 + µ
b0 r + µ1 π + µ2 π)f + 1 − π − (ϕ + ψr)f
π
√
+(θ − κr)fr + 0.5η 2 frr + ρη(σ0 + σ1 π + σ2 π)fr }.

(3.5)

Under the assumption that the Bellman equation is concave in π, which follows if µ1 > 0, the
optimal investment strategy of the firm is given by
2

µ1 f + ρησ1 fr
∗
π =
.
2(1 − µ2 f − ρησ2 fr )

(3.6)

First, notice that this optimal strategy does not depend on the second derivative with respect
to the interest rate. Second, it does not depend on the first derivative if either the correlation
between the cash flow stream and the short rate is zero, ρ = 0, or if the firm’s investment
decision has no impact on the volatility of the cash flow stream, σ1 = σ2 = 0. To get some
intuition about the optimal investment, assume that we are in one of these two cases. Then
an upper bound on the investment strategy is π max = (0.5µ1 /µ2 )2 , which obtains if the cash
3

A generalization to two state variables can be found in the Appendix.

6

flow multiplier f goes to infinity. On the other hand, if the cash flow multiplier is zero, then
the firm’s optimal investment is zero. If investments were free, then the optimal investment
strategy would be equal to the upper bound π max . We have however assumed that the firm has
to spend a fraction of its cash flow, π, if it chooses to invest. This is the reason why there is a
one present in the denominator of (3.6), which implies that the optimal investment strategy is
smaller than the upper bound, π ∗ < π max . How close the optimal strategy is to π max depends
on the trade off between additional expected growth rate - modeled by µ1 and µ2 - and the
necessary expenditures to achieve it.
Substituting the optimal investment level back into the Bellman equation (3.5) leads to a
differential equation for the cash flow multiplier
b
0 = (ϕ
b + ψr)f
+ 1 + (θ + ρησ0 − κr)fr + 0.5η 2 frr +

(µ1 f + ρησ1 fr )2
,
4(1 − µ2 f − ρσ2 ηfr )

(3.7)

where ϕ
b = µ0 − ϕ and ψb = µ
b0 − ψ are constants. The presence of the last ratio in this equation
is crucial. It can be easily shown that this ratio disappears if the firm does not invest. In this
case, the cash flow multiplier has the explicit solution
Z ∞ h R
Z
i
s
b u du
ϕ+
b ψr
b
0
f (r) =
E e
ds =
0

∞

eA(s)−B(s)r ds

(3.8)

0

b is taken under
with A and B being deterministic functions of time. The expected value E[·]
the measure under which the short rate has the dynamics
c
dr = (θ + ρησ0 − κr)dt + ηdW
c being a Brownian motion under this measure. If the firm is however investing optimally,
with W
then the last term in (3.7) can be thought of as an additional cash flow that the firm is able
to generate by doing so. From a real option perspective, this fraction can be interpreted as
the firm’s option to invest optimally at a particular time t in the future. Brealey, Myers, and
Allen (2010) call this the net present value of growth opportunities. The present value of this
continuous series of options is given by
Z ∞  R
b u du
b ψr
b e 0s ϕ+
O(r; f ) =
E
0


(µ1 f (rs ) + ρησ1 fr (rs ))2
ds
4(1 − µ2 f (rs ) − ρσ2 ηfr (rs ))

such that the optimal cash flow multiplier becomes the sum of (3.8) and (3.9), i.e.
Z ∞
f (r) =
eA(s)−B(s)r ds + O(r; f ).
0

7

(3.9)

(3.10)

We have added a second argument in the definition of O to emphasize that it depends on f .
The firm has a series of options to invest and the net present value of these options is positive,
O ≥ 0. Otherwise, the firm would decide to refrain from investing. Clearly, the option value
O is not explicit since it depends on the optimal cash flow multiplier f which is unknown
and a part of the solution.4 Nevertheless, at least the first part of the representation (3.10) is
explicitly known and equal to the solution without investing.
To gain further insights, let us assume for the moment that the interest rate r is constant. In
this case, it makes sense to simplify notations by setting µ
b0 = 0, ϕ = λ = const, and ψ = 1.
b
This implies that µ0 = µ0 = const and ϕ
b + ψr = µ0 − r − λ = const. The risk-adjusted interest
rate is the sum of the short rate and a risk premium, i.e. R = r + λ. Furthermore, the optimal
cash flow multiplier f is a constant and (3.10) simplifies into
Z ∞
Z ∞
(µ1 f )2
(µ0 −r−λ)s
ds,
f=
e
ds +
e(µ0 −r−λ)s
4(1 − µ2 f )
0
0
|
{z
}

(3.11)

=O(f )

where the transversality condition µ0 − r − λ < 0 is assumed to hold. Then we obtain the
following proposition.
Proposition 3.1 (Cash Flow Multiplier under Constant State Process). If µ21 /4 − µ2 (µ0 −
r − λ) < 0, then the optimal cash flow multiplier is uniquely given as the positive root of the
quadratic equation


0 = µ21 /4 − µ2 (µ0 − r − λ) f 2 + (µ0 − r − λ − µ2 )f + 1.

(3.12)

Notice that in the special case when the firm has no control over the expected growth rate of
its cash flow stream (µ1 = µ2 = 0), relation (3.12) becomes a linear equation with solution
f = 1/(r + λ − µ0 ). This is a version of the Gordon growth model. Furthermore, due to the
transversality condition, a necessary requirement for the condition of Proposition 3.1 to hold
is µ2 < 0.
To make the implications of Proposition 3.1 as clear as possible, let us consider a numerical
example. Similar to the previous section, we choose µ0 = −0.03, µ1 = 0.1 and µ2 = −0.03.
Besides, we assume that r = 0.04 and λ = 0.03 such that the risk-adjusted interest rate is
R = 0.07. The positive root of (3.12) which is the cash flow multiplier equals 13.06. If the firm
suboptimally decides not to invest, then the option value in (3.11) is zero and the cash flow
multiplier is 10. Therefore, the option value equals O = 3.06. Put differently, the opportunity
4

From a mathematical point of view, (3.10) is a fixed point problem for f .

8

to invest increases the cash flow multiplier by 30 percent. Let us consider a second example
where all parameters are the same as in the first example except for µ0 which is assumed to
be -0.05. As discussed in the introduction, one reason for this lower value might be that the
industry requires more investments. The cash flow multiplier resulting from optimal investing
is now 9.91, whereas the cash flow multiplier without investing is 8.33. Therefore, the option
value becomes O = 1.58 or 18% of the optimal cash flow multiplier. This suggests that in an
investment intensive industry the real option to invest loses value both in absolute as well as
in relative terms. In fact, we are able to show that this is in general true.
Theorem 3.2 (Value of the Option to Invest). If, in addition to the assumption of Proposition
3.1, condition µ0 − r − λ − µ2 < 0 holds, then the optimal cash flow multiplier f , the option
value O, and the ratio O/f are increasing in µ0 .
Remark. The requirement µ0 −r−λ−µ2 < 0 is a bit stronger than the transversality condition
since µ2 < 0. Nevertheless, it is satisfied for reasonable parametrizations of the model.
Put differently, the previous theorem says that the option’s absolute and relative values decrease
if µ0 becomes more negative. This result puts some of the classical results on real options into
perspective and it is related to Grenadier (2002) and Aguerrevere (2009): If the firm is forced
to invest for instance because competitors do the same, then the option to invest loses (part
of) its value. Hence, the cash flow multiplier decreases.
We now study the more general case of stochastic interest rates. Then, the presence of the
fraction in (3.7) turns the differential equation into a highly nonlinear equation, which makes
solving the equation more challenging.5 Nevertheless, we are able to provide an explicit power
series representation in the following theorem.
Theorem 3.3 (Optimal Cash Flow Multiplier under Stochastic Interest Rates). The cash flow
multiplier has the following series representation
f (r) =

∞ X
∞
X

(n)
ai

n=0 i=0
(n)

where the coefficients ai

i

θ
ηn
r−
κ

(3.13)

are given by an explicit recursion the can be found in Appendix B.

The main insight of Theorem 3.3 that leads to an explicit recursion for the coefficients is to
5

At least this is so if there are two state variables since in this case the equation is a non-linear partial
differential equation, a case treated in the Appendix.

9

expand f in two directions, r and η. If one expands f only in terms of r, i.e.
∞
X

i

θ
f (r) =
b
ai r −
,
κ
i=0
then we also obtain a recursion for the coefficients b
ai . However, the first two coefficients of this
recursion, b
a0 and b
a1 , are not determined. The coefficients of both representations are related
as follows.
b
ai =

∞
X

(n)

η n ai .

(3.14)

n=0
(n)

Therefore, one can calculate first the coefficients a0

(n)

and a1

with the algorithm provided in

Appendix B and then apply relation (3.14) to obtain b
a0 and b
a1 . With these starting values one
can then directly compute b
ai using the above mentioned algorithm.6 Not surprisingly, in all
our numerical experiments both algorithms lead to the same results.
Furthermore, it is convenient to use an expansion at zero for the volatility η and at the short
rate’s mean reversion level θ/κ. To see the advantage, we substitute η = 0 and r = θ/κ into
(0)

the expansion (3.13) to obtain f = a0 . Now, recall that this choice is equivalent to assuming
that the short rate is constant and equal to the mean reversion level θ/κ. Therefore, as shown
(0)

in Appendix B, the coefficient a0

satisfies the same quadratic equation (3.12) as the cash

flow multiplier if we assume constant interest rates. Consequently, our expansion (3.13) is an
expansion around the cash flow multiplier for constant interest rates.

4

Numerical Example

In this section, we illustrate the implications of our model by considering one particular firm,
IBM. We study its cash flow multiplier over the time period from 1962 to 2005, where the
relevant information about IBM comes from Compustat. Since this is intended to be an introductory example, we postpone a detailed description of the data for our empirical study to
Section 5. To start with, we choose the parameters of the riskfree short rate process (3.4) to
be κ = 0.1, η = 0.015, and θ = 0.005. This implies that the mean reversion level is θ/κ = 0.05,
which is close to the sample average of the one-month Fama-French riskfree rate as reported by
CRSP. The reason for not formally estimating θ and κ over the period from 1962 to 2005 is that
there are regime shifts during this period like the spike in 1979 that cannot be well calibrated by
6

The algorithm is available from the authors upon request. Since it does not provide additional insights it
is not reported here.

10

a one-factor model. We define firm value as the sum of book value plus the difference between
market value and book value of equity minus deferred taxes. Free cash flows are defined as
EBIDTA minus taxes.7 For IBM we have 44 observations of the cash flow multiplier observed
on December 31 of the particular year. Figure 2 plots these observations against the realizations
of the Fama-French one-month risk free rate. Obviously, both variables are negatively related.
This figure also depicts the least-square fit of our model.8 This calibration is so similar to the
calibration of an exponential model that they are hard to distinguish in the figure.
[INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]
Given these results, we run a simple OLS regression of the logarithm of the cash flow multiplier
on the riskfree rate. The slope of the fitted line is -0.096 and the R2 is about 0.33, which
reflects the strong relation between both variables. In the sequel, we will extend this analysis
by running panel regressions and controlling for other explanatory variables. The following
section describes the panel data that we use.

5

Data

Our sample period covers 44 years ranging from 1962 to 2005. The data comes from several
sources. The first is the combined annual, research, and full coverage 2006 Standard and Poor’s
Compustat industrial files. The sample is selected by first deleting any firm-year observations
with missing data. The only exception is deferred taxes (Compustat Item74) that we set to
zero if it is missing. The reason is that deferred taxes are typically an insignificant part of
firm value compared to the book and market value of the assets (Item6, Item25, Item199, and
Item60) and we would have lost around 10% of the observations if we had deleted them. To
check the robustness of this assumption, we run our benchmark regression (1) that is reported
in Table 4 excluding all observations where deferred taxes are missing. As expected, the results
are virtually unchanged. Furthermore, in our benchmark regressions we have only included a
firm if its fiscal year ends in December 31. This is by far the largest group. The second largest
group consists of firms with fiscal year ending in June, but the number of observations is almost
ten times smaller than for the firms with fiscal year ending in December. The main reason for
initially looking at these firms is that we include a liquidity variable measuring share turnover
7

Therefore, firm value is given by Item6 + Item199 × Item25 - Item60 - Item74 and free cash flows are given
by Item13 - Item16. Recall that our free cash flows definition excludes investments.
8
The calibrated values are φ̂ = −0.1047, ψ̂ = −1.4735, µ1 = 0.0280, µ2 = −0.0011, σ0 = 1.2400, σ2 =
−2.3509, and ρ = −0.5689 by applying the results of Theorem 3.3.

11

that Compustat only reports for the calendar year. We also report regression results where we
include all firms independent of their fiscal year end (and exclude share turnover) obtaining
very similar results.
In our analysis we use two definitions of cash flow multipliers. In the first, and conceptually more
appropriate one, we use free cash flow (before investment) defined as the difference between
EBITDA and taxes (Item13 minus Item16). In the second one we use gross profits (Item12
minus Item41) as a proxy for free cash flows. For the firms with fiscal year ending in December
we have 113,972 observations for the first definition and 115,118 observations for the second
definition.
Since our theoretical model and empirical analysis does not allow for negative cash flows, we
need to trim the top and bottom 21% of the data set in the first case and 7% in the second
case. The reason for including gross profits as a proxy for free cash flows is precisely to avoid
deleting so many observations, and since the correlation between the two cash flow measures is
very high (0.9), we do not expect the differences to be large. Anyhow, we also run regressions
on subsamples where the cutoff quantiles are smaller. In all cases, the results are similar as
we will show in our extensive robustness checks.9 To summarize, after trimming we end up
with unbalanced panels of firms over the period from 1962 to 2005 with 66,102 observations
stemming from 8,043 firms in the first case and 99,002 observations stemming from 10,949 firms
in the second case. If all firms independent of their fiscal year are included, we have 119,270
observations stemming from 13,682 firms in the first case and 177,197 observations stemming
from 17,926 firms in the second case.
The one-month Fama-French riskfree rate was obtained from CRSP. The Treasury yields and
the corporate bond yields are from Global Finance Data. The slope of the Treasury yield curve
is defined as the difference between the 15y Treasury yield and the riskfree rate. The 15y
Treasury yield is obtained by linearly interpolating between the 10y and 20y yield. We use this
maturity since it can be matched against the industrial BBB 15y corporate bond yields reported
by S&P to calculate the 15y yield spread between corporate bonds and Treasury bonds. Finally,
we calculate the historical volatility of the stock market from the value weighted S&P 500 index
as reported in CRSP. We use the version without dividends, but the volatilities obtained from
the version with dividends are almost identical. Therefore, our results are robust with respect
to this choice. We include the last 250 trading days to compute the volatility. Figure 3 depicts
the sample paths of the four macro variables measured at the last trading day in December
of the particular year. Table 1 presents the corresponding summary statistics. All variables
9

See, e.g., Tables 8 and 12.

12

are annualized and quoted in percentages. For instance, the average riskfree rate over the
period from 1962 to 2005 was 5.192%. The maximum of 12.528% was reached in 1980 and
the minimum of 0.827% in 2003. There are four years where the slope went negative, namely
1968, 1973, 1980, and 2000. These are times that either fall into an NBER recession period or
are close to such a period. The yield spread reached its maximum of 3.445% in 1990 and its
minimum of 0.415% in 1964. Finally, the average annualized historical volatility is about 14%.
Since a year has about 250 trading days, we multiply the daily volatility by the square root of
250 to obtain the annual volatility.
[INSERT FIGURE 3 AND TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
In the empirical analysis to follow, we regress the logarithm of the cash flow multiplier on several
variables. The first three are closely related to the term structure and include the riskfree rate,
the slope of the Treasury term structure, and the spread of BBB rated bonds over Treasury
bonds. Holding the other variables fixed, an increase in either of these variables increases the
discount rate at which free cash flows are discounted. Since in our model the discount rate
is negatively related with the multiplier, we expect to observe negative relations between the
multiplier and these variables. We also include the historical volatility of the the S&P 500 as an
explanatory variable measuring aggregate equity market risk. We expect to observe a negative
relationship between volatility and the multiplier.
Besides, as the multiplier is a measure of how firms are valued by the market, we also control
for liquidity effects that might affect the valuation of a firm’s equity. We proxy liquidity by
the annual share turnover that is defined as the ratio between the number of common stocks
traded in the calendar year (Compustat Item28) and the number of common shared outstanding
(Compustat Item25). The distribution of this ratio is highly skewed with a mean of 12.45 and
a median of 0.37 since there are a few observations with very high turnovers. To correct for
skewness we use the logarithm of turnover in our regressions which leads to almost identical
values of median and mean. In general, a high value of this ratio reflects that the corresponding
company’s shares are frequently traded. Therefore, it is a measure for the liquidity of the
company’s shares. If investors are willing to pay a liquidity premium, then we expect the cash
flow multiplier to be positively related with this variable. Alternatively, this variable could also
capture idiosyncratic events happening to a particular firm in a particular year. To control for
size effects, we include the logarithm of the market capitalization as an explanatory variable.
The market capitalization of a firm is defined as the product of the number of shares outstanding
and the price per share (Compustat Item25 and Item199). Finally, the first-order condition
(3.6) of our model suggests that the multiplier increases with the proportion of the cash flows
13

invested. To test this prediction empirically, we add a proxy for this variable to the set of our
explanatory variables. We measure the investment proportion by the ratio of the annual capital
expenditures (Compustat Item128) over the free cash flows. Table 2 presents the summary
statistics of the firms specific variables and Table 3 summarizes the correlations between all
firm specific and all macro variables. Note that the highest correlation in the table is between
volatility and the BBB spread (0.51); both of them represent some measure of global risk. The
corresponding statistics for the gross profits as a proxy for cash flows will be presented in the
section discussing our robustness checks.
[INSERT TABLES 2, 3 ABOUT HERE]

6

Panel Regression Results

In this section we examine the determinants of the cash flow multiplier by running several
panel regressions that use all the information contained in the time-series. The residuals of
the cross-sectional regressions are likely to be serially correlated. Furthermore, as we will
demonstrate later on, there might be cross-sectional dependance as well. To overcome these
potential problems, we correct our t-statistics using the approach outlined in Driscoll and Kraay
(1998). They assume an error structure that is heteroscedastic, autocorrelated up to some lag,
and possibly correlated between the units.10 The resulting standard errors are heteroscedasticity
consistent as well as robust to very general forms of cross-sectional and temporal dependence.
In our robustness checks, we will discuss this point in more detail.
[INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]
Our benchmark result (1) is a fixed-effects regression presented in Table 4. As postulated
in the previous section, the riskfree rate, the slope of the term structure, and volatility have
significantly negative impacts on the cash flow multiplier. Additionally, the fraction of the
cash flows invested, π, and market capitalization are significantly positively related with the
multiplier. Interestingly, credit spread is insignificant and the same is true for the turnover
variable, although both have the expected signs. The results for turnover are ambiguous,
though. If we include the stock’s turnover instead of the logarithm of turnover in our regression,
then turnover is significant at all levels and the significance levels of the other variables are not
affected. This result is driven by about 60 large realizations with turnovers of more than 40
that also cause turnover to be highly skewed.
10

In our regressions, the maximum lag is three.

14

Given the magnitude of the coefficient a one standard deviation positive move in the riskfree
rate (volatity, slope) implies a 6% (3%, 1%) lower cash flow multiplier relative to its mean
value. On the other hand, a one standard deviation positive move in π increases the cash flow
multiplier by 12%. Thus, the effects of these variables are both statistically and economically
significant.
Columns (2) and (3) in Table 4 report results when we run regressions either with dummies for
the 48 Fama-French industries or with two dummies for regulated, financial, or public service
firms (one dummy for Fama-French industries 31 and 48 as well as one dummy for FamaFrench industries 44-47). The significance levels of the significant coefficients remain the same
in both regressions. However, the logarithm of turnover now becomes highly significant as
well. One explanation for this might be that a fixed-effects regression is similar to a regression
with dummies for each firm. Since regressions (2) and (3) aggregate these firm dummies, our
results suggest that turnover may also pick up some of the firms’ idiosyncratic effects. In order
to test for the presence of subject-specific fixed effects, we performed a robust version of the
Hausman test.11 The null hypothesis of no fixed-effects is rejected at all levels suggesting that
there are fixed effects in the data. This is the reason why we have chosen regression (1) to be
our benchmark regression. Unless otherwise stated, in the sequel we thus report the results of
fixed-effects regressions.
Finally, we consider regressions where we exclude some of the explanatory variables. The results
are reported in Table 5. Regression (4) shows that the spread variable becomes significant at
the 1% level if volatility is disregarded. On the other hand, the significance level of volatility
increases to the 1% level if the spread variable is disregarded. This suggests that both variables
measure similar effects. Since volatility is significant in the benchmark regression (1), whereas
spread is not, volatility has more explanatory power in our sample. This is also documented
by magnitude of the R2 s of regressions (4) and (5). Additionally, regressions (6) and (7) report
the results if the logarithm of turnover is excluded. It can be seen that the coefficients and
significance levels of the other variables are not affected.
[INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]

7

Robustness Checks

In this section, we report the results of several checks on the basic results. The tests consider
standard errors, endogeneity issues, inclusion of firms with fiscal year different from the calendar
11

See, e.g., Wooldridge (2002), p. 288ff.

15

year, and exclusion of firms with few observations. In Subsection 7.1, we go through these points
for our free cash flow definition. We also briefly discuss the investment definition that we use.
In Subsection 7.2, we present some empirical evidence when we proxy free cash flows by gross
profits. This allows us to include a much larger sample and to check our results against varying
the cash flow definition.

7.1

Free Cash Flows

We first compare the standard errors of regression (2) with the standard errors that obtain
if we form clusters by firm and year (regression (8)) or by firm only (regression (9)).12 The
results are reported in Table 6. Notice that the point estimates for the first two regressions
are exactly the same. Besides, the standard errors are similar leading to the same significance
levels of the coefficients. Clustering by firm only however leads to overly optimistic standard
errors. The same would be true if we run a fixed-effects regression clustering by firm only. To
get an idea whether it is appropriate to use Driscoll-Kray errors, we performed Pesaran’s test
of cross sectional independence on a subsample of firms with at least 30 observations. This test
rejects independence at all significance levels, which suggest that Driscoll-Kray standard errors
are more appropriate.
[INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE]
The next issue we consider is the possibility of endogeneity. One may argue, for example,
that high cash flow multipliers may lead to more investment activity. A straightforward way
to address this is to consider the relation between cash-flow multiplier and one-year lagged
investment proportion, π. Results from doing so appear in Table 7. It turns out that the
significance of π is preserved in this alternative specification, even though, understandably,
the point estimate of the coefficient declines. The same is true for the logarithm of market
capitalization. Column (13) reports the results if we exclude both variables from the set of
explanatory variables. It can be seen that the estimates of the other variables are hardly
affected. Interestingly, in this case the logarithm of turnover becomes significant.
[INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE]
We also run regressions on subsamples with more observations per firm. The reason for this
is that for these firms the number of disregarded observations are much smaller. The results
12

See, e.g., Pedersen (2009) and the references therein.

16

of the panel regressions when we only include firms that have at least 10, 20, 30 and 40 full
observations are presented in Table 8. It can be seen that the cutoff quantiles are decreasing,
whereas the average market capitalization is increasing as we require more observations per firm.
Nevertheless, our main results remain unchanged. The riskfree rate and π are still significant at
all levels. The only differences are that slope becomes more significant for larger firms, whereas
volatility is only significant at the 10% level in regression (15) and not significant in regressions
(16) and (17).
Furthermore, our proxy for investments are capital expenditures (Compustat Item128) that do
not include R&D expenses (Compustat Item46). The main reason for using this proxy is that we
would have lost almost 60% of our observations since Item46 is often missing in Compustat. To
check whether including R&D expenses changes our results, we run our benchmark regression
(1) with the ratio of R&D expenses over free cash flows as an additional explanatory variable.
This regression is based on 27,959 observations coming from 3992 firms. Both investment ratios
are highly significant and have positive coefficients. The levels of the other variables are not
affected except for slope which is not significant any more. However, this cannot be attributed
to the inclusion of the R&D ratio, but to the smaller sample size since slope is also insignificant
when we run the same regression on the subsample without the R&D ratio.
As mentioned earlier most of the firms in our sample have their fiscal year ending December
31, but there are firms with fiscal year ending before that date. This may raise some concerns
since our benchmark regression (1) only includes firms with fiscal year ending in December. To
deal with this issue, Table 9 reports regression results when we include all firms independent
of their fiscal year. This leads to more than 119,000 observations coming from around 13,700
firms (compared to 66,102 coming from 8,043 firms). In these regressions, we need to exclude
turnover since we have only annual data for this variable. Nevertheless, our results are very
similar to the benchmark regression. Slope is still significant, albeit at the 10% level only. To
summarize, all the above mentioned regressions confirm that our results are very robust to
different specifications of the regressions, data and estimation procedures.
[INSERT TABLES 8 and 9 ABOUT HERE]

7.2

Gross Profits

In this subsection, we report the results when we proxy free cash flow by gross profits. Since
gross profits are more likely to be positive, this approach allows us to include more observations
in our sample. It can be justified by the large correlation between free cash flows and gross
17

profits, which is about 90%. Running a simple regression of gross profits on free cash flows
leads to a regression coefficient of about 1.6 that is significant at all levels. The R2 of this
regression is 80%. This suggests that gross profits are a good proxy for free cash flows. Tables
10 and 11 present the summary statistics and the correlations for this alternative approach.
From Table 11 note that the sign of the correlation between the cash flow multiplier and the
spread BBBGov changes. This spread is however insignificant in our regressions as long as
Vol250 is included.
[INSERT TABLES and 10 and 11 ABOUT HERE]
To simplify comparisons between the regression results on free cash flows and gross profits, we
use the convention that regressions with respect to the same explanatory variables have the
same numbers. To distinguish both cases, the numbers of the regressions for gross profits have
primes. Column (1’) of Table 12 presents the benchmark regression for gross profits. Notice
that this regression is now based on 90,492 observations stemming from 10,197 firms. The
significance levels of the coefficients are very similar to the levels of regression (1). The main
difference is that, although slope has still a negative sign, it is not significant. In fact, its pvalue is 19%. Regressions (6’) and (7’) exhibit similar patterns as before since both spread and
volatility alone are significant at the 1% level. Besides, column (12’) reports the results when
we lag π and the logarithm of market capitalization. Both remain significant. Interestingly,
the logarithm of turnover is highly significant, which was not the case in regression (12). This
shows again the ambivalent nature of turnover that we have already discussed before. The same
is true for regression (13’) where we disregard π and market capitalization completely. For this
regression, slope is significant at the 10% level.
Tables 13 and 14 report the results when we either consider subsamples of firms with more
observations or include firms independent of their fiscal year. Since we now proxy free cash
flows by gross profits, the percentages of disregarded firms in Table 13 are much smaller than
in Table 8 as can be seen from the cutoff quantiles that are smaller. The patterns are however
the same. In particular, the relevance of slope increases for bigger firms, whereas volatility
becomes insignificant. Actually, slope is already significant at the 10% level in regression (14’),
whereas volatility is only borderline significant at this level in (15’).
Finally, the regressions reported in Table 14 rely on the largest sample studied in this paper.
The number of observation is 177,197 coming from 17,929 firms. Nevertheless, our main results
are confirmed.
[INSERT TABLES and 12, 13, 14 ABOUT HERE]
18

8

Value of the Option to Invest

We have shown that the cash flow multiplier consists of two parts (see, e.g., (3.10)): Whereas
the first part is exogenous, the second part is endogenous and captures the firm’s real option to
invest, the so-called net present value of growth opportunities. Besides, Theorem 3.2 proves that
the option value is decreasing with µ0 . This parameter equals the expected cash flow growth if
the firm does not invest at all. We expect µ0 to be on average smaller when the firm operates in
an industry that is more investment intensive. Investment intensity is measured by the average
fraction of cash flows that is reinvested, i.e. by the average π of a particular industry. To test
this hypothesis, we run regressions where this average is included as an additional explanatory
variable. We have already seen that the cash flow multiplier increases with π. Following our
line of argument, the opposite should be true for the mean of the industry. There are two ways
of calculating an industry mean. Firstly, one can calculate the mean over the whole sample
period leading to a constant. Secondly, one can compute the mean for every year of the sample
period, which provides us with 48 time series of means for the 48 Fama-French industries. In the
first case, it clearly makes no sense to include firm dummies or fixed effects since otherwise the
coefficients of the average π cannot be identified. But also in the second case dummies would
absorb a lot of the variability that we expect to be captured by the industry means of π. For
this reason, we run four pooled regressions without dummies and report the results in Table 15.
Columns (22) and (23) are based on the same set of observations as our benchmark regression
(1), whereas regressions (24) and (25) include all firms independent of their fiscal year such as
in regression (19). The variable Av pi denotes the average π of the corresponding industry over
the whole sample period of 44 years. In contrast, Av pi annual denotes the average π of the
corresponding industry calculated every year leading to 48 time series. It can be seen that in all
regressions the coefficients on the average π are significantly negative, which supports our line
of argument above. In the last two regressions, volatility is significant at the 10% level only,
whereas slope is not significant any more. The significance levels of the other coefficients do
not change. Finally, we compare the results of regression (22) with the results of regression (2)
where we included industry dummies for the Fama-French industries. Figure 4 plots the values
of the dummies that are significant at a 5% level against the average πs of the corresponding
industries, Av pi. The relation is strongly negative showing that the dummies are related to
the investment intensities of the industries. The result does not change when we also include
the dummies that are insignificant.
[INSERT TABLE 15 and FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE]
19

9

Conclusion

We develop a simple discounted cash flow valuation model with optimal investment that provides the basis for an extensive empirical analysis. The dependent variable in the valuation
exercise is the cash flow multiplier, defined as the ratio of current firm value and current cash
flows (before investment). The explanatory variables include macro variables such as interest
rates, credit spreads and equity market volatility, and firm specific variables such as liquidity,
size and the proportion of cash flows reinvested in the firm. In addition we include dummy
variables to take into account firm and/or industry fixed effects. The panel regression results
indicate that the explanatory variables have the correct sign and for the most part are highly
significant. In addition, we perform extensive robustness checks to deal with econometric and
data issues such as different estimation of standard errors, endogeneity issues, inclusion of firms
with fiscal year different from calendar year, exclusion of firms with few observations, and different definitions of the cash flow multiplier. In all cases the main results of the analysis stand.
Since the cash flow multiplier depends on observable and relatively easily obtainable variables,
the approach taken in this paper can be considered as an alternative valuation framework.
Even though it is based on a discounted cash flow model it does not require the estimation
of expected future cash flow and an appropriate risk adjusted discount rate. Potentially then,
the approach could be used to value non-traded firms and to determine under and over priced
firms.

20

References
Aguerrevere, 2009, Real options, product market competition, and asset returns, Journal of
Finance 64, 957–983.
Anderson, C.W., and L. Garcia-Feijoo, 2006, Empirical evidence on capital investment, growth
options, and security returns, Journal of Finance 61, 171–194.
Ang, A., and J. Liu, 2001, A general affine earnings valuation model, Review of Accounting
Studies 6, 397–425.
Ang, A., and J. Liu, 2004, How to discount cashflows with time-varying expected returns,
Journal of Finance 59, 2745–2783.
Ang, A., and J. Liu, 2007, Risk, return, and dividends, Journal of Financial Economics 85,
1–38.
Baker, M., and R.S. Ruback, 1999, Estimating industry multiples, Working Paper, Harvard
University.
Berk, J.B., R.C. Green, and V. Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options, and security
returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1553–1607.
Bhojraj, S., and D.T. Ng, 2007, Cross-country differences in firm multiples, Working Paper,
Cornell University.
Brealey, R.A., S.C. Myers, and F. Allen, 2010, Principles of Corporate Finance. McGraw-Hill.
Brennan, M.J., and E.S. Schwartz, 1985, Evaluating natural resource investment, Journal of
Business 58, 135–157.
Carlson, M., A. Fisher, and R. Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset price dynamics: Implications for the cross-section of returns, Journal of Finance 59, 2577–2603.
Driscoll, J.C., and A.C. Kraay, 1998, Consistent covariance matrix estimation with spatially
dependent panel data, Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 549–560.
Duffie, D., and D. Lando, 2001, Term structure of credit spreads with incomplete accounting
information, Econometrica 69, 633–664.

21

Goldstein, R., N. Ju, and H. Leland, 2001, An EBIT-based model of dynamic capital strucure,
Journal of Business 74, 483–512.
Grenadier, 2002, Option exercise games: An application to the equilibrium investment strategies
of firms, Review of Financial Studies 15, 691–712.
Liu, J. and. D. Nissim, and J. Thomas, 2002, Equity valuation using multiples, Journal of
Accounting Research 40, 135–172.
Liu, J. and. D. Nissim, and J. Thomas, 2007, Is cash flow king in valuations?, Financial Analysts
Journal 63, March/April, 1–13.
McDonald, R., and D. Siegel, 1986, The value of waiting to invest, Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 707–728.
Merton, R.C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates,
Journal of Finance 29, 449–479.
Pedersen, M.A., 2009, Estimating standard errors in Finance panel data sets: Comparing
approaches, Review of Financial Studies 22, 435–480.
Titman, S., K.C.J. Wei, and F. Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock returns, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.
Wooldridge, J.M., 2002, Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press.

22

A

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 2.1. We set Yt = Ct /c such that Y0 = 1 and dY = dC. Then, problem
(2.1) can be rewritten as
hZ ∞ Rs
i
hZ
− 0 ru du
V (c, x) = max E
(cYs −πs cYs )ds = c max E
e
π

π

0

∞

e−

Rs
0

ru du

i
(Ys −πs Ys )ds = cV (1, x).

0

This implies Vc (c, x) = V (1) = const and Vcc (c, x) = 0, which shows that V is linear in c.

2

Proof of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation (3.5). The firm value satisfies the
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation
0 = max{(µcVc + c − πc − rV + α(x)cVx + 0.5η 2 (x)cVxx + η(x)cσ(π, x)ρVcx }.
π

2

Applying the separation (2.3) yields (3.5).

Proof of Proposition 3.1. The equation (3.12) follows from (3.11). By Vieta’s formulas, the
two solutions, f1 and f2 , satisfy
f1 f2 =

µ21 /4

1
.
− µ2 (µ0 − r − λ)

implying that there exists a unique positive cash flow multiplier if µ21 /4 − µ2 (µ0 − r − λ) < 0,
i.e. if the parabola defined in (3.12) has a maximum.

2

Proof of Theorem 3.2. We set K = µ21 /4 − µ2 (µ0 − r − λ). By assumption of Proposition 3.1,
K is negative. Due to the transversality condition, this implies that µ2 < 0. We interpret (3.12)
as the implicit definition of f as a function of µ0 . For this reason, we interpret the right-hand
side of (3.12) as a function F of f and µ0 . Then
f0 =

df
∂F/∂µ0
−µ2 f 2 + f
=−
=
> 0,
dµ0
∂F/∂f
2Kf + µ0 − r − λ − µ2

since, by assumption, µ0 − r − λ − µ2 < 0. Next recall that
−1
µ21 f 2
O=
.
µ0 − r − λ 4(1 − µ2 f )
Therefore,
O0 =

dO
1
µ21 f 2
−1
µ21 f f 0 (2 − µ2 f )
=
+
> 0.
dµ0
(µ0 − r − λ)2 4(1 − µ2 f ) µ0 − r − λ 4 (1 − µ2 f )2
23

Finally,
O
=
f

O
−1
µ0 −r−λ

+O

.

Consequently,
1
O0 − µ0 −r−λ
O
−1
d O
=
> 0,
dµ0 f
µ0 − r − λ
f2

since
O0 −

−1
µ21 f f 0 (2 − µ2 f )
1
O=
> 0.
µ0 − r − λ
µ0 − r − λ 4 (1 − µ2 f )2
2

This completes the proof of Theorem 3.2.

B

Series Expansion of Theorem 3.3

We firstly provide a representation of the coefficients in the series expansion (3.13) and then
b and
prove Theorem 3.3). We define θb = θ/κ, ϕ
e=ϕ
b + ψbθ,
(k) (ν)

(k) (ν)

k,ν
Hi,j
=e
ai bj + 0.25ci cj ,

where
(ν)

e
ai

(ν)

bi

(ν)
ci

(ν−1)

(ν)

= 1{ν=i=0} − µ2 ai − ρσ2 (i + 1)ai+1 ,
(ν)
b (ν) − κia(ν) + ρσ0 (i + 1)a(ν−1) + 0.5(i + 2)(i + 1)a(ν−2)
+ ψa
= 1{ν=i=0} + ϕa
e
i

=

(ν)
µ1 ai

+ ρσ1 (i +

i−1
(ν−1)
1)ai+1 .

i+1

i

i+2

Then the coefficients are given by the following explicit recursion
(n)
a0

a(n)
m

Pn−1

(n)

k,n−k
H0,0
+ R0
= −
,
D0
P
(n)
k,n−k
(i,k)∈I Hi,m−i + Rm
= −
,
Dm
k=1

(B.15)

where
(n)
Rm

h
i
(n)
(n−1)
(n−2)
b
= (1 −
1{m=n=0} + ψam−1 + ρσ0 (m + 1)am+1 + 0.5(m + 2)(m + 1)am+2
h
i
(0)
(n−1)
(0) (n−1)
+(1 + ϕa
e 0 ) 1{m=n=0} − ρσ2 (m + 1)am+1 + 0.5µ1 ρσ1 (m + 1)a0 am+1 ,
(0)
µ 2 a0 )

(0)

(0)

(0)

Dm = (1 − µ2 a0 )(ϕ
e − mκ) − µ2 (1 + ϕa
e 0 ) + 0.5µ21 a0

24

and I = {0, 1, . . . , m − 1, m} × {0, 1, . . . , n − 1, n} \ {(0, 0), (m, n)} is an index set.13
(n)

We emphasize that this recursion is explicit and all equations (B.15) do not involve am on the
(0)

(0)

right-hand side. The only exception is the equation for a0 where a0 appears on the left- and
right-hand side. This leads to the following quadratic equation.
(0)

(0)

0 = (0.25µ21 − µ2 ϕ)(a
e 0 )2 + (ϕ
e − µ2 )a0 + 1.
For reasonable parametrizations, numerical experiments suggest that this equation has one
positive and one negative root.
Proof of Theorem 3.3. We firstly multiply equation (3.7) by 4(1 − µ2 f − ρσ2 ηfr ). Then
we substitute the representation (3.13) into the resulting equation. This leaves us with several
products of power series. Expanding these products and rearranging, we can rewrite equation
(3.7) as follows:
∞ X
∞
X
n=0 m=0

(

n X
m
X

)
(k) (n−k)

(k) (n−k)

e
aj bm−j + 0.25cj cm−j

b m η n = 0.
(r − θ)

k=0 j=0

Since the representation of a power series is unique, we conclude that {. . .} = 0 for all (n, m) ∈
(n)

IN0 × IN0 . This gives a series of equations for the coefficients am . Solving these equations
2

yields (B.15).

C

Two State Processes

We consider an economy that is driven by two state processes Y and Z that have Vasicek
dynamics
dY

= (θY − κY Y )dt + ηY dWY ,

dZ = (θZ − κZ Z)dt + ηZ dWZ .
The cash flow process of the firm is given by
dC = C[µ(π, Y, Z)dt + σ(π)dW ],

C(0) = c,

where
√
b0 Y Z + µ1 π + µ2 π,
µ(π, Y, Z) = µ0 + µY0 Y + µZ0 Z + µ
√
σ(π) = σ(π) = σ0 + σ1 π + σ2 π
Pn Pm
P
Therefore, the difference k=0 i=0 . . . has two more elements than (i,k)∈I . . ., namely the elements with
indices (i, k) = (0, 0) and (i, k) = (m, n).
13

25

with constants µ0 , µY0 , µZ0 , µ
b0 , µ1 , and µ2 . The processes W , WY , and WZ are correlated
Brownian motions with the constant correlations ρY C , ρZC , and ρY Z . The firm value reads
hZ ∞ Rs
i
V (c, y, z) = max E
e− 0 Ru du (Cs − Is )ds ,
π

0

where, with a slight abuse of notation, the risk-adjusted discount rate R is of the form
R(Y, Z) = r + rY Y + rZ Z + rbY Z
with constants r, rY , rZ , and rb. This specification gives us some flexibility and allows for
several possible interpretations. For instance, assume that Y is the default-free interest rate.
Then, one could choose R to be of the form
R = Y + βλ,
where β is the firm’s beta and λ is the risk premium. If the default-free interest rate predicts
the risk premium, then one can set
λ = λ + λY Y.
Then Z could model a stochastic beta of the firm. In this case,
R = Y + Z(λ + λY Y ) = Y + λZ + λY Y Z
or in our above notation
r = 0,

rY = 1,

rZ = λ,

rb = λY .

Alternatively, one could assume the beta of the firm to be constant and identify Z with the
risk premium. Then,
R = Y + βZ,
or in our notation above
r = 0,

rY = 1,

rZ = β = const,

rb = 0.

The Bellman equation for this problem reads
n
0 = max µ(y, z, π)cVc + 0.5σ 2 (π)cVcc − R(y, z)V + c − πc + (θY − κY y)Vy + 0.5ηY2 Vyy
π
o
2
+(θZ − κZ z)Vz + 0.5ηZ Vzz + ηY ηZ ρY Z Vyz + ηY σ(π)cρY C Vyc + ηZ σ(π)cρZC Vzc .

26

We conjecture the following form of the firm value
V (c, y, z) = cf (y, z)
and obtain
n
0 = max µ(y, z, π)f − R(y, z)f + 1 − π + (θY − κY y)fy + 0.5ηY2 fyy
π

o
+(θZ − κZ z)fz + 0.5ηZ2 fzz + ηY ηZ ρY Z fyz + ηY σ(π)ρY C fy + ηZ σ(π)ρZC fz .
Notice that the term involving Vcc drops out since the firm value is linear in the current cash
flow. The first-order condition for the optimal investment proportion reads

2
µ1 f + ηY σ1 ρY C fy + ηZ σ1 ρZC fz
∗
π =
.
2(1 − µ2 f − ηY σ2 ρY C fy − ηZ σ2 ρZC fz )
Substituting back into the Bellman equation leads to a non-linear second-order partial differential equation for f :
0 = (α + αY y + αZ z + α
byz)f + 1 + (θY + ηY σ0 ρY C − κY y)fy + 0.5ηY2 fyy

(C.16)

+(θZ + ηZ σ0 ρZC − κZ z)fz + 0.5ηZ2 fzz + ηY ηZ ρY Z fyz
(µ1 f + ηY σ1 ρY C fy + ηZ σ1 ρZC fz )2
+0.25
,
1 − µ2 f − ηY σ2 ρY C fy − ηZ σ2 ρZC fz
b=µ
b0 − rb. We solve this equation in
where α = µ0 − r, αY = µY0 − rY , αZ = µZ0 − rZ , and α
two steps. Firstly, we expand f in terms of ηY and ηZ in the following way
∞ X
∞
X
An,m (y, z)(ηY )n (ηZ )m .
f (y, z) =

(C.17)

n=0 m=0

This leads to the following result.
Proposition C.1 (PDEs for An,m ). The functions An,m satisfy the following series of partial
differential equations
i X
k n
o
X
p,q
i−p,k−q
p,q
i−p,k−q
e
A (y, z)B
(y, z) + 0.25C (y, z)C
(y, z) = 0,

(i, k) ∈ IN0 × IN0 ,

p=0 q=0

(C.18)
where
en,m = 1{n=m=0} − µ2 An,m − σ2 ρY C An−1,m − σ2 ρZC An,m−1 ,
A
y
z
B n,m = 1{n=m=0} + (α + αY y + αZ z + α
byz)An,m + (θY − κY y)An,m
+ σ0 ρY C An−1,m
y
y
+0.5An−2,m
+ (θZ − κZ z)An,m
+ σ0 ρZC An,m−1
+ 0.5An,m−2
+ ρY Z An−1,m−1
,
yy
z
z
zz
yz
C n,m = µ1 An,m + σ1 ρY C An−1,m
+ σ1 ρZC An,m−1
,
y
z
with the convention that coefficients with negative indices are zero.
27

2

Proof. Substituting (C.17) into (C.16) and long calculations yield (C.18).

We now expand An,m in terms of the state variables y and z centered at the mean reversion
levels θbY = θY /κY and θbZ = θZ /κZ , i.e.
∞ X
∞

ν 
`
X
n,m
n,m
b
b
A (y, z) =
aν,` y − θY
z − θZ .
ν=0 `=0

This leads to the following representation of f :
f (y, z) =
=
=

∞ X
∞
X

An,m (y, z)(ηY )n (ηZ )m

n=0 m=0
∞ X
∞ X
∞ X
∞
X

an,m
ν,`

n=0 m=0 ν=0 `=0
∞ X
∞
∞ X
∞
X
X
ν=0 `=0



y − θbY

ν 

z − θbZ
!

(ηY )

n

(ηZ )m an,m
ν,`



`

(ηY )n (ηZ )m

y − θbY

ν 

z − θbZ

`

n=0 m=0

{z

|

}

=b
aν,`

To derive this representation, the following lemma firstly provides the expansions of the funcen,m , B n,m , and C n,m .
tions A
Lemma C.2. For (n, m) ∈ IN0 × IN0 we obtain
∞ X
∞
∞ X
∞

ν 
`

ν 
`
X
X
n,m
n,m
n,m
bY
bZ ,
b
b
e
y
−
θ
z
−
θ
A
=
e
aν,` y − θY
z − θZ , B
=
bn,m
ν,`
ν=0 `=0

C n,m =

∞ X
∞
X

ν=0 `=0



cn,m
y − θbY
ν,`

ν 

z − θbZ

`

.

ν=0 `=0

with14
n−1,m
n,m−1
e
an,m
= 1{n,m,ν,`=0} − µ2 an,m
ν,`
ν,` − σ2 ρY C (ν + 1)aν+1,` − σ2 ρZC (` + 1)aν,`+1 ,
bn,m = 1{n,m,ν,`=0} + (α − νκY − `κZ )an,m + bbn,m ,
ν,`

ν,`

cn,m
ν,`

=

µ1 an,m
ν,`

+ σ1 ρY C (ν +

1)an−1,m
ν+1,`

ν,`

+ σ1 ρZC (` + 1)an,m−1
ν,`+1 ,

where
α = α + αY θbY + αZ θbZ + α
bθbY θbZ ,
n−1,m
bbn,m = (αY + α
ban,m
bθbZ )an,m
bθbY )an,m
ν,`−1 + α
ν−1,`−1 + σ0 ρY C (ν + 1)aν+1,`
ν,`
ν−1,` + (αZ + α
n,m−1
n,m−2
+0.5(ν + 2)(ν + 1)an−2,m
ν+2,` + σ0 ρZC (` + 1)aν,`+1 + 0.5(` + 2)(` + 1)aν,`+2

+ρY Z (ν + 1)(` + 1)an−1,m−1
ν+1,`+1
14

1{n,m,ν,`=0} is one if n = m = ν = ` = 0 and zero otherwise.

28

n,m
bn,m
Remark. Splitting up bn,m
ν,` into a term involving aν,` and into the term bν,` will be useful
later on. This is because bbn,m
ν,` involves lower order coefficients only that are known when one

calculates an,m
ν,` with the help of a recursion that we will provide below.
Combining our results above, we can rewrite the Bellman equation (C.16) in the following way:
0=

∞ X
∞ X
∞ X
∞
X


ν 
`
bY
bZ (ηY )N (ηZ )M ,
y
−
θ
z
−
θ
ΛN,M
ν,`

ν=0 `=0 N =0 M =0

where
ΛN,M
ν,`

=

ν X
` X
N X
M
X
p=0 q=0

N −n,M −m
N −n,M −m
+ 0.25cn,m
e
an,m
.
p,q cν−p,`−q
p,q bν−p,`−q
|
{z
}
n=0 m=0
n,m,N −m,M −m
=Hp,q,ν−p,`−q

Since the representation of a power series is unique, we obtain that for all combinations
(ν, `, N, M ) ∈ IN0 × IN0 × IN0 × IN0
ΛN,M
= 0.
ν,`
We thus obtain the following result.
Proposition C.3 (Recursion for aN,M
ν,` ). The coefficients are given by the following recursion
P
aN,M
0,0

= −
= −

n,m,N −m,M −m
N,M
H0,0,0,0
+ R0,0

D0,0
P

aN,M
ν,`

(n,m)∈K

(p,q,n,m)∈I

,

n,m,N −m,M −m
N,M
Hp,q,ν−p,`−q
+ Rν,`

Dν,`

(C.19)
,

where
N,M
Rν,`

h
i
n,m
b
= (1 −
1{N,M,ν,`=0} + bν,`
h
i
N −1,M
N,M −1
)
1
−
σ
ρ
(ν
+
1)a
−
σ
ρ
(`
+
1)a
+(1 + αa0,0
2 YC
2 ZC
{N,M,ν,`=0}
0,0
ν+1,`
ν,`+1
i
h
N,M −1
N −1,M
+0.5µ1 σ1 a0,0
,
0,0 ρY C (ν + 1)aν+1,` + ρZC (` + 1)aν,`+1
µ2 a0,0
0,0 )

0,0
2 0,0
Dν,` = (1 − µ2 a0,0
0,0 )(α − νκY − `κZ ) − µ2 (1 + αa0,0 ) + 0.5µ1 a0,0

and K = {0, 1, . . . , N −1, N }×{0, 1, . . . , M −1, M }\{(0, 0), (N, M )} as well as J = {0, 1, . . . , ν−
1, ν} × {0, 1, . . . , ` − 1, `} × {0, 1, . . . , N − 1, N } × {0, 1, . . . , M − 1, M } \ {(0, 0, 0, 0), (ν, `, N, M )}
are index sets.15
PN PM
P
Therefore, the sum n=0 m=0 . . . has two more elements than (n,m)∈K . . ., namely the elements with
indices (n, m) = (0, 0) and (n, m) = (M, N ). The same property holds for the index set I accordingly.
15

29

We emphasize that this recursion is explicit. Although the previous proposition is also valid for
a0,0
ν,` , we summarize the corresponding results in a separate corollary. In particular, the equation
0,0
for a0,0
0,0 is special because in this case a0,0 appears on both sides of equation (C.19). This is the

only equation of the recursion that is non-linear.
Corollary C.4 (Representation of A0,0 ). The coefficient a0,0
0,0 satisfies the quadratic equation
0,0
2
0 = (0.25µ21 − µ2 α)(a0,0
0,0 ) + (α − µ2 )a0,0 + 1.

The subsequent coefficients can be calculated from the explicit representation
P
0,0
0,0,0,0
(p,q)∈J Hp,q,ν−p,`−q + Rν,`
0,0
aν,` = −
Dν,`

(C.20)

(C.21)

where
h
i
0,0
0,0
0,0
bZ )a0,0 + (αZ + α
bY )a0,0 + α
Rν,`
= (1−µ2 a0,0
)
1
+
(α
+
α
b
θ
b
θ
b
a
Y
{ν,`=0}
0,0
ν−1,`
ν,`−1
ν−1,`−1 +(1+αa0,0 )1{ν,`=0}
and J = {0, 1, . . . , ν − 1, ν} × {0, 1, . . . , ` − 1, `} \ {(0, 0), (ν, `)} is an index set.
Notice that (C.20) becomes (3.12) if the state processes are constant.

30

mu2=-0.03

mu2=-0.06

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0

-0.01

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

-0.02
-0.03
-0.04

Investment Proportion pi

Figure 1: The figure illustrates two different forms of the expected growth rate. In both cases,
it is assumed that µ0 = −0.03 and µ1 = 0.1. For the upper curve, we have µ2 = −0.03 and for
the lower one µ2 = −0.06.

31

Observations

Our Model

Exponential Fit

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

Riskfree Rate

Figure 2: This figure depicts 44 observations of IBM’s cash flow multiplier over the period from
1962 to 2005, as a function of risk free rate. It also shows the fit of our model and an exponential
fit. As can be seen, both calibrations are so similar that they are hard to distinguish in the
figure.

32

Riskfree

Slope

BBBGov

Vol250

14

35

12

30

10
25
8
20
6
15

4
10
2
5

0
1962

1967

-2

1972

1977

1982
Year

1987

1992

1997

2002
0

Figure 3: This figure depicts the sample paths of the four macro variables that we use in
our regressions. Riskfree denotes the one-month Fama-French riskfree rate. Slope denotes the
difference between the 15y yield on Treasury bonds and the riskfree rate. BBBGov denotes
the spread between the 15y yield on BBB corporate bonds and the Treasury bonds. Vol250
denotes the annualized historical volatility of the S&P-500 calculated using index values of the
last 250 trading days. The left y-axis applies to the first three time series, whereas the right
one applies to the volatility.

33

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

Median

Riskfree

5.192

2.343

0.827

12.528

4.871

Slope

1.943

1.428

-0.414

5.318

1.871

BBBGov

1.738

0.71

0.415

3.445

1.766

Vol250

13.781

5.366

5.253

31.161

12.727

Table 1: This table provides summary statistics for the macro variables. Riskfree denotes
the one-month Fama-French riskfree rate. Slope denotes the difference between the 15y yield
on Treasury bonds and the riskfree rate. BBBGov denotes the spread between the 15y yield
on BBB corporate bonds and the Treasury bonds. Vol250 denotes the annualized historical
volatility of the S&P-500 calculated using index values of the last 250 trading days.

34

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

Median

Ratio

10.933

3.588

2.727

18.956

10.570

Pi

0.675

0.718

-0.749

63.652

0.516

Log turnover

-1.095

1.288

-14.453

11.582

-1.001

Log market cap

4.932

2.236

-6.043

12.75

4.857

Table 2: This table provides summary statistics when the cash flow multipliers are calculated
using free cash flows. To shorten notation, ratio stands for cash flow multiplier. Pi denotes
the investment proportion given by the ratio between the annual capital expenditures and the
free cash flows. Log turnover is defined as the logarithm of the ratio between the number of
common stocks traded in the calendar year and the number of common shared outstanding.
Log market cap denotes the logarithm of the market capitalization which is defined as the
product of the number of shares outstanding and the price per share. The statistics are based
on 66102 observations. There are only 7 for observations where Pi < 0.

35

36
-0.118

0.132
0.246

Log turnover

Log market cap

0.038

0.038

-0.038

0.104

0.241

1.000

Slope

0.032

0.070

-0.041

0.511

1.000

BBBGov

0.004

0.047

-0.024

1.000

Vol250

0.000

-0.025

1.000

Pi

0.151

1.000

Log turnover

1.000

Log market cap

free cash flows. The correlations are calculated on the basis of 66102 observations.

Table 3: This table reports the correlations between the relevant variables when cash flow multipliers are calculated using

-0.164

0.123

-0.126

-0.255

0.044

-0.010

BBBGov

-0.357

Pi

0.029

Slope

1.000

-0.069

-0.172

Riskfree

Riskfree

Vol250

1.000

Log ratio

Log ratio

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.026***

-0.024***

-0.023***

(-4.95)

(-6.61)

(-6.46)

-0.012*

-0.007

-0.007

(-2.28)

(-1.18)

(-1.17)

-0.019

-0.011

-0.009

(-1.21)

(-0.62)

(-0.50)

-0.006*

-0.006*

-0.006*

(-2.18)

(-2.19)

(-2.17)

0.123***

0.071***

0.038***

(7.10)

(7.17)

(5.06)

0.007

0.018***

0.025***

(1.24)

(3.30)

(4.57)

0.081***

0.040***

0.034***

(9.80)

(8.75)

(7.20)

2.141***

2.405***

2.392***

(23.17)

(47.34)

(39.64)

0.1859

0.1783

0.1134

Fixed effects

yes

no

no

FF industry dummies

no

yes

no

Bank-utility dummies

no

no

yes

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi
Log turnover
Log market cap
Intercept
R2

Table 4: The table reports the results of panel regressions with Driscoll-Kraay errors that
correct for a variety of dependencies including spatial dependencies. The first regression is a
pooled regression with fixed effects. The second one is a pooled regression with dummies for
the 48 Fama-French industries. The third one is a pooled regression with two dummy variables,
one for financial industry firms (Fama-French industries 44-47) and one for public service firms
(Fama-French industries 31 and 48). All regressions are based on 66102 observations stemming
from 8043 firms. The t-statistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels correspond
to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

37

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi
Log turnover
Log market cap
Intercept
R2

(1)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.026***

-0.027***

-0.025***

-0.027***

-0.025***

(-4.95)

(-4.72)

(-4.82)

(-4.73)

(-4.83)

-0.012*

-0.013*

-0.013*

-0.013*

-0.013*

(-2.28)

(-2.10)

(-2.24)

(-2.11)

(-2.24)

-0.019

-0.041**

-0.041**

(-1.21)

(-2.67)

(-2.66)

-0.006*

-0.007**

-0.007**

(-2.18)

(-2.73)

(-2.69)

0.123***

0.123***

0.123***

0.123***

0.123***

(-7.10)

(-7.07)

(-7.15)

(-7.09)

(7.17)

0.007

0.006

0.006

(-1.24)

(-0.97)

(-1.21)

0.081***

0.082***

0.080***

0.084***

0.082***

(-9.80)

(-9.67)

(-9.70)

(-8.34)

(8.64)

2.141***

2.097***

2.120***

2.083***

2.104***

(-23.17)

(-23.78)

(-23.92)

(-21.05)

(21.78)

0.1859

0.1776

0.1846

0.1773

0.1843

Table 5: The table reports the results of panel regressions when some of the explanatory
variables are excluded. All regressions are fixed effects regressions with Driscoll-Kraay errors.
The first regression corresponds to the first regression that is reported in Table 4. The reported
R2 s are the within R2 s of the fixed effect regressions. As in Table 4, all regressions are based on
66102 observations stemming from 8043 firms. The t-statistics are reported in brackets. The
significance levels correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

38

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi
Log turnover
Log market cap
Intercept

(2)

(8)

(9)

-0.024***

-0.024***

-0.025***

(-6.61)

(-5.99)

(-24.37)

-0.007

-0.007

-0.011***

(-1.18)

(-1.11)

(-9.73)

-0.011

-0.011

-0.017***

(-0.62)

(-0.59)

(-8.31)

-0.006*

-0.006*

-0.006***

(-2.19)

(-2.23)

(-23.62)

0.071***

0.071***

0.110***

(7.17)

(7.38)

(6.83)

0.018***

0.018***

0.013***

(3.30)

(4.54)

(7.48)

0.040***

0.040***

0.062***

(8.75)

(12.83)

(39.84)

2.405***

2.405***

2.322***

(47.34)

(37.26)

(44.03)

Table 6: The table reports two additional regressions that we run as robustness checks for the
standard errors. The first regression corresponds to the second regression that is reported in
Table 4. All regression include industry dummies for the 48 Fama-French industries. Panel
regression (2) calculates the standard errors according to Driscoll and Kraay (1998). Panel
regression (8) computes standard errors by clustering by year and firm (see, e.g., Pedersen
(2009) and the references therein). Panel regression (9) clusters by firm only. As in Table
4 and 5, all regressions are based on 66102 observations stemming from 8043 firms. The tstatistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels correspond to the following p-values:
∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

39

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi

(1)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

-0.026***

-0.029***

-0.022***

-0.023***

-0.027***

(-4.95)

(-4.81)

(-3.75)

(-3.90)

(-5.00)

-0.012*

-0.010

-0.011

-0.009

-0.012*

(-2.28)

(-1.73)

(-1.75)

(-1.40)

(-2.06)

-0.019

-0.016

-0.014

-0.016

-0.016

(-1.21)

(-0.83)

(-0.78)

(-0.76)

(-0.81)

-0.006*

-0.007*

-0.006*

-0.007*

-0.006*

(-2.18)

(-2.26)

(-2.23)

(-2.31)

(-2.11)

0.123***

0.146***

(7.10)

(29.24)
0.0003***

0.0003***

(3.62)

(3.47)

Lag pi
Log turnover
Log market cap

0.007

0.014*

0.007

0.010

0.035**

(1.24)

(2.17)

(1.20)

(1.50)

(3.04)

0.081***

0.079***

(9.80)

(9.11)

Lag log market cap
Intercept
R2

0.058***

0.061***

(5.53)

(5.92)

2.141***

2.268***

2.197***

2.318***

2.663***

(23.17)

(20.73)

(21.16)

(20.98)

(40.24)

0.1859

0.1675

0.1283

0.1001

0.0634

Table 7: The table reports three additional regressions that address the issue of endogeneity.
We use the one-year lagged logarithm of the market capitalization and/or the one-year lagged
percentage of the cash flow invested. The first regression corresponds to the first regression
that is reported in Table 4. All regressions are fixed effect regressions with Driscoll-Kraay
errors. Since we are losing one year of observations and because of missing observations,
regression (10) is based on 62048 observations stemming from 7525 firms and regressions (11)
and (12) are based on 61353 observations stemming from 7469 firms. Regression (13) disregards
π and market capitalization. The number of observations is the same as for (1). The tstatistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels correspond to the following p-values:
∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.
40

(1)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

-0.026***

-0.030***

-0.035***

-0.043***

-0.062***

(-4.95)

(-5.25)

(-5.80)

(-6.73)

(-9.53)

-0.012*

-0.015*

-0.020**

-0.028***

-0.045***

(-2.28)

(-2.35)

(-2.81)

(-3.60)

(-4.58)

-0.019

-0.017

-0.016

-0.014

-0.013

(-1.21)

(-1.02)

(-0.86)

(-0.71)

(-0.58)

-0.006*

-0.006*

-0.005

-0.005

-0.005

(-2.18)

(-2.28)

(-1.79)

(-1.48)

(-1.45)

0.123***

0.158***

0.176***

0.193***

0.208***

(7.10)

(29.07)

(33.46)

(30.80)

(12.69)

0.007

0.006

0.007

-0.010

-0.011

(1.24)

(0.98)

(0.74)

(-0.86)

(-0.76)

0.081***

0.081***

0.077***

0.085***

0.077***

(9.80)

(8.76)

(6.68)

(6.11)

(5.09)

2.141***

2.183***

2.229***

2.178***

2.308***

(23.17)

(20.68)

(17.79)

(15.04)

(16.09)

R2

0.1859

0.1988

0.2146

0.2428

0.2893

# ob. included

66102

56520

35023

20493

6686

8043

3835

1379

615

166

21

14

7

4

2

1507.145

1787.128

2550.220

3702.969

7324.377

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi
Log turnover
Log market cap
Intercept

# firms included
Cutoff quantile
Av. market cap.

Table 8: The table reports panel regressions when we only include firms that have at least 0,
10, 20, 30, 40 full observations. We report the quantiles of observations that are disregarded
at the upper and lower tail. The t-statistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels
correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

41

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi
Log market cap
Intercept
R2

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

-0.022***

-0.024***

-0.022***

-0.018***

(-4.37)

(-4.03)

(-4.04)

(-4.38)

-0.012

-0.013

-0.013

(-1.80)

(-1.72)

(-1.89)

-0.019

-0.039*

(-1.16)

(-2.39)

-0.006*

-0.007*

-0.007**

(-1.96)

(-2.39)

(-2.59)

0.130***

0.130***

0.130***

0.130***

(11.43)

(11.35)

(11.56)

(11.49)

0.084***

0.084***

0.083***

0.082***

(9.28)

(8.82)

(9.19)

(8.90)

2.142***

2.098***

2.121***

2.079***

(21.32)

(21.99)

(20.92)

(22.16)

0.1744

0.1658

0.1732

0.1700

Table 9: The table reports panel regressions when we include all firms with arbitrary fiscal years.
This leads to 119270 observations stemming from 13682 firms. The t-statistics are reported in
brackets. The significance levels correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p <
0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

42

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

Median

Ratio gp

6.498

5

0.654

25.949

4.900

Pi gp

0.325

0.586

-10.654

28.821

0.150

Log turnover

-0.955

1.33

-14.453

11.865

-0.854

Log market cap

4.736

2.317

-11.043

13.073

4.662

Table 10: This table provides summary statistics when the cash flow multipliers are calculated
using gross profits. To emphasize this, the index gp is added. The statistics of the corresponding
firm specific explanatory variables are reported as well. The statistics are based on 99002
observations. There are only 12 for observations where Pi gp < 0.

43

44

-0.150
0.023
0.018
-0.015
0.271
0.094
0.325

Riskfree

Slope

BBBGov

Vol250

Pi gp

Log turnover

Log market cap

-0.137

-0.143

0.096

-0.148

-0.245

-0.370

1.000

Riskfree

-0.006

0.003

-0.011

0.098

0.203

1.000

Slope

-0.014

0.058

-0.009

0.541

1.000

-0.019

0.055

-0.003

1.000

BBBGov Vol250

0.040

-0.039

1.000

Pi gp

0.164

1.000

Log turnover

1.000

Log market cap

correlations since the correlations are calculated on different samples.

gross profits. The correlations are calculated on the basis of 99002 observations. The macro variables have slightly different

Table 11: This table reports the correlations between the relevant variables if the cash flow multipliers are calculated using

1.000

Log ratio gp

Log ratio gp

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi gp

(1’)

(6’)

(7’)

(12’)

(13’)

-0.021**

-0.022**

-0.020**

-0.025***

-0.027***

(-2.94)

(-2.73)

(-2.78)

(-3.97)

(-4.75)

-0.012

-0.013

-0.013

-0.012

-0.015

(-1.31)

(-1.39)

(-1.31)

(-1.44)

(-1.80)

-0.022

-0.051**

-0.021

-0.023

(-1.13)

(-2.81)

(-0.88)

(-0.91)

-0.007*

-0.008**

-0.008*

-0.008*

(-2.36)

(-2.86)

(-2.54)

(-2.39)

0.220***

0.220***

0.220***

(10.28)

(10.24)

(10.33)

Lag pi gp

0.002***
(3.85)

Log turnover
Log market cap

0.001

0.034***

0.060***

(0.09)

(3.89)

(4.55)

0.147***

0.148***

0.147***

(12.65)

(12.75)

(12.08)

Lag log market cap

0.085***
(6.46)

Intercept
R

2

1.112***

1.065***

1.085***

1.523***

1.989***

(10.15)

(9.63)

(9.45)

(12.35)

(25.84)

0.1898

0.1846

0.1890

0.0836

0.0392

Table 12: The table reports the panel regressions when free cash flows are proxied by gross
profits. The numbers of the regression correspond to the numbers of regressions reported in
Tables 4-7. The regressions (1’), (6’), (7’), and (13’) are based on 99002 observations stemming from 10949 firms. Since we are losing one year of observations and because of missing
observations, regression (12’) is based on 90492 observations stemming from 10197 firms. The
t-statistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels correspond to the following p-values:
∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

45

(1’)

(14’)

(15’)

(16’)

(17’)

-0.021**

-0.026***

-0.036***

-0.047***

-0.066***

(-2.94)

(-3.95)

(-5.73)

(-7.71)

(-10.18)

-0.012

-0.016

-0.025**

-0.037***

-0.060***

(-1.31)

(-1.77)

(-3.07)

(-4.33)

(-5.46)

-0.022

-0.022

-0.016

-0.011

-0.016

(-1.13)

(-1.07)

(-0.75)

(-0.53)

(-0.66)

-0.007*

-0.007*

-0.005

-0.005

-0.003

(-2.36)

(-2.31)

(-1.62)

(-1.33)

(-0.92)

0.220***

0.268***

0.329***

0.369***

0.480***

(10.28)

(11.23)

(14.47)

(22.55)

(13.45)

0.001

0.008

0.014

0.003

-0.013

(0.09)

(0.91)

(1.27)

(0.23)

(-0.84)

0.147***

0.128***

0.119***

0.126***

0.142***

(12.65)

(11.21)

(9.27)

(8.30)

(8.05)

1.112***

1.183***

1.185***

1.100***

0.911***

(10.15)

(10.44)

(9.18)

(7.55)

(5.44)

R2

0.1898

0.1924

0.2300

0.2890

0.3856

# ob. included

99002

71864

39939

21892

6865

# firms included

10949

4211

1430

617

167

7

5

2

1

1

1550.778

1824.736

2560.66

3657.959

7228.487

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi gp
Log turnover
Log market cap
Intercept

Cutoff quantile
Av. market cap.

Table 13: The table parallels the results of Table 8 if the cash flow multipliers are calculated
using gross profits. We report the quantile of observations that is disregarded at the upper
and lower tail. Obviously, there are much smaller now, i.e. there are more observations included compared to Table 8. The t-statistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels
correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

46

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi gp
Log market cap
Intercept
R2

(18’)

(19’)

(20’)

(21’)

-0.019*

-0.020*

-0.018*

-0.013*

(-2.40)

(-2.30)

(-2.18)

(-2.22)

-0.015

-0.016

-0.016

(-1.44)

(-1.47)

(-1.45)

-0.022

-0.046*

(-1.08)

(-2.41)

-0.007*

-0.008*

-0.008**

(-2.12)

(-2.52)

(-2.68)

0.248***

0.248***

0.248***

0.248***

(14.80)

(14.76)

(14.86)

(14.62)

0.143***

0.144***

0.143***

0.143***

(13.50)

(13.90)

(13.47)

(12.60)

1.056***

1.009***

1.028***

0.973***

(8.35)

(8.55)

(8.09)

(9.07)

0.1839

0.1786

0.1831

0.1811

Table 14: The table reports panel regressions when we include all firms with arbitrary fiscal
years. Cash flow multipliers are calculated using gross profits. We have 177197 observations
stemming from 17926 firms. The t-statistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels
correspond to the following p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.

47

Riskfree
Slope
BBBGov
Vol250
Pi
Log turnover
Log market cap
Av pi

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

-0.023***

-0.016***

-0.018***

-0.013***

(-6.89)

(-3.78)

(-5.86)

(-3.54)

-0.005

-0.005

-0.005

-0.005

(-0.91)

(-0.78)

(-0.83)

(-0.70)

-0.007

-0.008

-0.003

-0.006

(-0.39)

(-0.43)

(-0.16)

(-0.36)

-0.006*

-0.006*

-0.004

-0.004

(-2.21)

(-2.15)

(-1.72)

(-1.85)

0.071***

0.068***

0.062***

0.061***

(7.01)

(6.77)

(9.24)

(9.09)

0.021***

0.021***

(3.88)

(4.15)

0.039***

0.035***

0.036***

0.033***

(7.68)

(6.78)

(8.75)

(7.90)

-0.338***

-0.308***

(-22.08)

(-21.79)

Av pi annual
Intercept
R2

-0.223***

-0.217***

(-10.14)

(-11.23)

2.575***

2.481***

2.518***

2.452***

(40.61)

(37.79)

(37.62)

(36.97)

0.147

0.127

0.119

0.105

Table 15: The table reports regression results if we include the average πs of the Fama-French
industries as additional explanatory variables. These are pooled OLS regressions with DriscollKraay errros where we neither include fixed effects nor Fama-French industry dummies. The
variable Av pi denotes the average π of the corresponding industry over the whole sample
period of 44 years. In contrast, Av pi annual denotes the average π of the corresponding
industry calculated every year, i.e. these are 48 time series. Regressions (22) and (23) are based
upon the same observations as our benchmark regression (1), whereas regressions (24) and (25)
are based upon the same observations as regression (19) that includes all firms independent
of their fiscal years. Therefore, the last two regression do not include the turnover variable.
The t-statistics are reported in brackets. The significance levels correspond to the following
p-values: ∗p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ p < 0.01, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.001.
48

0.2

0.1

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

y = -0.4174x + 0.2143
R² = 0.5896

Average Pi of Fama-French Industry

Figure 4: This figure plots the significant industry dummies of regression (2) against the means
of π for the 48 Fama-French industries. It is based on 66102 observations stemming from 8043
firms.

49

