NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL RESERVES AND SWAP LINES:
SUBSTITUTES OR COMPLEMENTS?
Joshua Aizenman
Yothin Jinjarak
Donghyun Park
Working Paper 15804
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15804

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

The views expressed in this paper are personal. No responsibility for them should be attributed to the
Asian Development Bank or the NBER. We are grateful to Kevin Davis, Stephen Grenville, Michael
Hutchison, Takatoshi Ito, Andrew Rose, the participants at the ADB Tokyo March 2010 conference,
On the Future Global Reserve System, and the EASE 21 NBER conference, Sydney, June 2010 for
useful comments. Any errors are ours.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donghyun Park. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

International reserves and swap lines: substitutes or complements?
Joshua Aizenman, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donghyun Park
NBER Working Paper No. 15804
March 2010, Revised July 2010
JEL No. F15,F31,F32
ABSTRACT
Developing Asia experienced a sharp surge in foreign currency reserves prior to the 2008-9 crisis.
The global crisis has been associated with an unprecedented rise of swap agreements between central
banks of larger economies and their counterparts in smaller economies. We explore whether such swap
lines can reduce the need for reserve accumulation. The evidence suggests that there is only a limited
scope for swaps to substitute for reserves. The selectivity of the swap lines indicates that only countries
with significant trade and financial linkages can expect access to such ad hoc arrangements, on a case
by case basis. Moral hazard concerns suggest that the applicability of these arrangements will remain
limited. However, deepening swap agreements and regional reserve pooling arrangements may weaken
the precautionary motive for reserve accumulation.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu
Yothin Jinjarak
NTU
Division of Economics
S3-B2A-06 Nanyang Avenue
Singapore 637698
yjinjarak@ntu.edu.sg

Donghyun Park
Economics and Research Department
Asian Development Bank
Manila, Philippines
dpark@adb.org

1 Introduction
By any measure, developing Asia (henceforth Asia) has experienced an unprecedented build-up
of FX reserves since the Asian financial crisis of 1997-8. Asia's reserves have surged from
US$202 billion in 1990 to US$3,371 billion in 2008. The growth rate has accelerated since 2000,
with reserves growing on average by more than 20% per year. China has definitely played a
significant role in the build-up, accounting for more than 50% of the 1990-2008 growth, but the
build-up is a region-wide phenomenon. The pattern is similar even if we account for the region's
rapid economic growth – the region's reserves-to-GDP ratio tripled from 13.1% in 1990 to 40.2%
in 2008. The explosive growth of Asia's reserves is part of a broader trend of reserve build-up in
developing countries in general. The share of global reserves accounted for by developing
countries has risen from 28% to 65% between 1990 and 2008. In Asia's case, the reserve buildup has been largely driven by a sharp reversal of the current account position since the crisis.
While the region as a whole ran a small current account deficit prior to the crisis, it has run a
sizable and persistent current account surplus since the crisis. In some countries such as PRC and
Korea, an important additional source of reserve growth has been net capital inflows. As of
December 2009, no fewer than six Asian developing countries were among the world’s ten
largest holders of FX reserves – China, India, Taipei, Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong SAR. In
addition, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Viet Nam and Kazakhstan also have
large and growing amounts of FX reserves.
Broadly speaking, there are two main explanations for the extraordinary growth of Asia's FX
reserves in the post-crisis period: (i) precautionary self-insurance against financial crisis and (ii)
mercantilist export promotion. The Asian crisis had a devastating economic and social impact on
Asia. Although 5 countries – Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand – bore the
brunt of the impact, the psychological impact of the crisis extended to the entire region. While
there is a great deal of controversy about the causes of the crisis, what directly precipitated the
crisis was a shortage of international liquidity. Therefore, one plausible interpretation of Asia's
reserve hoarding is that it is an attempt to build up an ample war chest of international liquidity
to protect oneself against a repeat of the Asian crisis. This type of demand for reserves is known
as the precautionary or self-insurance demand for reserves. The other main benefit of reserves is
that buying foreign currencies to hold down domestic currencies can improve external
competitiveness and thus promote exports. This type of demand for reserves is known as the
1

mercantilist demand for reserves. Aizenman and Lee (2007) provides comprehensive discussions
of both precautionary and mercantilist demand for reserves. A study of the two motives in Asia
by Aizenman and Lee (2007) finds that both motives are at play in the region's reserve build-up.
There is yet a third motive for holding reserves, which is related to the first two but somewhat
different – exchange rate stability, outlined by Calvo and Reinhart (2002). Exchange rate stability
is often a key macroeconomic policy objective and in that case, rapid reserve growth may be the
result of systematic foreign market interventions aimed at stabilizing the exchange rate.
The different motives behind Asia's reserve accumulation are not mutually exclusive from a
theoretical point of view and hence very difficult to distinguish empirically. Indeed efforts to
empirically distinguish between the precautionary and mercantilist motives may ultimately be
unproductive. It is precisely because a more competitive exchange rate allows a country to
improve its current account position that the country is able to build up the reserves it needs for
precautionary purposes. From the perspective of the global reserve currency system, regardless
of the relative importance of the different motives, the massive purchase of US dollardenominated reserve assets – i.e. US government and government sponsored enterprise (GSE)
securities – by Asian countries has the effect of bolstering the status of the dollar as the world's
dominant reserve currency. The dollar standard or Bretton Woods II view of global imbalances
[see Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2009)] is closely tied to the mercantilist demand for
reserves. According to this view, much of Asia has in effect reverted to the tightly managed
dollar-based exchange rate regimes, after a brief experimentation with more flexibility during the
Asian crisis period. The term Bretton Woods II draws an analogy between the exchange rate
behavior of Asian countries since the Asian crisis and the Bretton Woods system of pegged but
adjustable exchange rates that was in place between 1945 and the early 1970s.
The desirability of the fast accumulation of FX reserves in Asia remains debatable [see Cheung
and Xingwang (2009)]. As noted above, holding reserves entails a number of potential benefits –
precautionary self-insurance, export promotion and exchange rate stability. At the same time,
countries also incur substantial costs when they accumulate large amounts of reserves. These
include inflationary pressures due to expansion of monetary base, fiscal costs which arise if the
interest rate on sterilization bonds exceeds the interest rate earned on reserve assets, and
potentially higher interest rates required to induce the public to hold ever-larger amounts of
sterilization bonds. The presence of both costs and benefits implies an optimal reserve level,
2

above which more reserves subtract from rather than add to national welfare. According to most
conventional measures of reserve adequacy, the region now has reserves far in excess of all
plausible estimates of what it needs. According to one such measure, the Greenspan-Guidotti rule,
a country has adequate reserves if its reserves exceed its short-term debt.1 The underlying notion
here is that a country which has reserves exceeding all external debt falling within one year
should be able to service its most urgent external obligations even during a financial crisis. At the
end of 2008, all of Asia's top 10 reserve holders passed the Greenspan-Guidotti rule, some by a
wide margin. Most other reserve adequacy measures also all point to an abundance of reserves. 2
The growing consensus that the region now has substantial amounts of surplus reserves has led
to calls for managing such reserves more actively. In the period immediately preceding the
global financial crisis, parking surplus reserves in safe and liquid but low-yielding US
government securities was increasingly seen as a waste of valuable national resources. The
creation of sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) such as China Investment Corporation (CIC) and
Korea Investment Corporation (KIC) represent a policy response to growing popular pressure for
using surplus reserves for active profit-seeking investment rather than passive liquidity
management.3 In addition to the opportunity costs of foregoing more productive and profitable
investment opportunities, the global financial crisis has exposed the risks of investing in
industrialized countries. More specifically, the crisis, which originated in industrialized countries,
tarnished their long-standing reputation for safe and efficient financial markets as well as sound
financial regulation and macroeconomic policies. The upshot for Asia's reserve management is
that holding massive amounts of reserves in the form of US government securities is not without
risks, especially in light of the deterioration of public finances due to the current fiscal stimulus.
1

The focus on short term total external debt/international reserves makes sense if sudden stop
crises have a duration shorter than a year. Yet, some severe events, like the global crisis of 2008-9, may
have lingering effects well beyond a year. Hence, prudent regulators may pay attention to the external
debt maturity structure of a country, looking beyond the short-term debt/International reserve ratio. In the
same vein, the regulator may pay attention to both the private and the public external debt maturity
structure.
2
Park and Estrada (2009) provide a comprehensive analysis of the issue of whether Asia's reserves
have reached excessive levels. Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2009) find empirical support a broader
self-insurance view, where reserves provide a buffer against both deleveraging initiated by foreign parties
and sudden demand of domestic residents for external assets, i.e., “sudden capital flight.” The high
positive co-movement of international reserves and M2 is consistent with the view that the greatest
capital-flight risks are posed by the most liquid assets, i.e., by the liquid liabilities of the banking system
captured by M2.
3
Park (2007) provides a comprehensive analysis of the emergence of Asian SWFs.
3

A sustained depreciation of the US dollar and consequent valuation losses is another large
potential cost confronting Asia's biggest reserve holders in the post-crisis period.
We have just seen that holding large amounts of reserves entails significant costs and risks for
Asian countries. One way to reduce such costs is to use reserves more productively via sovereign
funds and more generally, by active reserve management. Although the global financial crisis has
inflicted heavy losses on Asian sovereign funds and temporarily dampened their risk appetite,
they provide an important channel for more productive use of reserves in the medium- and longterm. There are already signs that the funds are returning to the financial markets, and there are
indications that China may inject up to US$250 billion of fresh capital into CIC. Furthermore, if
we view reserves as insurance against unexpected shortage of international liquidity and
financial crisis, pooling risks is more efficient than individual risk bearing. That is, collective
insurance is always less costly than self insurance. The seemingly irrational behavior of reserve
hoarding can partly be explained by the region's loss of confidence in the IMF during the Asian
crisis. In principle, the IMF pools the risks of all countries and thus offers the most efficient
collective insurance. In practice, a region wide perception that the IMF has mishandled the Asian
crisis, compounded by a broader region wide perception that the IMF does not serve the interests
of Asian countries, has eroded the region's confidence in IMF. Regardless of the validity of the
perceptions, the perceptions themselves have contributed to a marked preference of selfinsurance over collective insurance.
The central objective of this paper is to explore one alternative mechanism for reducing the
need for precautionary reserves, namely swap agreements or swap lines between central banks of
large economic powers and their counterparts in smaller economies. The global financial crisis
has witnessed a proliferation of such agreements. Perhaps the most well-known example is the
US$30 billion swap lines between the US Fed and the central banks of Brazil, Korea, Mexico
and Singapore opened in October 2008 during the peak of the crisis.4 In principle, swaps can
4

Such a swap line is a transaction where the supplying Central Bank (US FED), offers a credit line
of 30 Billion US $ to a foreign central bank, say the Bank of Korea, for a pre-set duration. The swap
provides the Bank of Korea with the option of borrowing up to 30 Billion US $, at a pre-set interest rate,
for a pre-set time. The swap line augments the initial international reserves position of the Bank of Korea
with the option to borrow international reserves. By exercising the swap line, the Bank of Korea may
mitigate, in the short-run, the dollar shortage propagated by delivering pressure induced by the global
crisis. Such a swap line outsources the US FED dollar printing press capacity to the Bank of Korea,
exposing the US FED to the sovereign risk associated with lending dollar to foreign central banks. This
exposure implies that the US FED provides such swap lines on a case by case basis, for a pre-set duration.
4

either substitute for or complement reserves. To the extent that swaps provide the international
liquidity needed during emergencies, central banks can cut back on their reserve holdings. On the
other hand, only countries with large reserves may be able to secure swap agreements and this
may encourage countries to accumulate more reserves. In addition, large reserves and swap lines
can jointly restore the confidence of financial markets in a country's liquidity and solvency. The
broader issue of interest is whether swap lines can have a perceptible deterrent effect on the
speed and scale of Asia's reserve accumulation. An important integral part of Asia's swap
agreements is the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) which encompasses a network of bilateral
agreements between ASEAN + 3 (China, Japan and Korea).
The unprecedented provision of $120 billion in swap lines to 4 the emerging markets by the US
Fed in October 2008 provided welcome relief and an important signal to the financial markets.
Yet the exposure of US banks was the single most important criterion for extending swap-lines to
the four countries [see Aizenman and Pasricha (2010)]. These ad hoc facilities would not suffice
in protecting exposed countries from an Asian crisis-type crisis in the absence of self insurance.
Furthermore, the selectivity of the swap lines suggests that only countries with solid past record
of governance and significant trade and financial linkages can expect access to such ad hoc
arrangements, on a case by case basis. Moral hazard concerns suggest that the applicability of
these arrangements will remain limited. Mitigating moral hazard should be the prime
responsibility of the international financial institutions, in particular the IMF. Due to the “cherry
picking” nature of the swap lines between central banks, access to IMF lines of credit would
remain a valuable option for many developing countries, but it is an option that countries may
choose to avoid by means of alternative insurance arrangements.
Specifically, regions characterized by deepening trade and financial integration may consider
cooperative regional arrangements, including regional swap-lines and international reserves
pooling agreements. Asia is a good example of a region that stands to gain substantially from
collective regional insurance. Intra-Asian trade has grown rapidly in recent years and this trend is
likely to gather speed in light of the general weakness of the industrialized countries and hence
their diminished appetite for imports. The prospective rebalancing of Asian countries toward
domestic demand should also strengthen intra-regional trade, especially in final goods. The
resulting shift of intra-Asian trade from parts and components to final goods will make trade
among Asian economies less dependent upon final demand from outside the region. While intra5

Asian financial integration lags far behind intra-Asian trade integration, we can expect financial
linkages to grow as the regional economies become financially more developed. A further
impetus for intra-regional financial integration may come from heightened reluctance to invest in
industrialized countries in the wake of the global crisis. Other characteristics of Asian countries
which work in the favor of swap arrangements and regional reserve pooling include high reserveGDP ratios, high saving rates and lingering mistrust of the IMF.

2 Swap Lines and International Reserves
Swap lines may act to stabilize market concerns about the risk of losing control due to
deleveraging pressures, thereby preventing downward pressure on international reserves and the
exchange rate, substituting the need to hoard reserves. This possibly was the case of Korea,
where the introduction of the Fed swap line prevented a replay of the crisis dynamics of 1997
[see Park (2009)]. In these circumstances, access to swap lines would mitigate the need for
Korea to hoard reserves to replace the 60 billion dollars of reserves it used during the first phase
of the crisis. Yet, uncertainty regarding the duration of these swap lines, and lingering concerns
that in the absence of these swap lines the initial level of reserves was insufficient to prevent
crisis dynamics may induce Korea to further accumulate reserves in the future. Therefore,
intuitively, perceptions about the duration of swap lines play a key role in determining the future
path of reserves. To the degree that regional arrangements like the Chiang Mai Initiative offer
pooling schemes of indefinite duration, they may mitigate the urge to hoard reserves. Greater
use of regional swap lines may also reduce excessive hoarding precipitated by the wish to signal
that country’s reserves are above the average of its neighbours [the “keeping with the Joneses”
motive, see Cheung and Qian (2009)].
A related issue is the currency composition of swap lines. There is no reason why swap lines
have to be denominated solely in US dollars. Just as countries typically hold reserves in different
currencies, they could agree to help each other by providing a basket of currencies rather than a
single currency. The denomination of swap lines in non-dollar currencies will speed up the
diversification of reserves away from dollars into other currencies. For example, eurodenominated swap lines will raise the demand for euro reserves since swap lines are ultimately a
mutual promise to provide liquidity support in case of emergencies and that promise will not be
credible in the absence of reserves. For Asian countries, a more realistic scenario is the
6

denomination of swap lines in the currency of a dominant regional economy such as China or
even a real or notional Asian currency. Such development would further speed up the shift away
from dollar reserves and the emergence of an Asia-specific hard currency much like the Europespecific euro. In fact, China's central bank has already entered into yuan-denominated swap
agreements with its counterparts in Korea, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Belarus, Indonesia and
Argentina.5 A number of other central banks have also expressed a willingness to enter into swap
agreements with China. The growing popularity of yuan swaps reflects the rapid emergence of
China as a globally significant trading power. Despite China's financial underdevelopment and
the yuan's restricted convertibility, growing trade with China gives the yuan some intrinsic value.
There is also an intriguing possibility that broadening and deepening of the Chiang Mai
Initiative could result in a more permanent and institutionalized form of regional precautionary
insurance against financial crisis. The Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) was announced by the
finance ministers of ASEAN+3 – ASEAN countries, China, Japan and Korea – in May 2000. In
the wake of the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998, the CMI was designed to address short-term
liquidity problems and to supplement existing international financial arrangements in the event
of a crisis. The initiative consisted of an expanded ASEAN Swap Arrangement (ASA) involving
all ASEAN members, a network of bilateral swap agreements (BSAs) and repurchase facilities
among ASEAN+3. By December 2008, the size of the BSA had increased to $84 billion [Table
1].

[Table 1]

The leaders of ASEAN+3 decided to push for the multilateralization of the CMI in October
2008. Multilateralization means that funds available under the CMI would be managed as a selfmanaged reserve pooling arrangement, governed by a single contract, reducing waste and
inefficiency. At this time, the countries also agreed that ASEAN's share of contribution in the
total reserve pool would be 20% while the combined share of PRC, Korea, and Japan would be
80%. In February 2009, the ASEAN+3 finance ministers agreed to expand the pool of foreigncurrency reserves from $80 billion to $120 billion. The most substantive progress toward
5

More specifically, the central banks of China and South Korea signed a 180 billion yuan currency
swap framework agreement on December 12, 2008. The People's Bank of China entered into a 200 billion
yuan swap with the Hong Kong Monetary Authority on January 20, 2009; an 80 billion yuan agreement
with Malaysia's central bank on February 8; a 20 billion yuan deal with the National Bank of Belarus on
March 11, a 100 billion yuan swap with the central bank of Indonesia on March 24, and an 80 billion
yuan swap with the central bank of Argentina. The swaps will allow the parties to avoid using dollars in
trade between them and China.
7

multilateralization took place in May 2009, when the finance ministers agreed upon the
governing mechanisms and implementation plan for the CMI multilateralization (CMIM). The
politically trick issue of relative contributions among the big three powers was resolved, with
Japan and PRC each contributing 32% and Korea contributing 16%. Other details such as voting
rights, decision making rules, and operational issues such as activation of short-term liquidity in
case of a sovereign financial emergency were also agreed upon.6
Especially significant was the agreement to establish an independent regional surveillance unit
which would monitor the region's economies and support CMIM decision-making. While the
formal unit is being set up, the ASEAN Secretariat (ASEC) and ADB are working out an interim
surveillance arrangement based on existing surveillance process. The ASEAN+3 independent
regional surveillance unit is intended to supplement rather than replace the IMF. It is primarily a
mechanism for objective economic monitoring. Under the CMIM, a country can draw up to 20%
of its quota without being subject to IMF conditionality, although the duration is restricted to a
maximum of 6 months. Should a country avail itself of its full quota, 80% of the total amount
disbursed would be tied to an IMF program. Once the regional surveillance unit becomes fully
operational, the amount that member countries can withdraw without IMF conditionality could
be increased. The collective CMIM agreement on the process of managing a regional pool of
international reserves marks a major milestone in institutionalizing Asian regionalism.

3 The global financial crisis, the dollar standard’s sustainability, and alternative options
The global financial crisis, which originated in market failures in the housing and financial
markets of the US, brings into question the desirability and feasibility of pegging Asian
currencies to the dollar as the keystone for the regional stability and future growth. The alleged
gains from pegging to the dollar are debatable, and there is scarcity of studies that tested it
carefully against alternative hypotheses. The instability of the dollar against the euro and other
key currencies implies that pegging to the dollar would increase the domestic currency volatility
against the euro, pound and other currencies. This effect may be sub-optimal for countries that
trade heavily with the euro bloc and experience an increase in such trade over time. One way to
deal with this issue is to evaluate what would have been the optimal weight of achieving real
exchange stability against a basket of currencies that reflect the actual trading patterns of the
6

For the full text of the agreement, please visit http://www.asean.org/22536.htm.
8

region.
Recent studies dealing with the Trilemma [Aizenman, Chinn and Ito (2010)] are consistent
with the notion that emerging market countries have moved towards the Trilemma middle
ground, associated with greater exchange rate flexibility and limited but growing financial
integration, buffered by sizable reserve holdings.7 This has enabled them to retain a degree of
monetary autonomy, even as financial integration continued – e,g, Indian and China before the
crisis, a time that both countries grew rapidly while maintaining controlled financial openness
and limited exchange rate flexibility. During that time, the Chinese yuan appreciated significantly,
without obvious downside effects. The onset of the crisis led to the renewed pegging of the yuan
to the dollar, but is not self-evident that returning to a rigid peg to the dollar is desirable and
sustainable in the post-crisis period. Applying data predating the crisis, Aizenman et al. (2010)
failed to find evidence that countries which pegged their currency to the dollar preformed on
average better than those that allowed controlled flexibility. During crises, many developing
countries found that allowing the real exchange rate and monetary policy to initially take the
brunt of the required adjustment to a crisis facilitated the adjustment process. We will look at the
recent history of the region to assess the potential gains from prolonging the dollar standard.
3.1 Korea's Financial Turmoil in the Second Half of 2008: The Use of Both Reserves and
Swaps
During the second half of 2008, Korea used both FX reserves and swap lines to cope with
turbulence in its FX and financial markets. The primary transmission channel which spread the
global financial crisis to Asia was the collapse of trade and exports. By and large, Asian financial
systems were relatively immune from the turbulence which afflicted their counterparts in the US
and EU. However, in the case of Korea, the global crisis also had adverse effects on both the real
economy and financial system. During the course of 2008, Korea suffered an unusually high
degree of financial instability relative to other countries in the region. The instability reached its
peak during October when the Korean won teetered on the verge of collapse [Figure 1] and the
stock market plunged by one third. [Figure 2] There was even speculation of a repeat of the
Asian crisis which had wrought havoc on the Korean economy. The financial stress was puzzling
in light of Korea's relatively strong macroeconomic fundamentals – e.g. GDP growth, current
account balance and fiscal balance – and microeconomic fundamentals – e.g. balance sheets of
7

Both trends are more pronounced for the emerging markets than for the non-emerging developing countries.
9

financial institutions and corporations. Equally puzzling was the fact that Korea's fundamentals
were at least as strong as and certainly not visibly worse than those of comparable countries such
as NIEs or the ASEAN-4, which were spared such financial turbulence. Furthermore, Korea was
the world's sixth largest holder of FX reserves when it entered the crisis, and its reserve level
comfortably passed conventional tests of reserve adequacy.
[Figure 1], [Figure 2]
The most likely answer to the puzzle lies in Korea's exceptionally high degree of capital degree
liberalization. For example, there are almost no restrictions on foreign residents' purchase and
sale of domestic equities or domestic financial institutions' foreign borrowing. Growing financial
integration kicked off by liberalization since the Asian financial crisis led to rapid increase in the
share of foreign investments in Korean’s stock market capitalization, from less than 5% in 1992
to more than 35% by 2005. In addition, the share of equity investment in total foreign investment
is third highest among 30 OECD economies, at 39.0%. [Figure 3] The large exposure of Korean
banks to short-term foreign loans arose from their taking counterparty positions to the purchases
of forward exchange contracts by shipbuilders keen to hedge themselves against exchange rate
risk. The rollover rate on those loans fell sharply as a result of the global credit crunch and the
resulting repayment pressures precipitated the freefall of the won in October. Hedge funds and
other foreign residents withdrew from Korean equities in droves to reinforce their balance sheets
back home as the global financial crisis intensified. Total net sales of equities by foreign
residents exceeded 43 trillion won during 2008. Those sales were the main drivers of the yearlong plunge of the equity market and also contributed to the won debacle in October. The Korean
experience should serve as a cautionary tale for other developing Asian countries about the
substantial risks of capital account liberalization. Countries which are more open toward crossborder capital flows will suffer disproportionately when foreign residents withdraw their funds
from the local financial markets.

[Figure 3]

The Korean government took a number of decisive policy actions to contain the financial
turmoil. The Bank of Korea (BOK) spent around US$60 billion trying to defend the won but
without much success. [Figure 4] There were some reservations about how BOK handled its FX
market intervention, especially in terms of communicating its intentions clearly the financial
markets, but the upshot is that even sustained and massive intervention failed to restore stability.
The centre-piece of a bailout package the government finally unveiled in response to the
10

mounting market pressure was a $100 billion, three-year government guarantee for banks’ debt
raised abroad before July 2009. This sum is more than sufficient to cover Korean banks’ foreign
debt maturing by June 2009, estimated by the Korean Ministry of Strategy and Finance to be
about $80 billion. Yet, despite the large stockpile of FX reserves used to finance the bailout
package, market pressures did not subside. The limited effectiveness of high reserves-to-GDP
ratio in containing market pressures reflects Korea's vulnerability to balance sheet effects due to
its heavy short term borrowing in foreign currencies as well as its vulnerability to massive
deleveraging by foreign portfolio investors during the global crisis [see Aizenman (2009)].
[Figure 4]
Korea regained a measure of stability in its financial markets only after the Bank of Korea
entered into a $30 billion swap agreement with the US Federal Reserve. The BOK-Fed swap
agreement came into effect on 30 October 2008 and was part of a network of $30 billion
agreements that the Fed simultaneously signed with the central banks of 4 emerging markets –
Brazil, Korea, Mexico and Singapore. The initial swap arrangement was in effect until April
2009 but has been twice extended since then, up to February 2010. The facilities were designed
to support the provision of US dollar liquidity to fundamentally sound and well-managed
emerging markets which faced the risk of shortage of US dollar funding due to unfavorable
global liquidity conditions. Korea made the swap deal as part of efforts to secure secondary
support measures, not because of any shortage of reserves. Further bolstering market confidence
were two additional swap agreements reached with China and Japan in mid-December 2008,
which expanded Korea's existing swap lines with the two countries to US$30 billion each. A
simplified overall picture of the Korean experience is as follows: a country with an ample pool of
reserves tries to defend its currency with massive but ineffective FX market intervention, and is
ultimately rescued by swap agreements.

4 Empirical Analysis of Swap Lines
In this section, we report and discuss the results of our empirical analysis of swap lines. Our
analysis is based on cross-country data. The swap lines since December 2007 to date involve 24
countries as shown in Table 2. Collectively, the economic size of the swap providers and
recipients is equal to 85 percent of world GDP. In term of the initial swap amounts, the US
Federal Reserve has been the largest provider, extending 14 swap lines, 755 billion USD in total.
11

The People Bank of China has provided swap lines to 6 countries (650 billion Yuan) and the
European Central Bank commits 4 swap lines (31.5 billion Euros).
[Table 2]
While the swap lines provided by the Federal Reserve to the ECB, the Bank of Japan, and the
Bank of England are by far the largest, many believe that the swap commitments among these
central banks could be even larger. However, the claim that some of the swap lines are infinite or
unlimited is probably overstating the evidence. The swap lines involved the OECD countries are
more elastic at the margin, but they are most likely not infinite. To illustrate, the global swap
size is constrained by a multiple the global GDP, but practicality suggests that they are elastic at
the range that OECD countries will use them. Better institutional quality means lower moral
hazard which should imply more elastic access to larger swap lines, which seems to be the case
for the swap lines between the OECD countries.8
Figure 5 plots the extent and the use of swap lines in the last two years. The earliest columns
measure the size of the swap lines. The remaining columns correspond to the actual use of the
swap lines (subject to data availability). The figure reveals that the usage of the Federal
Reserve’s dollar swaps has been limited. Since the announcements of dollar swap liquidity,9 the
amounts outstanding have declined across the swap receivers. Canada, Brazil, Singapore, and
New Zealand have never used the dollar swaps, and the total dollar swap liquidity extended had
dropped to 57 billion USD as of September 30, 2009. These swap lines were originally
authorized through February 1, 2010, but has recently been re-scheduled to October 30, 2009.
[Figure 5]
We first look at the percentage changes (%) of key variables from December 2007 to October
2009 between receivers and non-receivers of swap lines. Table 3 reports for 86 developing

8

Swap lines resemble unsecured sovereign debt, and may be constrained by similar considerations.
Hence, factors that explain better access to the sovereign borrowing may also explain easier access to
larger swap lines. These factors include low volatility, higher trade openness, credibility associated with
history of low incidence of default and good growth prospects, quality of institutions, etc. All these
factors play a role in explaining the differential patterns of access and the use of swap lines.
9
December 12, 2007 for the ECB and the Swiss National Bank, and 29 October 2008 for the other
central banks, except the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan, where the dollar swaps are implicitly
always in place. The figure provides the amount of outstanding swap lines (billion USD) between the
U.S. Federal Reserve and foreign central banks as reported in the Federal Reserve System Monthly
Report on Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet.
12

countries (of which 8 are swap receivers)10 the changes in foreign exchange reserves, nominal
depreciation, short-term external debts and export credits (standard errors in brackets). The data
are taken from the Economist Intelligent Unit (EIU) database. Since the end of 2007, in
percentage term, the swap receivers on average accumulated larger foreign reserves, experienced
more nominal depreciation, de-leveraged bigger amount of short-term debts and witnessed more
decline in export credits. The evidence of short-term debts and export credits seem to suggest
that the swap receivers are more exposed to the (lagged) effects of a general deterioration of
conditions in global short-term funding markets.
[Table 3]
Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2009) find that currencies of countries holding more
reserves relative to M2 have tended to appreciate in the crisis, whereas those with smaller foreign
reserves have depreciated. They also argue that the dollar swaps to the emerging markets have
been largely symbolic since Brazil, Korea, and Singapore already had foreign reserves more than
predicted.11 Our evidence in Table 3 suggests that, as a group, the EM swap recipients have
experienced significantly larger nominal currency depreciation and reduction of short-term debt
stocks. Given that most of the EM’s short-term external debts are foreign currency denominated,
the swap liquidity might have been in place to backstopping these emerging markets, substituting
for a large hoarding of foreign exchange reserves in a short period of time.
There is also a noticeable decline in export credits of developing countries, probably reflecting
the effects of adverse global short-term credit market conditions on the real side of global
economy, namely international trade in goods and services. The finance literature consistently
shows the importance of trade credits as a financing vehicle between the buyers and sellers, as
well as the source of external finance along with bank loans.12 For all the emerging markets,

10

The eight countries are Argentina, Brazil, Hong Kong, Hungary, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, and

Poland.
11

They predict the foreign reserves/GDP ratio as a function of financial openness, the exchange rate
regime, monetary depth (M2/GDP ratio), a dummy for the advanced countries, and the ability to issue
debt in one’s own currency. From their estimation, Mexico and Hungary, however, had fewer foreign
reserves than predicted and their swap lines may have had a more substantive impact beyond mere
signaling.
12
See Preve and Sama-Allende (2007). In the context of international transactions, Jinjarak (2007)
provides some evidence that lagged trade credits forecast import, but not vice versa.
13

export credits account for 10 percent of the short-term external debts.13
We explore further the relationship between swap agreements and international trade for all
possible countries. Table 4 reports a seemingly unrelated regression of swap amount (dependent
variable) on the size of bilateral trade between the country of swap providers (the Federal
Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the People Bank of China) and swap recipients (22
countries in Table 2) and non recipients (191 countries). The size of bilateral trade is the total
sum from 2004 to 2008. The swap amount is in the currency of providers. The estimating
equation is given by

SWAPUSA →i = a USA

EXPORTSUSA →i
213

∑ EXPORTS

+ b USA

USA →i

i

SWAPEUR →i = a EUR

∑ IMPORTS

+ ε USA,i

USA ←i

i

EXPORTSEUR →i
213

∑ EXPORTS

+ b EUR

EUR →i

IMPORTSEUR ←i
213

∑ IMPORTS

+ ε EUR ,i

EUR ←i

i

SWAPCHN →i = a CHN

IMPORTSUSA ←i
213

i

EXPORTSCHN →i
213

∑ EXPORTS

+ bCHN

CHN →i

i

IMPORTSCHN ←i
213

∑ IMPORTS

+ εCHN,i

CHN ←i

i

In using the above specification, we focus on the role of swap lines extended during the latest
financial crisis. This approach can be considered as a version of gravity model of international
lending [e.g. Rose and Spiegel (2004) and Aizenman and Pasricha (2010)] in which conditions
that lead two countries to be more integrated are likely to lead to more financial activity between
them. The key variable for swap liquidity provision is a trade link as measured by the trade
shares of swap recipients in the provider’s total trade. 14
[Table 4-a]; [Table 4-b]
The estimation results in Table 4-a show that the importance of swap recipients as an export
destination is associated with a larger amount of swap liquidity extended from the US Federal
Reserve and the People Bank of China. In the case of the dollar swap lines, the results seem to be
driven by the presence of Japan and the euro area, which account for 7 and 20 percent of the US

13

This ratio dropped from 26 percent in 1997, presumably due to the Asian financial crisis.
Aizenman and Pasricha (2010) found that for the US, both the trade and financial exposure to
developing countries explains the recipients of FED’s swap lines. Unfortunately, data limitations prevent
us from controlling for the financial exposure of the country supplying the swap lines to the swap line
recipient country.
14

14

exports, respectively. For the swap liquidity extended by the People Bank of China, the
association between the swap size and export share is quite systematic: Hong Kong, Korea,
Indonesia, Malaysia, and Argentina account for 12, 4, .9, 1.1 and .2 percent of the China’s total
exports, respectively. An issue in Table 4-a is that most of the dependent variables are zero, with
the exceptions of about a dozen countries, the few recipients of swap lines. Therefore, we redid
and report in Table 4-b the regression results using the Probit and Tobit estimations, confirming
that bilateral trade ties are strongly associated with the dollar swap lines.
It is useful to check whether the marginal increase in bilateral trade (i.e. % increase in bilateral
trade in the previous 5 years, as a measure of swap provider's propensity to trade) is associated
with the presence of swap agreements and their size. Using the SUR specification in Table 4-a,
we address this issue first by using OLS estimation and separating trade shares below and above
1%. The estimation results continue to show that larger export destinations tend to receive larger
swap lines from the US and China. Next, we replace the bilateral trade shares with the marginal
increases in bilateral trade. Specifically, we check whether an increase in China’s exports to
Argentina relative to an increase in China’s total exports from 2004 to 2008 increase the size of
swap lines extended from China. The results suggest that the marginal increase of bilateral trade
over the past five years is associated with the swap liquidity extensions by both the US and
China.
During the financial turmoil of 2008, the frequent concern voiced towards the emerging
markets has been on the possibility that their size of foreign exchange reserves might have been
too low relative to GDP and outstanding short-term external debts. Indeed, history has never
been short on providing the evidence of concurrent external liquidity and currency runs. Figure 6
plots the nominal depreciation (%) from July 2008 to June 2009 against [ST Debts - FX
Reserves]/ FX Reserves (%) as of July 2008 for 23 emerging markets.15 The figure also provides
a linear prediction (quarterly data) specification (III) of Table 5.
[Figure 6]; [Table 5]
As noted earlier, Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2009) find that currencies of countries
holding more reserves have tended to appreciate in the crisis. The estimation results in Table 5
show that, as expected, larger nominal depreciation is associated with larger [ST Debts – FX
15

We narrow to these 23 countries as they make up the widely-followed S&P and MSCI emergingmarket bond and equity indices.
15

Reserves]/FX Reserves and lower FX Reserves/GDP ratios. Both coefficient estimates are,
however, statistically weak. If we run the regression with only one of these two variables, each
variable has become highly significant. As of July 2008, the correlation between [ST Debts – FX
Reserves]/FX Reserves and FX Reserves/GDP is -.43, which is rather high. Emerging markets
with larger external financing gap tended to hold smaller amount of foreign reserves at the onset
of the 2008 crisis.
The swap recipients in Figure 6 seem to be indistinguishable from the non-recipients in terms
of their nominal depreciation and short-term financing gap. Focusing on the recipient group,
however, shows some difference between the recipients of China’s swaps (Argentina, Indonesia,
and Malaysia) and the other swap recipients. In relation to the prediction line, the recipients of
China’s swap have experienced smaller actual nominal depreciation than predicted. On the other
hand the recipients of the US’s swaps (Brazil, Korea, and Mexico) and the ECB’s swaps
(Hungary and Poland) have had larger actual depreciation than the predicted ones. One
interpretation of this evidence is that the China’s swap liquidity has been complementary to
international reserves as an effective insurance against the instability of its recipient’s currency,
while the swaps from the Federal Reserve and the ECB have play a substitute role to the foreign
reserves accumulation of the emerging markets. 16
A limitation of our analysis is that, at this stage, we are unable to control for the factors
accounting for foreign currency pressure – for example, deleveraging pressures and drop in net
exports, as well as country-specific balance sheet exposures. Ideally, one needs to control for
these variables in order to understand the marginal contribution of swap lines.17 Figure 5 and our
estimation results are consistent with the possibility that the introduction of swap lines is more
important than the actual use of these lines. This would be the case if countries value to
flexibility granted by the swap line, providing the option value of using it if the crisis would
16

An alternative interpretation is that Argentina, Indonesia, and Malaysia are less integrated with
the global financial system Brazil, Korea, and Mexico; thereby the first group faced smaller effective
deleveraging pressure. This suggests that controlling financial integration, balance sheet exposure, and
deleveraging would provide more satisfactory explanation of the cross country variation in exchange rate
deprecation and international reserves loses during the 2008-9 crisis.
17
To illustrate this point, deeper depletion of international reserves by Korea relative to Brazil may
reflect deeper drop of net exports and greater deleveraging and exposure to short term foreign currency
debt facing Korea than Brazil, inducing Korea to adjust both by depletion of 60 Billion US $ of its IR, as
well as sizable depreciation, at times when Brazil’s adjustment was mostly via the depreciation of the
Real.
16

deepen. Yet, the actual use of a swap line may be associated with a stigma, implying that
countries would prefer to delay to use of swap line as a last resort (or at least as a secondary
resort).18 Hence, somewhat paradoxically, countries that are eager to have access to swap lines in
a crisis may prefer to refrain from using it.

5 Concluding Observations

One key stylized fact of global FX reserve management during the global financial crisis has
been the proliferation of swap agreements between large central banks such as the US Fed,
PBOC and ECB on one hand and the central banks of emerging markets on the other hand. The
most well-known of such agreements is the US$30 billion agreements between the US Fed and
the central banks of four systematically important emerging markets with strong fundamentals –
Brazil, Korea, Mexico and Singapore – which came into effect in October 2008. An important
issue which arises in connection with the swap deals is the extent to which they can mitigate the
precautionary or self-insurance motive underlying the unprecedented reserve accumulation in
developing countries immediately prior to the global crisis. At a broader level, swap lines can
substitute for reserves since the two serve the same basic purpose – they are both international
liquidity which can be called upon in case of unexpected shortages of international liquidity.
Upon closer inspection, there are clear limits to substitutability between swaps and reserves.
Above all, the credibility of reserves in the eyes of financial markets is ultimately determined by
the credibility of the central bank holding the reserves while the credibility of swap lines is
determined by the credibility of the central bank providing the liquidity support. Of course, one
may question the credibility of the US Fed in light of the fact that the global crisis originated in
the US. However, the somewhat paradoxical appreciation of the dollar at the slightest sign of
global financial distress – e.g. Dubai crisis – attests to the enduring safe-haven status of the dollar.
Before we can meaningfully assess the prospective impact of swap agreements on reserve
accumulation, it is necessary to look at the nature of those agreements as well as their
determinants. This has motivated the empirical analysis of this paper. Overall, the evidence
indicates that by and large swap lines are extended only to fundamentally sound and wellmanaged emerging markets. Crucially, sound fundamentals include healthy levels of FX reserves.
18

The crisis suggests lingering stigma concerns associated with accessing IMF credit lines, with
some countries preferring using ad hock Central Banks swap lines before using IMF credit lines.
17

The highly selective nature of swap recipients means that a majority of developing countries will
not have access to swap facilities. For those countries, swap lines cannot possibly be a substitute
for reserve accumulation for the simple reason that the central banks of large countries are
unwilling to provide them with swap lines. Of course, there are other substitutes for individual
reserve accumulation such as regional reserve pooling arrangement or access to IMF credit lines.
More fundamentally, our evidence shows that large central banks tend to extend swap facilities
only to those countries with which they have strong financial and trade linkages. In other words,
while swaps can contribute to the global public good of global financial stability, in fact large
central banks provide liquidity support only when it is in the self-interest of their respective
countries to do so. For example, as noted earlier, exposure of US banks was the single most
important explanation for why the US entered into swap deals with Brazil, Korea, Mexico and
Singapore.
In the context of swap lines motivated by the self-interest of providing countries, a particularly
interesting result from our empirical analysis is the strong influence of trade, in particular exports,
in the determination of recipient countries. That is, large central banks tend to enter into swap
agreements with their counterparts in countries which are important export markets. Although
this pattern holds for large central banks in general, what is striking is that it helps to explain the
recent rise of the PBOC as a major provider of swap facilities. For all its spectacular growth,
China's financial system is still under-developed and lags far behind the country's real economy.
The depth, breadth, liquidity and sophistication of its financial markets fall far below that of
financial center countries, which explains why China invests so much of its savings in US
financial markets. Furthermore, the credibility of the PBOC is not noticeably greater than that of
central banks in other emerging markets even though it sits atop the world's largest stockpile of
reserves. Nevertheless, the emergence of China as a globally significant trading power gives the
yuan some intrinsic value despite the country's financial under-development. In particular, the
yuan can be used as to pay for imports from China, which is large and growing in many
countries given the sustained rapid growth of China's exports. The inclusion of countries such as
Argentina and Belarus, not known for strong fundamentals nor sound management, among
PBOC's swap recipient countries points to the overarching dominance of export markets as the
key criterion. Be that as it may, the growth of yuan-dominated swap lines may be a precursor to
the eventual emergence of the yuan as a new reserve currency.
18

The Korean experience is highly significant because it is a real-world case of a country
simultaneously using both FX reserves and swap deals to deal with financial instability during
the global financial crisis. One possible interpretation of the Korean saga is that more is always
better when it comes to reserves since even an ample stockpile of reserves failed to prevent sharp
currency depreciation. However, such a misinterpretation would be misguided and inappropriate
since it is doubtful whether more reserves would have made any difference. When market
confidence is shattered, FX market intervention to stabilize exchange rate becomes ineffective,
even if the economy has sound fundamentals. That is, reserves fail to perform their precautionary
or self-insurance function when tail-end risks are realized. In fact, in the case of Korea, declining
reserves themselves intensified market fears and concerns, forming a vicious cycle in which
adverse market sentiment drive down reserves via FX market intervention and the decline in
reserves, in turn, further dampens market sentiment. The timing of market movements suggests
that BOK's three swap agreements, in particular the agreement with the US Fed, played a pivotal
role in calming down the growing market hysteria over a possible dollar shortage. Quite clearly,
the swap agreement would have been much less effective in the absence of strong fundamentals,
including healthy reserve levels. A plausible interpretation of the Korean experience seems to be
that swap lines which have important signaling effects, such as the BOK-Fed deal, can restore
the precautionary or self-insurance function of reserves. This function can temporarily freeze up
during severe shocks but the Korean experience shows that swap deals can revive the function by
restoring market confidence.
One big puzzle in Asia's FX reserve management in the global crisis period is the virtual
invisibility of the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI). It was precisely the type of financial turbulence
visited upon Korea in the second half of 2008, precipitated by market jitters about prospective
shortage of dollar liquidity, that the architects of CMI had in mind. However, Korea turned to the
US Fed for primary support when push came to shove and the country teetered toward a fullfledged financial crisis. Even CMI partners PBOC and Bank of Japan played only a secondary
role and outside the CMI framework at that. What is needed for member countries to make
greater use of the CMI in the future is more concrete and specific governance structure and

19

implementation details.19 Encouragingly, as noted earlier, substantive progress has been made
toward the multilateralization of the CMI (CMIM) since October 2008. In fact, the global
financial crisis has served as a catalyst for CMIM. The resolution of politically sensitive issues
such as the relative share of contributions among member countries, as well as the establishment
of clear conditions for withdrawal of reserves and an independent regional surveillance unit, is
expected to significantly boost the attractiveness of CMI as a source of funds during a crisis.
Despite the progress of CMIM, a range of issues relating to the governance, operations and
technical details of the CMI still remain unresolved. These include, for example, precisely how
withdrawal requests will be evaluated and precisely how funds will be disbursed.
In addition to deepening regional reserve pooling arrangements – i.e. the CMI – another policy
option for mitigating the need for precautionary reserves is to lengthen the duration of swap
agreements. The Korean experience shows that swap agreements can help restore market
confidence at a time of severe crisis. There is an intriguing possibility that swaps can help
maintain market confidence even during normal non-crisis periods. The evidence of our analysis
suggests that swap lines are motivated primarily by the self-interest of provider countries, but in
fact they deliver substantial benefits for both provider and recipient countries. For provider
countries, swaps help to safeguard the economic interests they have in countries to which they
extend swap lines. The interests may take different forms – e.g. the exposure of US banks or a
significant export market – but they can be substantial. For recipient countries, swaps help to
restore financial stability during episodes of extreme financial distress when even large
stockpiles of FX reserves fail to reassure markets. It is entirely possible that swaps are mutually
beneficial not only during crises but also during normal non-crisis periods. Formalizing and
institutionalizing swap lines so that they are transformed from temporary anti-crisis measures to
more long-term mechanisms for liquidity support may dampen the need for precautionary
reserve hoarding.
At a broader level, the desirability of the unprecedented scale and speed of Asia's reserve
accumulation in the pre-crisis period is debatable. According to the dollar standard or Bretton

19

Curiously, the BOJ swaps lines were available to Korea under the CMI, not even tied to the IMFlinkage. Yet, Korea did not ask for them. Apparently, Korea preferred accessing the US FED Swap lines
to accessing swap lines authorized by the CMI.

20

Woods II view, Asia seeks to achieve rapid economic growth by adopting macroeconomic and
exchange rate policies that keep exchange rates very competitive on a sustained basis. A
centerpiece of such policies is systematic intervention in the FX market to purchase US dollars
and de facto pegging to the US dollar. The rapid build-up of reserves may be a visible
consequence of those policies. According to this interpretation, the global financial crisis has
shattered the myth that the dollar standard was sustainable since it benefited both Asia - rapid
growth driven by rapid growth of exports – and the US – which obtained cheap external
financing due to massive Asian purchases of low-yielding US government bonds. Arguably,
some interpret the global crisis as a painful wake-up call that Asian over-production
counterbalanced by US over-consumption is an unsustainable game which harms all countries.
Finally, since financial instability in emerging markets is usually the result of volatile capital
flows and the fundamental purpose of precautionary reserves is to limit financial instability,
some emerging markets may opt to dampen the precautionary accumulation of FX reserves by
controlling volatile capital flows. According to this argument, controlled financial integration
which retains some restrictions on capital flows may limit financial instability, which, in turn,
will limit the need for precautionary FX reserves. One possible solution to sudden stops and
deleveraging may be a Pigovian tax scheme, where inflows of portfolio flows and external
borrowing above a threshold may be taxed at an increasing rate, reflecting the resultant higher
exposure of the central bank to a possible future bailout of the banking system.20 Such a tax
scheme, implemented before banks’ external borrowing takes place, may curtail exposure to the
growing hazard facing the recipient country due to possible de leveraging.21 It may induce the
foreign investor to internalize the externality associated with possible costs of deleveraging, and
reduce the cost of self insurance by funding some of the self insurance.
20

The design of the FDIC deposit insurance scheme in the US may be viewed as generating
outcomes similar to such a Pigovian tax scheme. The FDIC charges insurance premiums on bank deposits
at a rate that ideally should reflect the riskiness of banks’ investments. The insurance premium is akin to a
tax on banks’ borrowing, inducing the bank to internalize the impact of its balance sheet on the possibility
of future bailouts. As with any insurance scheme, care should be taken to deal with the possibility of
moral hazard.
21
It is noteworthy that this tax should apply only to external borrowing in hard currency, and not to
other forms of capital inflows, like equity flows and FDI (foreign purchase of domestic equities and
domestic capital). The differential treatment of the various types of financial inflows follows from the
logic of balance sheet exposure and the original sin: the depreciation of the domestic currency induced by
deleveraging, reduces the foreign currency needed to finance domestic equity deleveraging, but increases
the domestic currency needed to fund deleveraging of foreign currency debt.
21

References
Aizenman, Joshua and Gurnain, Pasricha. "Selective Swap Arrangements and the Global Financial Crisis:
Analysis & Interpretation." International Review of Economics and Finance, 2010, 19 (3), pp. 353365.
Aizenman, Joshua. "Hoarding International Reserves Versus a Pigovian Tax-Cum-Subsidy Scheme:",
2009, NBER working Paper number 15484.
Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee. "International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercantilist Views,
Theory and Evidence," Open Economies Review, 2007, 18 (2), pp. 191-214.
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie Chinn and Hiro Ito. “The emerging global financial architecture: Tracing and
evaluating new patterns of the trilemma configuration,” Journal of International Money and
Finance,2010, 29 (4), pp. 615-641.
Calvo Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart, "Fear Of Floating," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
2002, MIT Press, 117(2), pp. 379-408.
Cheung, Yin-Wong and Qian, Xingwang. "Hoarding of International Reserves: Mrs Machlup's Wardrobe
and the Joneses." Review of International Economics, 2009, 17(4), pp. 824-43.
Dooley, Michael P.; Folkerts-Landau, David and Garber, Peter M. "Bretton Woods Ii Still Defines the
International Monetary System." Pacific Economic Review, 2009, 14(3), pp. 297-311.
Jinjarak, Yothin. "On the Causality between Trade Credits and Imports: Evidence and Possible
Implication for Trade Penalties on Debt Defaults." International Economic Journal, 2007, 21(3), pp.
317-33.
Love, Inessa; Preve, Lorenzo A. and Sarria-Allende, Virginia. "Trade Credit and Bank Credit: Evidence
from Recent Financial Crises." Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 83(2), pp. 453-69.
Obstfeld, Maurice; Shambaugh, Jay C. and Taylor, Alan M. "Financial Instability, Reserves, and Central
Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2009,
99(2), pp. 480-86.
____. "Financial Statability, the Trilemma, and International Reserves." American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Park, Donghyun and Estrada, Gemma. ""Are Developing Asia's Foreign Exchange Reserves Excessive?
An Empirical Investigation," ADB Working Paper No. 170 (August), 2009.
Park, Donghyun. "Beyond Liquidity: New Uses for Developing Asia's Foreign Exchange Reserves,"
ADB Working Paper No. 109 (November), 2007.
Park, Yung-Chul. "Reform of the Global Regulatory System: Perspectives of East Asia's Emerging
Economies," ABCDE World Bank Conference. Seoul, 2009.
Rose, Andrew K. and Spiegel, Mark M. “A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default, and
Credit.” IMF Staff Papers, 2004, 51 (Special Issue), pp. 50-63.

22

Table 1
Swap arrangements under the Chiang Mai Initiative (as of December 2008)
To
China Japan Korea IndonesiaMalaysia PhilippinesSingaporeThailand Total

From
China
3.0
4.0
4.0
1.5
2.0
Japan
3.0
13.0
6.0
1.0
6.0
Korea
4.0
8.0
2.0
1.5
2.0
Indonesia
2.0
Malaysia
1.5
Philippines
0.5
2.0
Singapore
1.0
Thailand
3.0
1.0
Cambodia
Lao PDR
Myanmar
Vietnam
Sub-total 7.0
15.5
23.5
12.0
4.0
10.0
ASEAN Swap Agreement (among the 10 ASEAN countries)
TOTAL

3.0

..

3.0

Source: Elaborations based on Japan's Ministry of Finance website.
Available from:http://www.mof.go.jp/english/index.htm. Accessed: February 2009.

Figure 1
Korean won per US dollar, January 2008 – January 2010

Won/$

1600

1400

1200

1000

800
Jan-08

May-08

Sep-08

Jan-09

23

May-09

Sep-09

2.0
6.0
1.0

Jan-10

9.0

16.5
38.0
18.5
2.0
1.5
2.5
1.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
84.0
2.0
86.0

Figure 2
KOSPI monthly average,, January 2008 – January 2010

Index (4 Jan
1980 = 100)
2,000

1,800

1,600

1,400

1,200

1,000
Jan-08

May-08

Sep-08

Jan-09

May-09

Sep-09

Jan-10

Figure 3
Equity investment as share of total foreign investment, selected OECD countries

% of total foreign
investm ent
50
40
30
20
10
0
LUX

JP N

KOR

A US

USA

GER

FRA

SP A

UKG

CA N

Figure 4
Korea's FX reserves, January 2008 – January 2010

($ billion)
300

250

200

150
Jan-08

May-08

Sep-08

Jan-09

24

May-09

Sep-09

Jan-10

ITA

Table 2
This table provides the initial swap lines provided by the U.S. Federal Reserve (billion USD), the
European Central Bank (billion Euro), and the People Bank of China (billion Yuan).

Country
Argentina
Australia
Brazil
Belarus
Canada
Denmark
ECB
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Malaysia
Norway
New Zealand
Poland
Sweden
Singapore
Switzerland
United Kingdom

FED_USD

ECB_EURO

PBC_CNY
70

30
30
20
30
15
240

15
200
5
1.5
100

120
30
30

180
80

15
15
10
30
30
60
80

25

Figure 5
This figure provides the amount of outstanding swap lines (billion USD) between the U.S. Federal Reserve and foreign central banks as reported
in the Federal Reserve System Monthly Report on Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet. The authorized dates of these dollar swap
liquidity are December 12, 2007 for the ECB and the Swiss National Bank, and 29 October 2008 for the other central banks (except the Bank of
England and the Bank of Japan, where the dollar swaps are implicitly always in place). The earliest columns measure the size of the swap

lines.

300
250
200
150
100
12‐Dec‐07
29‐Oct‐08
31‐Dec‐08
27‐May‐09
24‐Jun‐09
29‐Jul‐09
26‐Aug‐09
30‐Sep‐09
28‐Oct‐09
25‐Nov‐09
30‐Dec‐09

50
0
ECB

JP

UK

SW

AU

CN

SD

BR

KO

MX

SP

27

DK

NW

NZ

Table 3
This table compares percentage changes (%) of key variables from December 2007 to October 2009
between receivers and non-receivers of swap lines. Standard deviations are in brackets. The sample
includes 86 developing countries (of which 8 are swap receivers: Argentina, Brazil, Hong Kong, Hungary,
Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, and Poland). The data are derived from the Economist Intelligent Unit (EIU).

No

Swap Line(s)?
Yes

Diff.

Δforeign Reserves

5.620
[3.875]

14.846
[8.550]

‐9.226
[9.387]

Nominal Depreciation

8.685
[2.044]

18.463
[4.083]

‐9.778
[4.566]

ΔShort‐Term Debts

‐7.768
[3.966]

‐26.130
[6.269]

18.363
[7.418]

ΔExport Credits

‐2.711
[2.173]

‐14.132
[7.688]

11.421
[7.989]

% Change: Dec. 07 ‐ Oct. 09

28

Table 4-a
This table reports a seemingly unrelated regression of swap amount (dependent variable) on the
size of bilateral trade between the country of swap providers (the Federal Reserve, the European
Central Bank, and the People Bank of China) and the receivers (22 countries in Table 2) and non
receivers (191 countries). The size of bilateral trade is the total sum from 2004 to 2008. The
swap amount is in the currency of providers. Standard errors are in parentheses (*,**,*** denotes
statistical significance at 10, 5, 1 percent, respectively). The estimating equation is given by
SWAPUSA→i = aUSA

EXPORTSUSA→i
213

∑EXPORTSUSA→i

+ bUSA

i

SWAPEUR→i = aEUR

EXPORTSEUR→i
213

∑EXPORTS

+ bEUR

EXPORTSCHN→i

∑EXPORTSCHN→i
i

+ εUSA ,i

IMPORTSEUR←i
213

∑IMPORTS

+ εEUR,i

EUR←i

i

213

∑IMPORTSUSA←i
i

EUR→i

SWAPCHN→i = aCHN

IMPORTSUSA←i
213

i

+ bCHN

IMPORTSCHN←i
213

∑IMPORTSCHN←i

+ εCHN,i

i

Trade Share (% of Total), SUR Estimation

Bilateral Trade Shares

USA

EUR

CHN

Exports

1.927**
(0.839)

0.052
(0.122)

2.922***
(1.037)

Imports

‐1.422*
(0.752)

‐0.056
(0.128)

‐2.067***
(0.781)

R‐squared

0.041

0.001

0.038

Countries

213

213

213

Swap lines

11

4

6

29

Table 4-b
This table reports probit and tobit estimation of swap lines (dependent variable) on the size of bilateral trade between the country of swap
providers (the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the People Bank of China) and the receivers (22 countries in Table 2) and non
receivers (191 countries). The size of bilateral trade is the total sum from 2004 to 2008. The swap amount is in the currency of providers.
Standard errors are in parentheses (*,**,*** denotes statistical significance at 10, 5, 1 percent, respectively).
Specification

Probit Estimation

Tobit Estimation

Bilateral Trade Shares

USA

EURO Zone

China

USA

EURO Zone

China

% of Total Exports

0.220**
(0.109)

0.281
(0.505)

0.050
(0.072)

25.479*
(13.600)

5.966
(10.669)

14.920
(17.884)

% of Total Imports

-0.197*
(0.110)

-0.308
(0.553)

-0.031
(0.056)

-22.028*
(13.176)

-6.521
(11.682)

-9.475
(13.845)

Pseudo R-squared

0.0705

0.0114

0.0107

0.0315

0.0075

0.0071

Countries

213

213

213

213

213

213

Swap lines

11

4

6

11

4

6

30

Table 5

ST Debts-Foreign Reserves
Foreign Reserves
and
of July 2008 (explanatory
GDP
Foreign Reserves
variables) are associated with the nominal depreciation during June 2008 to June 2009 (dependent
variable). The sample includes 23 emerging markets (with quarterly data and included in MSCI).
Standard errors are in parentheses (*,**,*** denotes statistical significance at 10, 5, 1 percent,
respectively).

This table tests whether

(I)
(SE‐IR)/IR

.21

(II)

(III)

(.09)**

IR/GDP

‐.37

(.19)*

.16

(.10)

‐.24

(.20)

R‐Squared

.19

.15

.24

Countries

23

23

23

Figure 6
This figure plots the nominal depreciation (%) from July 2008 to June 2009

against the

ST Debts-Foreign Reserves
(%) as of July 2008. The 23 countries
Foreign Reserves

Nominal Depreciation from July 2008 to June 2009
0
20
40
60

below make up the S&P and MSCI emerging bond and equity indices. The
linear prediction (using quarterly data) is given by specification (III) in Table
5.

PO
HN

RS
BR

MX

CB

TK
CZ

KO

IS

ID
SA
IN
MC
AG
TW
MY
PE
EY

PH
TH

CL

CH

-100

-50
0
[ST Debts - Foreign Reserves]/Foreign Reserves ... as of July 2008

31

50

