NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVOLUNTARY UNEMPLOYMENT AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Lawrence J. Christiano
Mathias Trabandt
Karl Walentin
Working Paper 15801
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15801

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

We are grateful for the advice and comments of Gadi Barlevy, Marco Bassetto, Jeff Campbell, Mikael
Carlsson, Ferre De Graeve, Martin Eichenbaum, Jonas Fisher, Jordi Gali and Matthias Kehrig. We
have also benefited from comments at the Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control Conference
on Frontiers in Structural Macroeconomic Modeling: Thirty Years after "Macroeconomics and Reality"
and Five Years after "Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy",
Hitotsubashi University, Tokyo, Japan, January 23 2010. The views expressed in this paper are solely
the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Executive
Board of the European Central Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Lawrence J. Christiano, Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Involuntary Unemployment and the Business Cycle
Lawrence J. Christiano, Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin
NBER Working Paper No. 15801
March 2010, Revised December 2019
JEL No. E02,E3,E5,J2,J6
ABSTRACT
Can a model with limited labor market insurance explain standard macro and labor market data jointly?
We construct a monetary model in which: i) the unemployed are worse o§ than the employed, i.e.
unemployment is involuntary and ii) the labor force participation rate varies with the business cycle.
To illustrate key features of our model, we start with the simplest possible framework. We then integrate
the model into a medium-sized DSGE model and show that the resulting model does as well as existing
models at accounting for the response of standard macroeconomic variables to monetary policy shocks
and two technology shocks. In addition, the model does well at accounting for the response of the
labor force and unemployment rate to these three shocks.

Lawrence J. Christiano
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-christiano@northwestern.edu

Karl Walentin
Sveriges Riksbank
103 37 Stockholm
Sweden
karl.walentin@riksbank.se

Mathias Trabandt
Freie Universität Berlin
Department of Economics
Boltzmannstrasse 20
14195 Berlin
Germany
mathias.trabandt@gmail.com

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15801

1. Introduction
Can a model with limited labor market insurance explain standard macro and labor market
data jointly? To answer this question, we construct a monetary model in which: the unemployed are worse o§ than the employed, i.e. unemployment is involuntary and the labor force
participation rate varies with the business cycle. We investigate whether the resulting model
fits standard real and nominal macro data and unemployment and labor force participation
data in response to monetary policy and technology shocks.1
Recently, the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate have been discussed prominently in the light of the Great Recession. A shortcoming of standard monetary
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models is that they are silent about these
important variables. Work has begun on the task of introducing unemployment into monetary DSGE models. The Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides search and matching approach
of unemployment represents a leading framework and has been integrated into monetary
models by a number of authors.2
However, the approaches taken to date have several important shortcomings. First, they
assume the existence of perfect consumption insurance against labor market outcomes, so
that consumption is the same for employed and non-employed workers.3 With this kind of
insurance, a worker is delighted to be unemployed because it is an opportunity to enjoy leisure
without a drop in consumption.4 In other words, unemployment in these models is voluntary
rather than involuntary. Second, it is generally assumed that labor force participation is
constant and exogenous. This assumption is at odds with the business cycle properties of
1

We are interested in a monetary environment since it allows us to study the general equilibrium repercussions between e.g. unemployment, inflation and nominal interest rates. In addition, monetary models such
as Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005, CEE) and Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2004,
ACEL) have proved to be useful to account for VAR-based evidence for real and nominal variables in response to monetary as well as technology shocks. The model features developed in CEE and ACEL have
become standard ingredients in modern business cycle models, see e.g. Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007) and
many others. Integrating our model of unemployment into such an environment therefore provides a useful
empirical test for our approach to the labor market in general.
2
Examples include Blanchard and Galí (2010), Campolmi and Gnocchi (2016) Christiano, Ilut, Motto
and Rostagno (2008), Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2011b), Christo§el, Costain, de Walque, Kuester,
Linzert, Millard, and Pierrard (2009), Christo§el, and Kuester (2008), Christo§el, Kuester and Linzert
(2009), den Haan, Ramey and Watson (2000), Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2009), Groshenny (2009), Krause,
Lopez-Salido and Lubik (2008), Lechthaler, Merkl and Snower (2010), Sala, Söderström and Trigari (2008),
Sveen and Weinke (2008, 2009), Thomas (2011), Trigari (2009) and Walsh (2005).
3
Gornemann, Kuester and Nakajima (2016) model unemployment in a search and matching framework
allowing for household heterogeneity in terms of wealth in an incomplete-market setting, i.e. emphasizing
self-insurance against unemployment while abstracting from the labor force participation decision. The main
focus of Gorneman et al. (2016) is on the distributional e§ects of monetary policy.
4
The drop in utility reflects that models typically assume preferences that are additively separable in
consumption and labor or that have the King, Plosser, Rebelo (1988) form. Examples include all papers
cited in footnote 2.

1

the labor force participation rate, especially during the Great Recession.5 Moreover, it also
appears important to restrict our models to be consistent with the endogenous choice of
agents whether or not to participate in the labor market, see e.g. Veracierto (2008).6
To remedy these limitations, we pursue an approach to model the labor market that
has not been used in the monetary DSGE literature. Our approach follows the work of
Hopenhayn and Nicolini (1997) and others, in which finding a job requires exerting a privately
observed e§ort.7 In this type of environment, the higher utility enjoyed by employed workers
is necessary for people to have the incentive to search for and keep jobs.8 Moreover, our
approach implies that workers take an optimal decision whether or not to join the labor force.
In other words, the labor force participation margin in our framework responds endogenously
to business cycle shocks.
We define unemployment the way it is defined by the agencies that collect the data. To
be o¢cially unemployed a person must assert that she (i) has recently taken concrete steps
to secure employment and (ii) is currently available for work.9 To capture (i) we assume
that people who wish to be employed must undertake a costly e§ort. Our model has the
implication that a person who asserts (i) and (ii) enjoys more utility if she finds a job than if
she does not, i.e., unemployment is involuntary. Empirical evidence appears to be consistent
with the notion that unemployment is in practice more of a burden than a blessing.10 For
example, Chetty and Looney (2007) and Gruber (1997) find that U.S. workers su§er roughly
a 10 percent drop in consumption when they lose their job. Also, there is a substantial
literature which purports to find evidence that insurance against labor market outcomes is
5

According to the CPS, the labor force participation rate has fallen by 3% in the relevant time period,
from a peak of 66.4% in January 2007 to 63.6% in April 2012 (these numbers refer to population 16 years
and over, seasonally adjusted).
6
When allowing for endogenous participation, Veracierto (2008) finds that the canonical DiamondMortensen-Pissarides search model implemented in an RBC setting counterfactually implies i) procyclical
unemployment and ii) labor force participation that is almost perfectly correlated with GDP.
7
An early paper that considers unobserved e§ort is Shavell and Weiss (1979). Our approach is also
closely related to the e¢ciency wage literature, as in Alexopoulos (2004). The present paper is also related
to Landais, Michaillat and Saez (2012) who study the cyclicality of optimal unemployment insurance in a real
model with imperfect labor market insurance. However, the authors barely spell out the macro implications
of their approach. In contrast to these authors, we study the implications of limited labor market insurance
in a monetary model and, more importantly, examine the ability of the approach to explain actual macroand labor market data in response to technology and monetary policy shocks quantitatively.
8
Lack of perfect insurance in practice probably reflects other factors too, such as adverse selection.
Alternatively, Kocherlakota (1996) explores lack of commitment as a rationale for incomplete insurance.
Lack of perfect insurance is not necessary for the unemployed to be worse o§ than the employed (see
Rogerson and Wright, 1988).
9
See the Bureau of Labor Statistics website, http://www.bls.gov/cps/cps_htgm.htm#unemployed, for
an extended discussion of the definition of unemployment, including the survey questions used to determine
a household’s employment status.
10
There is a substantial sociological literature that associates unemployment with an increased likelihood
of suicide and domestic violence.

2

imperfect. An early example is Cochrane (1991). These observations motivate our third
defining characteristic of unemployment: (iii) a person looking for work is worse o§ if they
fail to find a job than if they find one.11
To highlight the mechanisms in our model, we first introduce it into the simplest possible
framework. In our model, workers gather into “households” for the purpose of partially
ensuring themselves against bad labor market outcomes. We regard the “household” as a
label or stand-in for all the various market and non-market arrangements that actual workers
have for dealing with idiosyncratic labor market outcomes.12 In line with this view of the
household, workers are assumed to have no access to loan markets, while households have
access to complete markets.
Each worker experiences a privately observed shock that determines its aversion to work.
Workers that experience a su¢ciently high aversion to work stay out of the labor force.
The other workers join the labor force and are employed with a probability that is an
increasing function of a privately observed e§ort. The only thing about a worker that is
observed is whether or not it is employed. Although consumption insurance is desirable in
our environment, perfect insurance is not feasible because everyone would claim high work
aversion and stay out of the labor force.
For simplicity we suppose the wage rate is determined competitively so that firms and
households take it as given.13 Firms face no search frictions and hire workers up to the point
where marginal costs and benefits are equated. But it is important to note that our modelling
approach in principle could encompass search frictions for firms and wage bargaining, and
that the friction that we emphasize — workers have to make a job finding e§ort which is
unobservable — might well be viewed as a complement to the currently dominating paradigm.
At this point it is worth emphasizing that unemployment in our model is purely frictional.
It is not generated by unions or other factors pushing up the general wage level to a point
where supply exceeds demand. However, note too that our environment is flexible enough to
11

Although the great majority of monetary DSGE models that we know of fail (iii), they do not fail (ii).
In these models there are workers who are not employed and who would say ‘yes’ in response to the question,
‘are you currently available for work?’. Although such people in e§ect declare their willingness to take an
action that reduces utility, they would in fact do so. This is because they are members of a large household
insurance pool. They obey the household’s instruction that they value a job according to the value assigned
by the household, not themselves. In these models everything about the individual worker is observable
to the household, and it is implicitly assumed that the household has the technology necessary to enforce
verifiable behavior. In our environment - and we suspect this is true in practice - the presence of private
information makes it impossible to enforce a labor market allocation that does not completely reflect the
preferences of the individual worker.
12
Alternative labels in this regard would be “a zero profit insurance company”, “the government”, “a
social planner” or “a representative agent”.
13
One interpretation of our environment is that job markets occur on Lucas-Phelps-Prescott type islands.
E§ort is required to reach those islands, but a person who arrive at the island finds a perfectly competitive
labor market. For recent work that uses a metaphor of this type, see Veracierto (2008).

3

allow for market power in the labor market, as will be the case in the estimated medium-sized
DSGE model that we present in section 3.
Although individual workers face uncertainty, households are su¢ciently large that there
is no uncertainty at the household level. Once the household sets incentives by allocating
more consumption to employed workers than to non-employed workers, it knows exactly
how many workers will find work. The household takes the wage rate as given and adjusts
employment incentives until the marginal cost (in terms of foregone leisure and reduced
consumption insurance) of additional market work equals the marginal benefit. The firm
and household first order necessary conditions of optimization are su¢cient to determine
the equilibrium wage rate. It turns out that our environment has a simple representative
agent formulation, in which the representative agent has an indirect utility function that is
a function only of market consumption and labor.
Our theory of unemployment has interesting implications for the optimal variation of
labor market insurance over the business cycle. In a boom more labor is demanded by
firms. To satisfy the higher demand, the household provides workers with more incentives
to look for work by raising consumption for the employed, cw
t , relative to consumption of
the non-employed, cnw
t . Conversely, in a recession, the consumption premium falls and thus
w
the replacement ratio, cnw
t /ct , increases. Thus, our model implies a procyclical consumption
premium — or equivalently — a countercyclical replacement ratio. Put di§erently, optimal
labor market insurance is countercyclical in our model.
Next, we introduce our model of unemployment into a medium-sized monetary DSGE
model that has been fit to data. In particular, we work with a version of the model proposed in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) (CEE). In this model there is monopoly
power in the setting of wages, there are wage setting frictions, capital accumulation and
other features.14 We estimate and evaluate our model using the Bayesian version of the impulse response matching procedure proposed in Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2011a)
(CTW). The impulse response methodology has proved useful in the basic model formulation
stage of model construction, and this is why we use it here. The three shocks we consider are
the same ones as in Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Lindé (2004) (ACEL). In particular,
we consider VAR-based estimates of the impulse responses of macroeconomic variables to
a monetary policy shock, a neutral technology shock and an investment-specific technology
shock. Our model can match the impulse responses of standard macro variables as well as
the standard model, i.e. the model in CEE and ACEL. However, our model also does a good
job matching the responses of the labor force and unemployment to the three shocks.
Our paper emphasizes the importance of labor supply for the dynamics of unemployment
and the labor force and is thereby related to Galí (2011). In his model, the presence of
14

The model of wage setting is the one proposed in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000).

4

unemployment rests on the assumption of market power in the labor market. By contrast,
in our model unemployment reflects frictions that are necessary for people to find jobs and
does not require monopoly power. Further, Galí (2011) assumes i) that available jobs can be
found without e§ort and ii) the presence of perfect labor market insurance which implies that
the employed have lower utility than the non-employed, i.e. unemployment is voluntary from
an individual workers perspective. Finally, Galí’s theory of unemployment with standard
preferences implies a drop of labor supply in response to an expansionary monetary policy
shock.15 The drop in labor supply is counterfactual, according to our VAR-based evidence.
We estimate the standard model that contains Galí’s theory of unemployment with and
without imposing data for unemployment and the labor force. In both cases, our model of
involuntary unemployment outperforms the standard model in terms of data fit.
These results highlight another important implication of our work. In particular, it is in
general not su¢cient to account only for the response of employment or total hours to be able
to draw conclusions about the unemployment rate. In particular, when the standard model
is estimated without data on unemployment and the labor force, the fit of total hours of the
model is in fact very good. By contrast, the implications of the model for unemployment
and the labor force are counterfactual. Conversely, when the standard model is estimated
on unemployment and labor force data too, the fit of these two variables indeed improves
somewhat. However the improvement of fit comes at the cost of not fitting total hours well.
In other words, the standard model provides an example that it is not straightforward to
account for the dynamics of unemployment and labor force participation jointly with other
standard macroeconomic variables. By contrast, our model does a good job in this regard.
Finally, our model of unemployment has several interesting microeconomic implications.
As mentioned above, the consumption premium is procyclical while the replacement ratio is
countercyclical. Studies of the cross-sectional variance of log household consumption are a
potential source of evidence on the cyclical behavior of the premium. Evidence in Heathcote,
Perri and Violante (2010) suggests indeed that the dispersion in log household non-durable
consumption decreased in the 1980, 2001 and 2007 recessions. Thus, the observed cross
sectional dispersion of consumption across households lends support to our model’s implication that the consumption premium is procyclical. Another indication that the replacement
ratio may indeed be countercyclical is the fact that the duration of unemployment benefits
is routinely extended in recessions, e.g. in the U.S. during the Great Recession. Second, our
model predicts that high unemployment in recessions reflects the procyclicality of e§ort in
job search. There is some evidence that supports this implication of the model. Data from
15

This drop in labor supply, or the labor force, is induced by the positive wealth e§ect. Galí (2011) and
Galí, Smets and Wouters (2011) show that changes to the household utility function that o§set wealth e§ects
reduce the counterfactual implications of the standard model for the labor force.

5

the Bureau of Labor Statistics suggests that the number of “discouraged workers” jumped 70
percent from 2008Q1 to 2009Q1. The number of discouraged workers is only a tiny fraction
of the labor force. However, to the extent that the sentiments of discouraged workers are
shared by workers more generally, a jump in the number of discouraged workers could be a
signal of a general decline in job search intensity in recessions.
The organization of the paper is as follows. The next section lays out our basic model of
limited labor market insurance. Section 3 proceed by integrating our model into the mediumsized DSGE (CEE) model. After that, in section 4, we describe our estimation method.
Section 5 reports the estimation results for our model. Moreover, section 6 discusses some
microeconomic implications and examines evidence that provides tentative support for the
model. The paper ends with concluding remarks.

2. Model of Limited Labor Market Insurance
We begin by describing the physical environment of a typical worker. Workers are subject to
two sources of privately observed idiosyncratic uncertainty: a shock to work aversion, l, and
the uncertainty of finding employment for workers that participate in the labor market. In
this environment, there is a need for insurance, but insurance cannot be perfect because of the
presence of asymmetric information. With standard separable preferences in consumption
and leisure, under perfect insurance all workers would enjoy the same level of consumption,
regardless of their realized value of l and of whether or not they find employment. Under
this first-best insurance arrangement, workers would have no incentive to participate in the
labor market and if they did, they would then have no incentive to exert e§ort in finding
work. Instead, we consider the optimal insurance arrangement in the presence of asymmetric
information. The optimal insurance contract balances the trade-o§ between incentive and
insurance provision.
Under the insurance arrangement, workers band together into large households. Individual workers have no access to credit or insurance markets other than through their
arrangements with the household. In part, we view the household construct as a stand-in
for the market and non-market arrangements that actual workers use to insure against idiosyncratic labor market experiences. In part, we are following Andolfatto (1996) and Merz
(1995), in using the household construct as a technical device to prevent the appearance
of di¢cult-to-model wealth dispersion among workers. Households have su¢ciently many
members that there is no idiosyncratic household-level labor market uncertainty. The environment is su¢ciently simple that we can obtain an analytic representation for the equally
weighted utility of all the workers in a household. This utility function corresponds to the
preferences in a representative agent formulation of our economy. At the end of this section,
6

we discuss some important implications of our basic model structure.
2.1. Workers
The economy consists of a continuum of households. In turn, each household consists of
a continuum of workers. A worker can either work, or not.16 At the start of the period,
each worker draws a privately observed idiosyncratic shock, l, from a stochastic process with
support, [0, 1] .17 We assume the stochastic process for l exhibits dependence over time and
that its invariant distribution is uniform. A worker’s realized value of l determines her utility
cost of working:
& (1 + σ L ) lσL .
(2.1)
The parameters & and σ L ≥ 0 are common to all workers. In (2.1) we have structured the
utility cost of employment so that σ L a§ects its variance in the cross section and not its
mean.18
After drawing l, a worker decides whether or not to participate in the labor force. In
case a worker chooses non-participation, her utility is simply:
ln (cnw
t − bCt−1 ) .

(2.2)

The term bCt−1 reflects habit persistence in consumption at the household level which the
worker takes as given. A non-participating worker does not experience any disutility from
work or from exerting e§ort to find a job.
The probability that a worker which participates in the labor market finds work is
p (el,t ; η̃ t ) where el,t ≥ 0 is a privately observed level of e§ort expended by the worker.
Let:
p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) = η̃ t + ael,t
(2.3)
where a > 0. The sign of a implies that the marginal product of e§ort is non-negative.
Further,
η̃ t = η + M (m̄t /m̄t−1 )
(2.4)
where η < 0. We discuss the negative sign of η below. The function M (m̄t /m̄t−1 ) reflects the
impact of aggregate economic conditions — in particular the change of the aggregate labor
16

In assuming that labor is indivisible, we follow Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988). The indivisible labor
assumption has attracted substantial attention recently. See, for example, Mulligan (2001), and Krusell,
Mukoyama, Rogerson, and Sahin (2008, 2011). The labor indivisibility assumption is consistent with the
fact that most variation in total hours worked over the business cycle reflects variations in number of people
employed, rather than in hours per worker.
17
A recent paper which emphasizes a richer pattern of idiosyncracies at the individual firm and household
level is Brown, Merkl and Snower (2015).
R1
R1
σ 2L
2
18
To see this, note that 0 (1 + σ L ) lσL dl = 1 and 0 [(1 + σ L ) lσL − 1] dl = 1+2σ
.
L

7

force m̄t /m̄t−1 — on the worker’s probability to find work. We will discuss details about the
function M in subsection 3.4 and in subsection B.6 in the technical appendix.19
In order to preserve analytic tractability, we assume the following piecewise linear specification for the probability of finding work:
8
<

1

p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) > 1
p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) 0 ≤ p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) ≤ 1 .
p (el,t ; η̃ t ) =
(2.5)
:
0
p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) < 0
A worker whose work aversion is l and which participates in the labor market and exerts
e§ort el,t enjoys the following expected utility:
ex post utility of worker that joins labor force and finds a job

p (el,t ; η̃ t )

z)
}|
*{
1
σL
ln (cw
− e2l,t
t − bCt−1 ) − & (1 + σ L ) l
2

(2.6)

ex post utility of worker that joins labor force and fails to find a job

+ (1 − p (el,t ; η̃ t ))

z)
}|
*{
1
2
ln (cnw
t − bCt−1 ) − el,t .
2

nw
Here, e2l,t /2 is the utility cost associated with e§ort. In (2.6), cw
denote the cont and ct
sumption of employed and non-employed workers, respectively. These are outside the control
of a worker and are determined in equilibrium given the arrangements which we describe
below. In addition, η̃ t is also outside the control of a worker. Our notation reflects that in
our environment, an individual worker’s consumption can only be dependent on its current
employment status because this is the only worker characteristic that is publicly observed.20
We now characterize the e§ort and labor force participation decisions of the worker.
Because workers’ work aversion type and e§ort choice are private information, their e§ort
and labor force decisions are privately optimal conditional on cnw
and cw
t
t . In particular, the
worker decides its level of e§ort and labor force participation by comparing the magnitude
of (2.2) with the maximized value of (2.6). In the case of indi§erence, we assume the worker
chooses non-participation.

2.2. Characterizing Worker Behavior
w
As described above, the worker takes the replacement ratio rt ≡ cnw
t /ct < 1 as given. The
workers’s utility of participating in the labor market, minus the utility, ln (cnw
t − bCt−1 ) , of
19

The technical appendix is available at the following URL:
http://sites.google.com/site/mathiastrabandt/home/downloads/CTWinvoluntary_techapp.pdf
20
For example, we do not allow worker consumption allocations to depend upon the employment history or
the history of worker reports of l. We make this assumption to preserve tractability. It would be interesting
to investigate whether the results are very sensitive to our assumption that consumption is not allowed to
depend on the individual history. We suspect that if the history of past reports were publicly known, then
the di§erence between discounted utility when household types and labor e§ort are public or private would
narrow (see, e.g., Atkeson and Lucas, 1995).

8

non-participation is given by:
) + w
,
*
ct − bCt−1
1
σL
max f (el,t ) , f (el,t ) ≡ p (el,t ; η̃ t ) ln nw
− & (1 + σ L ) l
− e2l,t .
el,t ≥0
ct − bCt−1
2
cnw −bC

t−1
Define r̃t = ctw −bCt−1
and note the distinction between this expression and the replacet
ment ratio, rt if b > 0. Then, the di§erence in utility can be expressed as follows:

1
max f (el,t ) , f (el,t ) ≡ p (el,t ; η̃ t ) [ln (1/r̃t ) − & (1 + σ L ) lσL ] − e2l,t .
el,t ≥0
2

(2.7)

We suppose that if more than one value of el,t solves (2.7), then the worker chooses the
smaller of the two. The worker chooses non-participation if the maximized value of (2.7) is
smaller than, or equal to, zero.
2.2.1. Optimal E§ort
It is convenient to consider a version of (2.7) in which the sign restriction on el,t ≥ 0 is
ignored and p (el,t ; η̃ t ) in (2.7) is replaced with the linear function, p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) (see (2.3)):21
1
max f˜ (el,t ; η̃ t , r̃t ) , f˜ (el,t ; η̃ t , r̃t ) ≡ p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) [ln (1/r̃t ) − & (1 + σ L ) lσL ] − e2l,t .
el,t
2

(2.8)

The function, f˜, is quadratic with negative second derivative, and so the unique value of el,t
that solves the above problem is the one that sets the derivative of f˜ to zero:
ẽl,t = a [ln (1/r̃t ) − & (1 + σ L ) lσL ] .
Substituting this expression into (2.8), we obtain:
)
*
ẽ
2
l,t
f˜ (ẽl,t ; η̃ t ) =
η̃ + ẽl,t ,
2 a t

(2.9)

(2.10)

2.2.2. Optimal Participation
There exists a unique 0 < l < 1 such that the object in square brackets in (2.10) is zero.
That value of l is the labor force participation rate, which we denote by mt and which solves:
2
a [ln (1/r̃t ) − & (1 + σ L ) mσt L ] = − η̃ t .
a
We can rewrite this indi§erence condition as:
+ w
,
ct − bCt−1
2
ln nw
= & (1 + σ L ) mσt L − 2 η̃ t ,
ct − bCt−1
a
21

(2.11)

(2.12)

Considering the unconstrained case first will be helpful to understand more easily the constrained case,
i.e. el,t ≥ 0 and 0≤ p (el,t ; η̃ t ) ≤ 1 which we characterize below.

9

which implies that the utility of the marginal labor force participant from the extra consumption from working equals the disutility of working and searching for a job. Equation
(2.11) can also be written as:
)

ln (1/r̃t ) + a22 η̃ t
mt =
& (1 + σ L )

* σ1

L

(2.13)

.

Note that for all l ≥ mt such that ẽl,t ≥ 0, f˜ (ẽl,t ; η̃ t , r̃t ) ≤ 0 and for all l < mt , f˜ (ẽl,t ; η̃ t , r̃t ) >
0. Furthermore, we impose the following restriction, which ensures an interior solution for
the labor force participation rate (see section A.2.1 in the technical appendix for details):
2
a ln (1/r̃t ) > − η̃ t > a [ln (1/r̃t ) − & (1 + σ L )] .
a

(2.14)

We can then summarize our findings in the form of the following proposition:
Proposition 2.1. Suppose that (2.14) is satisfied and the worker’s objective is described in
(2.8), with r̃t taken as given by the worker. Let mt be as defined by (2.13). Then workers
with mt ≤ l ≤ 1 choose non-participation and workers with l < mt and ẽl,t ≥ 0 choose
participation. For those who choose participation, their e§ort level is given by (2.9).
The previous proposition was derived under the assumption that the workers’s objective is
(2.8). We use the results based on (2.8) to understand the case of (2.7), i.e. without imposing
el,t ≥ 0 or linearity of p (el,t ; η̃ t ). One can show that there is a largest value of l, denoted ˚
lt ,
such that for all l ≤ ˚
lt , the constraint, p (el,t ; η̃ t ) ≤ 1 is binding. In other words, there is a
˚
share of workers lt that has p (el,t ; η̃ t ) = 1. The cuto§, ˚
lt , solves:
p (el,t ; η̃ t ) = η̃ t + a

2

h

i
σL
˚
ln (1/r̃t ) − & (1 + σ L ) lt = 1,

or after making use of (2.11) to substitute out ln (1/r̃t ) and re-arranging:
)
˚
lt = mσt L −

1 + η̃ t
& (1 + σ L ) a2

* σ1

L

.

(2.15)

2.3. Equilibrium Conditions
Before deriving the representative household’s utility, u (Ct , ht ) , as a function of household
aggregate employment, ht , and household aggregate consumption, Ct , it is useful to derive
a few helpful equilibrium conditions. The number of employed workers, ht , is, using our
uniform distribution assumption of workers across l:22
22

See the technical appendix section A.7 for the intermediate steps in the derivation of the following
equation.

10

Z

mt

Z

l̊t

Z

mt

1dl +
p̃ (el,t ; η̃ t ) dl
(2.16)
l̊t
"
!#
σL
˚
l
σ
+1
σ
= −η̃ t mt + a2 &σ L mt L + ˚
lt 1 + η̃ t + a2 & (1 + σ L ) −mt L + t
.
1 + σL

ht =

0

p (el,t ; η̃ t ) dl =

0

Combining the latter equation with expression (2.15) to substitute out for 1 + η̃ t and rearranging yields:
4
5
ht = −η̃ t mt + a2 &σ L mσt L +1 − ˚
ltσL +1
(2.17)
Note that one can use (2.15) to rewrite this expression for employment as:
)
* σLσ +1 !
L
1
+
η̃
t
ht = −η̃ t mt + a2 &σ L mσt L +1 − mσt L −
≡ Q (mt ; η̃ t )
2
& (1 + σ L ) a
or
mt = Q−1 (ht ; η̃ t ) ,

(2.18)

where Q−1 is the inverse function of Q. We show in the technical appendix section A.8 that
the mapping between ht and mt is unique. As we will see below, expression (2.18) will be
useful when computing the household utility function.
Equation (2.17) can also be re-arranged to obtain the following expression for the unemployment rate:
4
5
4
5
σ L +1
σ L +1
σ L +1
σ L +1
2
˚
˚
m
+
η̃
m
−
a
&σ
m
−
l
m
−
l
t
t
L
t
t
t
t
t
mt − ht
ut =
=
= 1 + η̃ t − a2 &σ L
mt
mt
mt
(2.19)
Suppose the household decides to send a measure, ht , of workers to work and to consume
Ct . The household that has chosen a level of employment, ht , must set the labor force, mt ,
to the level indicated by (2.18). To ensure that a measure, mt , of workers has the incentive
to enter the labor force requires setting the consumption premium as indicated by (2.11).
Expression (2.11) determines the ratio of the consumption of employed and not employed
workers. Given this ratio, the household’s resource constraint,
nw
ht cw
= Ct ,
t + (1 − ht ) ct

(2.20)

nw
nw
determines the level of cw
yields
t and ct . Solving this expression for ct

cnw
=
t

rt Ct
.
ht + (1 − ht ) rt

(2.21)

nw
The consumption of employed workers can then be obtained by using cw
t = ct /rt .
Note that in our environment there is no reason to describe a household optimization
problem for selecting cnw
or cw
t
t since there is only one setting for these variables that satisfies
the resource constraint, (2.20), and the labor force participation constraint, (2.12).

11

2.4. Household Utility Function
The equally weighted utility of the workers within the household is given by:
,
Z mt +
σL
p (el,t ; η̃ t ) [ln (cw
t − bCt−1 ) − & (1 + σ L ) l ]
u(Ct , ht , mt ; Ct−1 , η̃ t ) =
dl
1 2
+ (1 − p (el,t ; η̃ t )) ln (cnw
t − bCt−1 ) − 2 el,t
0
+ (1 − mt ) ln (cnw
t − bCt−1 )
We wish to express this as a function of Ct and ht only, given Ct−1 and η̃ t , using the results
in the previous section. The derivation of the following expression for household utility is
described in the technical appendix sections A.3-A.8:

where

+

u(Ct , ht ; Ct−1 , η̃ t ) = ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − z(ht ; η̃ t ),

(2.22)

)

(2.23)

*
,
1
L +1
z(ht ; η̃ t ) = ln ht
− 1 + 1 − α1 η̃ t mσt L +1 − α2 m2σ
t
r̃t
)
6
27
σL
2σ L
− α3 (1 + η̃ t ) mt − α2 mt + α4 (1 + η̃ t ) × mσt L −
σ L − 2 η̃
a2 t

r̃t = e−[&(1+σL )m

]

1 + η̃ t
& (1 + σ L ) a2

* σ1

L

and mt is a function of ht given by equation (2.18), η̃ t is given by equation (2.4) and the
expression for r̃t can be obtained by rearranging (2.13).23
A notable feature of (2.22) is that consumption enters the household’s utility function in
the same way that it enters the individual worker’s utility function. Moreover, consumption
and employment are separable in utility.
It is useful to define a measure of the curvature of the function z in the neighborhood of
steady state:
zhh h
σz ≡
(2.24)
zh
Here zh (zhh ) denotes the first (second) derivative of z with respect to h, evaluated in steady
state. Note that 1/σ z is the consumption-compensated elasticity of household labor supply
in steady state. In our environment, all changes in labor supply occur on the extensive
margin, so the empirical counterpart to 1/σ z is the extensive-margin labor supply.
2.5. Implications of Our Basic Model Structure
We now briefly discuss expression (2.22) as well as implications of our basic model structure.
First, note that the derivation of the household utility function, (2.22), involves no explicit
23

In the technical appendix, in equation (A.34), we express equation (2.23) in a way that is more useful
for computational purposes.

12

maximization problem even though the resulting insurance arrangement is optimal given our
information assumption. This is because the household labor force participation and resource
nw
constraints, (2.11) and (2.20), are su¢cient to determine cw
conditional on ht and
t and ct
Ct .
Second, we can see from (2.22) that our model is likely to be characterized by a particular
observational equivalence property. To see this, note that although the agents in our model
are in fact heterogeneous, Ct and ht are chosen as if the economy were populated by a
representative agent with the utility function specified in (2.22). A model such as the one
in Clarida, Galí and Gertler (1999, henceforth CGG) which specifies representative agent
utility as the sum of the log of consumption and a separable disutility of labor term is
indistinguishable from our model, as long as data on the labor force and unemployment are
not used. This is particularly obvious if, as is the case here, we only study the linearized
dynamics of the model about the steady state. In this case, the only properties of a model’s
utility function that are used are its second order derivative properties in the nonstochastic
steady state.
Third, our model and the standard CGG model are distinguished by the following two
features: i) our model addresses a larger set of time series than the standard model does
and ii) in our model the representative agent’s utility function is a reduced form object.
With respect to the utility function, its properties are determined by i) the details of the
technology of job search, and ii) the cross-sectional variation in preferences with regard to
attitudes about market work. As a result, the basic structure of the utility function in our
model can in principle be informed by time use surveys and studies of job search.24
Fourth, we gain insight into the determinants of the unemployment rate in the model by
re-stating (2.19):
4
5
mσt L +1 − ˚
ltσL +1
ut = 1 + η̃ t − a2 &σ L
.
(2.25)
mt
Ceteris paribus, a rise in the labor force, mt , is associated with a fall in the unemployment
rate, ut . To generate the fall in the unemployment rate, the rise in employment must be
larger than the rise in the labor force. The greater rise in employment reflects that an
increase in the labor force requires raising employment incentives, and this generates an
increase in search intensity.
Fifth, our theory of unemployment implies a procyclical consumption premium — or
equivalently — a countercyclical replacement ratio. So see this, consider, for simplicity, a
24

A similar point was made by Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1991). They argue that a representative
agent utility function of consumption and labor should be interpreted as a reduced form object, after nonmarket consumption and labor activities have been maximized out. From this perspective, construction of
the representative agent’s utility function can in principle be guided by surveys of how time in the home is
used.

13

version of equation (2.12) without habit (b = 0) and constant η̃ t = η̃ :
+ w,
ct
2
ln nw
= & (1 + σ L ) mσt L − 2 η̃.
ct
a

(2.26)

This equation shows that when the labor force, mt , increases in a boom, the equilibrium
nw
consumption premium, cw
t /ct increases. The boom results in more labor demanded by firms.
In order to satisfy the higher demand, the household provides workers with more incentives
to look for work by raising consumption for the employed, cw
t , relative to consumption of the
non-employed, cnw
t . Conversely, in a recession, the consumption premium falls and thus the
w
25
replacement ratio rt = cnw
In other words, our model implies that workers
t /ct increases.
are provided with more insurance in a recession, i.e. optimal labor market insurance is
countercyclical.

3. Limited Labor Market Insurance in a Medium-Sized DSGE Model
Next, we show how we embed our model of limited labor market insurance in to an otherwise
standard medium-sized New Keynesian DSGE framework as e.g. CEE or Smets and Wouters
(2003, 2007).
3.1. Final and Intermediate Goods
A final good is produced by a competitive, representative firm using a continuum of inputs
as follows:
)Z 1 1 *λf
λ
Yt =
Yi,tf di
, 1 < λf .
(3.1)
0

th

The i
function:

intermediate good is produced by a monopolist with the following production
α
Yi,t = (zt Hi,t )1−α Ki,t
− φt ,

(3.2)

where Ki,t denotes capital services used for production by the ith intermediate good producer.
Also, log (zt ) is a technology shock whose first di§erence has a positive mean and φt denotes a
fixed production cost which we will discuss below. The economy has two sources of growth:
the positive drift in log (zt ) and a positive drift in log (Ψt ) , where Ψt is the state of an
α
investment-specific technology shock discussed below. Let zt+ be defined as zt+ = Ψt1−α zt .
Along a non-stochastic steady state growth path, Yt /zt+ and Yi,t /zt+ converge to constants.
The two shocks, zt and Ψt , are specified to be unit root processes in order to be consistent
with the assumptions we use in our VAR analysis to identify the dynamic response of the
25

In the estimated model discussed in the next section featues habit formation and a time-varying η̃ t . We
verified numerically that in the estimated model, the consumption premium is pro-cyclical too.

14

economy to neutral and capital-embodied technology shocks. The two shocks have the
following time series representations:
∆ log zt = µz + "nt , E ("nt )2 = (σ n )2
∆ log Ψt

4 52
= µ + ρ ∆ log Ψt−1 + "t , E "t
= (σ )2 .

(3.3)
(3.4)

Our assumption that the neutral technology shock follows a random walk matches closely the
finding in Smets and Wouters (2007) who estimate log zt to be highly autocorrelated. The
direct empirical analysis of Prescott (1986) also supports the notion that log zt is a random
walk.
In (3.2), Hi,t denotes homogeneous labor services hired by the ith intermediate good producer. Intermediate good firms must borrow the wage bill in advance of production, so that
one unit of labor costs is given by Wt Rt where Rt denotes the gross nominal rate of interest.
Intermediate good firms are subject to Calvo price-setting frictions. With probability ξ p the
intermediate good firm cannot reoptimize its price, in which case it is assumed to set its
price according to the following rule:
Pi,t = π̄Pi,t−1 ,

(3.5)

where π̄ is the steady state inflation rate. With probability 1 − ξ p the intermediate good
firm can reoptimize its price. Apart from the fixed cost, the ith intermediate good producer’s
profits are:
1
X
Et
β j υ t+j {Pi,t+j Yi,t+j − st+j Pt+j Yi,t+j },
j=0

where st denotes the marginal cost of production, denominated in units of the homogeneous
good. st is a function only of the costs of capital and labor, and is described in the technical
appendix, section B.11.1. In the firm’s discounted profits, β j υ t+j is the multiplier on the
households’s nominal period t + j budget constraint. The equilibrium conditions associated
with this optimization problem are reported in section B.11.1 of the technical appendix.
We suppose that the homogeneous labor hired by intermediate good producers is itself
‘produced’ by competitive labor contractors. Labor contractors produce homogeneous labor
by aggregating di§erent types of specialized labor, j 2 (0, 1) , as follows:
)Z 1
*λw
1
Ht =
(ht,j ) λw dj
, 1 < λw .
(3.6)
0

Labor contractors take the wage rate of Ht and ht,j as given and equal to Wt and Wt,j ,
respectively. Profit maximization by labor contractors leads to the following first order
necessary condition:
+
, λwλ −1
w
Ht
Wj,t = Wt
.
(3.7)
ht,j
15

Equation (3.7) is the demand curve for the j th type of labor.
3.2. Worker and Household Preferences
We integrate the model of unemployment in the previous section into the Erceg, Henderson
and Levin (2000) (EHL) model of sticky wages that is commonly used in empirically relevant
DSGE models. Each type, j 2 [0, 1] , of labor is assumed to be supplied by a particular
household. The j th household resembles the single representative household in the previous
section, with one exception. The exception is that the unit measure of workers in the j th
household is only able to supply the j th type of labor service. Each worker in the j th
household has the utility cost of working, (2.1), and the technology for job finding, (2.5).
The preference and job finding technology parameters are the same across households.
w
th
Let cnw
household to nonj,t and cj,t denote the consumption levels allocated by the j
employed and employed workers within the household. Although households all enjoy the
same level of consumption, Ct , for reasons described momentarily each household experiences
a di§erent level of employment, hj,t . Because employment across households is di§erent,
each type j household chooses a di§erent way to balance the trade-o§ between the need for
consumption insurance and the need to provide work incentives. For the j th type of household
with high hj,t , the premium of consumption for employed workers to non-employed workers
must be high. Accordingly, the incentive constraint is given by (2.12) which we repeat here
for convenience:
+ w
,
cj,t − bCt−1
2
ln nw
= & (1 + σ L ) mσj,tL − 2 η̃ t
cj,t − bCt−1
a
where mj,t solves the analog of (2.17):

and

4
5
σ L +1
hj,t = −η̃ t mj,t + a2 &σ L mσj,tL +1 − ˚
lj,t
σL
˚
lj,t
= mσj,tL −

1 + η̃ t
.
& (1 + σ L ) a2

(3.8)

(3.9)

Consider the j th household that enjoys a level of household consumption and employment,
Ct and hj,t , respectively. Note that given (2.22) from the previous section, the j th household’s
discounted utility is given by:
E0

1
X
t=0

β t [ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − z(hj,t ; η̃ t )] .

(3.10)

Note that the utility function is additively separable, like the utility functions assumed
for the workers. Additive separability is convenient because perfect consumption insurance
at the level of households implies that consumption is not indexed by labor type, j.
16

3.3. The Household Problem
The j th household is the monopoly supplier of the j th type of labor service. The household
understands that when it arranges work incentives for its workers so that employment is hj,t ,
then the nominal wage Wj,t takes on the value implied by the demand for its type of labor,
(3.7). The household therefore faces the standard monopoly problem of selecting Wj,t to
optimize the welfare, (3.10), of its member workers. It does so subject to the requirement
that it satisfy the demand for labor, (3.7), in each period. We follow EHL in supposing
that the household experiences Calvo-style frictions in its choice of Wj,t . In particular, with
probability 1−ξ w the j th household has the opportunity to reoptimize its wage rate. With the
complementary probability, the household must set its wage rate according to the following
rule:
Wj,t = π̃ w,t Wj,t−1

(3.11)

π̃ w,t = (π t−1 )κw (π̄)(1−κw ) µz+ ,

(3.12)

where κw 2 [0, 1] . Note that in a non-stochastic steady state, non-optimizing households
raise their real wage at the rate of growth of the economy. Because optimizing households
also do this in steady state, it follows that in the steady state, the wage of each type of
household is the same.
In principle, the presence of wage setting frictions implies that households have idiosyncratic levels of wealth and, hence, consumption. However, we follow EHL in supposing that
each household has access to perfect consumption insurance. At the level of the household,
there is no private information about consumption or employment. The private information
and associated incentive problems all exist among the workers inside a household. Because
of the additive separability of the household utility function, perfect consumption insurance
at the level of households implies equal consumption across households. We have used this
property of the equilibrium to simplify our notation and not include a subscript, j, on the
j th household’s consumption. Of course, we hasten to add that although consumption is
equated across households, it is not constant across workers.
The j th household’s period t budget constraint is as follows:
+
,
1
Pt Ct + It + Bt+1 ≤ Wt,j ht,j + Xtk K̄t + Rt−1 Bt + ajt .
(3.13)
Ψt
Here, Bt+1 denotes the quantity of risk-free bonds purchased by the worker, Rt denotes the
gross nominal interest rate on bonds purchased in period t − 1 which pay o§ in period t, and
ajt denotes the payments and receipts associated with the insurance on the timing of wage
reoptimization. Also, Pt denotes the aggregate price level and It denotes the quantity of
investment goods purchased for augmenting the beginning-of-period t + 1 stock of physical
17

capital, K̄t+1 . The price of investment goods is Pt /Ψt , where Ψt is the unit root process with
positive drift specified in (3.4). This is our way of capturing the trend decline in the relative
price of investment goods.26
The household owns the economy’s physical stock of capital, K̄t , sets the utilization
rate of capital and rents the services of capital in a competitive market. The household
accumulates capital using the following technology:
+
+
,,
It
K̄t+1 = (1 − δ) K̄t + 1 − S
It .
(3.14)
It−1
Here, S is a convex function which we discuss below.
k
For each unit of K̄t+1 acquired in period t, the household receives Xt+1
in net cash
payments in period t + 1,
Pt+1
k
k
Xt+1
= ukt+1 Pt+1 rt+1
−
a(ukt+1 ).
(3.15)
Ψt+1
where ukt denotes the rate of utilization of capital. The first term in (3.15) is the gross
nominal period t + 1 rental income from a unit of K̄t+1 . The household supply of capital
services in period t + 1 is:
Kt+1 = ukt+1 K̄t+1 .
It is the services of capital that intermediate good producers rent and use in their production
functions, (3.2). The second term to the right of the equality in (3.15) represents the cost
of capital utilization, a(ukt+1 )Pt+1 /Ψt+1 which we discuss below.
9
:
The household’s problem is to select sequences, Ct , It , ukt , Wj,t , Bt+1 , K̄t+1 , to maximize
(3.10) subject to (3.7), (3.11), (3.12), (3.13), (3.14), (3.15) and the mechanism determining
when wages can be reoptimized. The equilibrium conditions associated with this maximization problem are standard, and so appear in section B.11.2 of the technical appendix.
3.4. Aggregate Resource Constraint, Monetary Policy and Functional Forms
Goods market clearing dictates that the homogeneous output good is allocated among alternative uses as follows:
Yt = Gt + Ct + I˜t .
(3.16)
Here, Ct denotes household consumption, Gt denotes exogenous government consumption
and I˜t is a homogenous investment good which is defined as follows:
; < <
1 ;
I˜t =
It + a ukt K̄t .
(3.17)
Ψt
26

We suppose that there is an underlying technology for converting final goods, Yt , one-to-one into Ct and
one to Ψt into investment goods. These technologies are operated by competitive firms which equate price
to marginal cost. The marginal cost of Ct with this technology is Pt and the marginal cost of It is Pt /Ψt . We
avoid a full description of this environment so as to not clutter the presentation, and simply impose these
properties of equilibrium on the household budget constraint.

18

As discussed above, the investment goods, It , are used by the households to add to the
physical stock of capital, K̄t , according to (3.14). The remaining investment goods are
; <
used to cover maintenance costs, a ukt K̄t , arising from capital utilization, ukt . Finally,
Ψt in (3.17) denotes the unit root investment specific technology shock with positive drift
discussed after (3.2).
We suppose that monetary policy follows a Taylor rule of the following form:
+ ,
+
,
)
+
,*
4π 5
Rt
Rt−1
gdpt
σ R "R,t
t
ln
= ρR ln
+ (1 − ρR ) rπ ln
+ ry ln
+
,
(3.18)
R
R
π
gdp
400
where "R,t is an iid monetary policy shock with unit variance and σ R scales the e§ective
variance of monetary policy shocks. As in CEE and ACEL, we assume that period t realizations of "R are not included in the period t information set of workers and firms, so that
the only variable that is contemporaneously a§ected by the monetary policy shock is the
nominal interest rate.
Let gdpt denote scaled real GDP defined as:
gdpt =

Gt + Ct + It /Ψt
,
zt+

(3.19)

and gdp denote the nonstochastic steady state value of gdpt .
We adopt the following specification for government spending, Gt , and the fixed cost
of production, φt , in response to technology shocks. To guarantee balanced growth in the
nonstochastic steady state, we require that each element in [φt , Gt ] grows at the same rate
as zt+ in steady state. Following Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2016), we assume:
[φt , Gt ]0 = [φ, G]0 Ωt .
Here, Ωt is defined as follows:

; + <θ
Ωt = zt−1
(Ωt−1 )1−θ ,

(3.20)

(3.21)

where 0 < θ ≤ 1 is a parameter to be estimated. With this specification, Ωt /zt+ converges to
a constant in nonstochastic steady state. When θ is close to zero, Ωt is virtually unresponsive
in the short-run to an innovation in either of the two technology shocks, a feature that we
find attractive on a priori grounds. Given the specification of the exogenous processes in
the model, Yt /zt+ , Ct /zt+ and It /(Ψt zt+ ) converge to constants in nonstochastic steady state.
In terms of fiscal policy, we assume that lump-sum transfers balance the government
budget.
Finally, we assume the following functional forms. We adopt the following functional
form for the capacity utilization cost function a :
K 2
K
a(uK
t ) = σ a σ b (ut ) /2 + σ b (1 − σ a ) ut + σ b (σ a /2 − 1) ,

19

where σ a and σ b are the parameters of this function. For a given value of σ a we select σ b so
that the steady state value of uK
t is unity. The object, σ a , is a parameter to be estimated.
We assume that the investment adjustment cost function takes the following form:
hp
i
h p
i
o
1n
S (It /It−1 ) =
exp S 00 (It /It−1 − µz+ µΨ ) + exp − S 00 (It /It−1 − µz+ µΨ ) − 2 .
2
Here, µz+ and µΨ denote the unconditional growth rates of zt+ and Ψt . The value of It /It−1
in nonstochastic steady state is (µz+ × µΨ ). In addition, S 00 denotes the second derivative
of S (·), evaluated at steady state. The object, S 00 , is a parameter to be estimated. It is
straightforward to verify that S (µz+ µΨ ) = S 0 (µz+ µΨ ) = 0.
We assume the following functional form for the impact of aggregate economic conditions
on the worker’s probability to find a job:
M (m̄t /m̄t−1 ) = 100! (m̄t /m̄t−1 − 1) .
We will estimate the parameter ! using a standard normal prior. That is, we are agnostic
about the sign of !. Recall that η̃ t = η + M(m̄t /m̄t−1 ) and p(el,t ; η̃ t ) = η̃ t + ael,t . That is
if, for example, ! < 0, then this implies that an inflow of workers into the labor force
reduces the probability of a worker to find a job. Importantly, it is the rate of change
of the labor force that triggers the probability of a worker to fall. Intuitively, one might
think about this as a bottleneck-type access to the labor market. When the labor force
grows rapidly, many workers get ‘stuck’ in the process of finding work. In spirit of the
various adjustment cost specifications in estimated medium-sized New Keynesian models,
according to our specification, it is not the level of the labor force but its rate of change
that a§ects the probability of a worker to find a job. In e§ect, if ! < 0, our specification
implies a more gradual adjustment of the labor force in response to shocks in line with
model specifications with labor force adjustment costs as in e.g. Erceg and Levin (2014) and
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2015). We will elaborate more on the e§ects of our
functional form for the impact of aggregate economic conditions on the worker’s probability
to find a job for the quantitative properties of our medium-sized New Keynesian model below
when we discuss our model estimation results.
3.5. Aggregate Labor Force and Unemployment in Our Model
We now derive our model’s implications for unemployment and the labor market. At the
level of the j th household, unemployment and the labor force are defined in the same way
as in the previous section, except that the endogenous variables now have a j subscript
(the parameters and shocks are the same across households). Thus, the j th households’s
labor force, mj,t , and total employment, hj,t , are related by (3.8) and ˚
lj,t is given by (2.15).
20

Log-linearizing these expressions gives:
4

5

+

hĥj,t = −η̃m ηb̃t + m̂j,t + (σ L + 1) a &σ L m

c̊
σ L˚
lσL lj,t = σ L mσL m̂j,t −

2

η̃
ηb̃
& (1 + σ L ) a2 t

σ L +1

b̊
m̂j,t − ˚
lσL +1 lj,t

,

(3.22)

Variables without subscript denote steady state values in the j th household. Because we
have made assumptions which guarantee that each household is identical in steady state, we
drop the j subscripts from all steady state labor market variables (see the discussion after
(3.11)).
Aggregate household hours and the labor force are defined as follows:
Z 1
Z 1
Z 1
b̊
c̊
ĥt =
ĥj,t dj, m̂t ≡
m̂j,t dj, lt ≡
lj,t dj.
0

0

0

Using the fact that, to first order, type j wage deviations from the aggregate wage cancel,
we obtain:
ĥt = Ĥt .
(3.23)

See section B.7 in the technical appendix for a derivation. That is, to a first order approximation, the percent deviation of aggregate household hours from steady state coincides with
the percent deviation of aggregate homogeneous hours from steady state. Integrating (3.22)
b̊
over all j and substituting for lt yields:
h
i
4
4
5
5
2
σL
˚
˚
hĥt = −η̃m + (σ L + 1) a &σ L m − l m
m̂t −η̃ m − l ηb̃t .
|
{z
} |
{z
}
>0

>0

4
5
h
t −ht
where ηb̃t = η̃tη̃−η̃ . Aggregate unemployment is defined as ut ≡ mm
so
that
du
=
m̂
−
ĥ
t
t
t
m
t
where dut denotes the deviation of unemployment from its steady state value, not the percent
deviation.
3.6. The Standard Model
We derive the utility function used in the standard model as a special case of the household
utility function in our involuntary unemployment model. In part, we do this to ensure consistency across models. In part, we do this as a way of emphasizing that we interpret the
labor input in the utility function in the standard model as corresponding to the number
of people working, not, say, the hours worked of a representative person. With our interpretation, the curvature of the labor disutility function corresponds to the (consumption
compensated) elasticity with which people enter or leave the labor force in response to a
change in the wage rate. In particular, this curvature does not correspond to the elasticity
21

with which the typical person adjusts the quantity of hours worked in response to a wage
change. Empirically, the latter elasticity is estimated to be small and it is fixed at zero in
the model.
Another advantage of deriving the standard model from ours is that it puts us in position to exploit an insight by Galí (2011). In particular, Galí (2011) shows that the standard
model already has a theory of unemployment implicit in it. The monopoly power assumed
by EHL has the consequence that wages are on average higher than what they would be
under competition. The number of workers for which the wage is greater than the cost of
work exceeds the number of people employed. Galí suggests defining this excess of workers as ‘unemployed’. The implied unemployment rate and labor force represent a natural
benchmark to compare with our model.
Notably, deriving an unemployment rate and labor force in the standard model does not
introduce any new parameters. Moreover, there is no change in the equilibrium conditions
that determine non-labor market variables. Galí’s insight in e§ect simply adds a block
recursive system of two equations to the standard DSGE model which determine the size of
the labor force and unemployment. Although the unemployment rate derived in this way
does not satisfy all the criteria for unemployment that we described in the introduction, it
nevertheless provides a natural benchmark for comparison with our model. An extensive
comparison of the economics of our approach to unemployment versus the approach implicit
in the standard model appears in the appendix to this paper.
We suppose that in the standard model, the household has full information about its
member workers and that workers which join the labor force automatically receive a job
without having to expend any e§ort. As in the previous subsections, we suppose that
corresponding to each type j of labor, there is a unit measure of workers which gather together
into a household. At the beginning of each period, each worker draws a random variable,
l, from a uniform distribution with support, [0, 1] . The random variable, l, determines a
worker’s aversion to work according to (2.1). The fact that no e§ort is needed to find a job
implies mt,j = ht,j . Workers with l ≤ ht,j work and workers with ht,j ≤ l ≤ 1 take leisure.
The type j household allocation problem is to maximize the utility of its member workers
with respect to consumption for non-working workers, cnw
t,j , and consumption of working
w
workers, ct,j , subject to (2.20), and the given values of ht,j and Ct . In Lagrangian form, the
problem is:
Z ht,j
6 ; w
<
7
σL
u (Ct − bCt−1 , hj,t ) = wmax
ln
c
−
bC
−
&
(1
+
σ
)
l
dl
t−1
L
t,j
nw
+

Z

ct,j ,ct,j

1

ht,j

0

;
<
6
7
w
nw
ln cnw
t,j − bCt−1 dl + λj,t Ct − ht,j ct,j − (1 − ht,j ) ct,j .

Here, λj,t > 0 denotes the multiplier on the resource constraint. The first order conditions
22

nw
imply cw
t,j = ct,j = Ct . Imposing this result and evaluating the integral, we find:
L
u (Ct − bCt−1 , hj,t ) = ln (Ct − bCt−1 ) − &h1+σ
.
t,j

(3.24)

The problem of the household is identical to what it is in section 3.3, with the sole exception
that the utility function, (3.10), is replaced by (3.24).
A type j worker that draws work aversion index l is defined to be unemployed if the
following two conditions are satisfied:
(a) l > hj,t , (b) υ t Wj,t > & (1 + σ L ) lσL .

(3.25)

Here, υ t denotes the multiplier on the budget constraint, (3.13), in the Lagrangian representation of the household optimization problem. Expression (a) in (3.25) simply says that to be
unemployed, the worker must not be employed. Expression (b) in (3.25) determines whether
a non-employed worker is unemployed or not in the labor force. The object on the left of
the inequality in (b) is the value assigned by the household to the wage, Wj,t . The object
on the right of (b) is the fixed cost of going to work for the lth worker. Galí (2010) suggests
defining workers with l satisfying (3.25) as unemployed. This approach to unemployment
does not satisfy properties (i) and (iii) in the introduction. The approach does not meet
the o¢cial definition of unemployment because no one is exercising e§ort to find a job. In
addition, the existence of perfect consumption insurance implies that unemployed workers
enjoy higher utility than employed workers.
We use (3.25) to define the labor force, mt , in the standard model. With mt and aggregate
t −ht
employment, ht , we obtain the unemployment rate as follows ut = mm
or, after linearization
t
4
5
h
about steady state dut = m
m̂t − ĥt . Here, h < m because of the presence of monopoly

power. The object, ĥt may be obtained from (3.23) and the solution to the standard model.
R1
We now discuss the computation of the aggregate labor force, mt . We have mt ≡ 0 mj,t dj
where mj,t is the labor force associated with the j th type of labor and is defined by enforcing
R1
(b) in (3.25) at equality. After linearization m̂t ≡ 0 m̂j,t dj. We compute m̂j,t by linearizing
the equation that defines m̂j,t . After scaling (3.25), we obtain
t w̄t ẘj,t

= & (1 + σ L ) mσj,tL ,

(3.26)

W

t
, ẘj,t ≡ Wj,tt . Log-linearizing (3.26) about steady state and
where t ≡ υ t Pt zt+ , w̄t ≡ zW
+
t Pt
integrating the result over all j 2 (0, 1) :
Z 1
ˆ +w
b̊ j,t dj = σ L m̂t .
b̄
w
t+
t

0

From the result in section B.7 in the technical appendix, the integral in the above expression
is zero, so that:
ˆ +w
b̄ t
m̂t = t
.
σL
23

4. Estimation Strategy
We estimate the parameters of the model in the previous section using the impulse response
matching approach applied by Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), CEE, ACEL and other
papers. We apply the Bayesian version of that method proposed in CTW. Specifically, our
estimation machinery makes use of priors and posteriors, as well as the marginal likelihood as
a measure of model fit in our impulse response function matching estimation. The advantage
of the Bayesian impulse response matching estimation approach that we use is transparency
and focus.27 The transparency reflects that the estimation strategy has a simple graphical
representation, involving objects - impulse response functions - about which economists have
often very strong intuition. The advantage of focus comes from the possibility of studying
the empirical properties of a model without having to specify a full set of shocks.
Impulse response matching estimation is often very useful when crafting new models with
new transmission channels since the estimation procedure is very transparent and allows the
researcher to focus on the particular new model features and new transmission mechanisms
when taking the model to the data. Given that our paper is about constructing a new labor
market model, we find the impulse response matching procedure particularly attractive.
To promote comparability of results across the two papers and to simplify the discussion
here, we use the impulse response functions and associated probability intervals estimated
using the 14 variable, 2 lag vector autoregression (VAR) estimated in CTW.28 Here, we
consider the response of 11 variables to three shocks: the monetary policy shock, "R,t in
equation (3.18), the neutral technology shock, "t in equation (3.3), and the investment
29
specific shock, "Ψ
Nine of the eleven variables whose responses we
t in equation (3.4).
consider are the standard macroeconomic variables displayed in Figures 1-3. The other two
variables are the unemployment rate and the labor force which are shown in Figure 4. The
VAR is estimated using quarterly, seasonally adjusted data covering the period 1952Q1 to
2008Q4.
The assumptions that allow us to identify the e§ects of our three shocks are the ones
implemented in ACEL and Fisher (2006). To identify the monetary policy shock we suppose all variables aside from the nominal rate of interest are una§ected contemporaneously
by the policy shock. We make two assumptions to identify the dynamic response to the
technology shocks: (i) the only shocks that a§ect labor productivity in the long run are the
two technology shocks and (ii) the only shock that a§ects the price of investment relative
27

Another advantage of the impulse response matching estimation compared to full information estimation
is that the former does not require the underlying data to be normally distributed while the latter does.
28
See CTW for a sensitivity analysis with respect to the lag length of the VAR. Further, see the technical
appendix in CTW for details about the data.
29
The VAR in CTW also includes data on vacancies, job findings and job separations, but these variables
do not appear in the models in this paper and so we do not include their impulse responses in the analysis.

24

to consumption is the innovation to the investment specific shock.30 We emphasize that our
medium-sized model structure is such that it is in line with the identifying assumptions for
the monetary policy shock as well as for the two types technology shocks in the VAR. That
is, the timing of monetary policy shocks as well as the long-run e§ects of technology shocks
coincide in the model and the VAR.
Let ˆ denote the vector of impulse responses used in the analysis here. Since we consider
15 lags in the impulses, there are in principle 3 (i.e., the number of shocks) times 11 (number
of variables) times 15 (number of lags) = 495 elements in ˆ . However, we do not include
in ˆ the 10 contemporaneous responses to the monetary policy shock that are required to
be zero by our monetary policy identifying assumption. Taking the latter into account, the
vector ˆ has 485 elements. To conduct a Bayesian analysis, we require a likelihood function
for our data, ˆ . For this, we use an approximation based on asymptotic sampling theory. In
particular, when the number of observations, T, is large, we have
5 a
p 4
ˆ
T
− (θ0 ) ˜ N (0, W (θ0 , ζ 0 )) .
(4.1)

Here, θ0 and ζ 0 are the parameters of the model that generated the data, evaluated at their
true values. The parameter vector, θ0 , is the set of parameters that is explicit in our model,
while ζ 0 contains the parameters of stochastic processes not included in the analysis. In (4.1),
W (θ0 , ζ 0 ) is the asymptotic sampling variance of ˆ , which - as indicated by the notation is a function of all model parameters. We find it convenient to express (4.1) in the following
form:
a
ˆ ˜ N ( (θ0 ) , V ) ,
(4.2)
where V ≡ W (θT0 ,ζ 0 ) . For simplicity our notation does not make the dependence of V on θ0 , ζ 0
and T explicit. We treat V as though it were known. In practice, we work with a consistent
estimator of V in our analysis (for details, see CTW). That estimator is a diagonal matrix
with only the variances along the diagonal. An advantage of this diagonality property is
that our estimator has a simple graphical representation.31
We treat the following object as the likelihood of the data, ˆ , conditional on the model
30

Details of our strategy for computing impulse response functions imposing the shock identification are
discussed in ACEL.
31
The diagonal matrix V makes the estimator particularly transparent. Specifically, the estimator then
corresponds to selecting the set of estimated parameters such that the model impulse responses lie inside a
confidence tunnel around the estimated VAR impulses. If we instead had allowed for non-diagonal terms in
V , then the estimator aims not just to put the model impulses inside a confidence tunnel about the VAR
point estimates, but it is also concerned about the pattern of discrepancies across di§erent impulse responses.
In addition, by using a diagonal variance-covariance matrix V we ensure maximum comparability with the
existing literature, including Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Lindé (2011) who also imposed this structure on V .

25

parameters, θ :
4

f ˆ |θ, V

5

=

+

1
2π

, N2

− 12

|V |

)
1 4ˆ
exp −
−
2

50

(θ) V

−1

4

ˆ−

The Bayesian posterior of θ conditional on ˆ and V is:
4
5
4
5 f ˆ |θ, V p (θ)
4
5
f θ| ˆ , V =
,
f ˆ |V

(θ)

5*

.

(4.3)

(4.4)

4
5
where p (θ) denotes the priors on θ and f ˆ |V denotes the marginal density of ˆ :
4

f ˆ |V

5

=

Z

4
5
f ˆ |θ, V p (θ) dθ.

As usual, the mode of the posterior distribution of θ can be computed by simply maximizing
the value of the numerator in (4.4), since the denominator is not a function of θ. The marginal
density of ˆ is required when we want an overall measure of the fit of our model and when
we want to report the shape of the posterior marginal distribution of individual elements in
θ. We do this using the MCMC algorithm.

5. Estimation Results for the Medium-sized Model
The first subsection discusses model parameter values. We then show that our model of
involuntary unemployment does well at accounting for the dynamics of unemployment and
the labor force. Fortunately, the model is able to do this without compromising its ability
to account for the dynamics of standard macroeconomic variables.
5.1. Parameters
Parameters whose values are set a priori are listed in Table 1. We found that when we estimated the parameters, κw and λw , the estimator drove them to their boundaries. This is why
we simply set λw to a value near unity and we set κw = 1. The steady state value of inflation
(a parameter in the monetary policy rule and the price and wage updating equations), the
steady state government consumption to output ratio, and the growth rate of investmentspecific technology were chosen to coincide with their corresponding sample means in our
data set.32 The growth rate of neutral technology was chosen so that, conditional on the
growth rate of investment-specific technology, the steady state growth rate of output in the
32

In our model, the relative price of investment goods represents a direct observation of the technology
shock for producing investment goods.

26

model coincides with the corresponding sample average in the data. We set ξ w = 0.75, so
that the model implies wages are reoptimized once a year on average. We did not estimate
this parameter because we found that it is di¢cult to separately identify the value of ξ w and
the curvature of household labor disutility.
The parameters for which we report priors and posteriors are listed in Table 2. The
posterior mode and parameter distributions are based on a standard MCMC algorithm with
a total of 2.5 million draws based on 10 chains. We use the first 20 percent of draws for burnin. The acceptance rates are about 0.25 in each chain. We report results for two estimation
exercises. In the first exercise we estimate the standard DSGE model discussed in section
3.6. In this exercise we only use the impulse responses of standard macroeconomic variables
in the likelihood criterion, (4.3). In particular, we do not include the impulse responses of
the unemployment rate or the labor force when we estimate the standard DSGE model.33
Results based on this exercise appear under the heading, ‘standard model’. In the second
exercise we estimate our model with involuntary unemployment and we report those results
under the heading, ‘involuntary unemployment model’.
We make several observations about the parameters listed in Table 2. First, the results in the last two columns are relatively similar. This reflects that the two models (i) are
observationally equivalent relative to the impulse responses of standard macroeconomic variables and (ii) no substantial adjustments to the parameters are required for the involuntary
unemployment model to fit the unemployment and labor force data.
In the estimation of the involuntary unemployment model, we calculate the four parameters η, a, σ L , & endogenously so as to set the following objects exogenously: h, m,
zhh h
= σ target
, r = cw /cnw = rtarget . See section C.2 in the technical appendix for more dez
zh
tails. We set h = 0.628 and m = 0.665 which yields a steady state unemployment rate of
0.055. We estimate the values of σ target
and rtarget . The resulting values for η, a, σ L , & at the
z
estimated posterior mode of the estimated parameters are provided in Table 3.
In the estimation of the standard model, we apply an analogous treatment to worker
parameter values. In particular, throughout estimation we fix the steady state level of hours
worked, h = 0.628 and calculate the value of the parameter & endogenously. The resulting
value for & at the estimated posterior mode of the estimated parameters is provided in
Table 3. Similar to the involuntary unemployment model, we also estimate the value of
zhh h
= σ target
in the standard model. Note, however, that given the preference specification
z
zh
of the standard model, σ z = σ L (evaluate (2.24) using (3.24)).
Turning to the parameter values themselves, note first that the degree of price stickiness,
ξ p , is modest. The implied time between price reoptimizations is a little less than 3 quarters in
33

Subection 5.3 in the appendix discusses the implications when unemployment and the labor force are
included in the estimation in the standard model.

27

the standard model and a little less than 4 quarters in the involuntary unemployment model.
The amount of information in the likelihood, (4.3), about the value of ξ p is reasonably large
in both models. The posterior standard deviation is roughly an order of magnitude smaller
than the prior standard deviation and the posterior probability interval is half the length
of the prior probability interval. Generally, the amount of information in the likelihood
about all the parameters is large in this sense. An exception to this pattern is the coe¢cient
on inflation in the Taylor rule, rπ . There appears to be relatively little information about
this parameter in the likelihood. Note that σ z is estimated to be quite small, implying
a consumption-compensated labor supply elasticity for the household of around 6 in the
standard model and 3 in the involuntary unemployment model. Such high elasticities would
be regarded as empirically implausible if it was interpreted as the elasticity of supply of hours
by an individual worker. But this elasticity should instead be interpreted as the elasticity
at the household level incorporating all individual workers who are part of the household.
Put di§erently, in our model of involuntary unemployment, the elasticity of labor supply
is quite large at the household level as an outcome of our limited labor market insurance
arrangement. By contrast the elasticity of labor supply is quite small at the individual worker
level, consistent with micro evidence. For further discussion of this distinction between
measures of individual and household-level labor supply elasticities, see section 2.3. in CTW.
The consumption replacement ratio, r = cnw /cw , is a novel feature of our model, that
does not appear in standard monetary DSGE models. The replacement ratio is estimated to
be roughly 80 percent. This is close to the value used for calibration by Landais, Michaillat
and Saez (2018). It is higher than the estimates of Hamermesh (1982) but somewhat lower
than the empirical estimate of 90 percent reported by Chetty and Looney (2007) and Gruber
(1997) and mentioned in the introduction. Also, our consumption replacement ratio appears
to be higher than the number reported for developed countries in OECD (2006). However,
the replacement ratios reported by OECD pertain to income, rather than consumption.34
So, they are likely to underestimate the consumption concept relevant for us.
Not surprisingly, our model’s implications for the consumption replacement ratio is sensitive to the habit persistence parameter, b. If we set the value of that parameter to zero, then
our model’s steady state replacement ratio drops to 20 percent. Essentially, habit persistence
adds curvature to the utility function and thereby increases workers desire for insurance, i.e.
a higher replacement ratio.
Table 2 reveals that the estimated value of the parameter governing the impact of the
labor force on the probability of a worker to find a job is ! = −0.533. Recall that we use
a standard normal prior, i.e. we are agnostic about the sign of !. The data is informative
34

The income replacement ratio for the US is reported to be 54 percent in Table 3.2, which can be found
at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/28/9/36965805.pdf.

28

about the sign of ! being negative. Note that ! < 0 implies that an inflow of workers into
the labor force reduces the probability of a worker to find a job. The negative value of !
helps the model to account for the slow response of the labor force to shocks, see Figures
1-3 which are discussed in the next subsection. To examine the sensitivity of our results we
re-estimated the involuntary unemployment model with ! set to zero. Technical Appendix
Table A.2 contains the corresponding estimated parameters and technical appendix Figures
1 through 4 show the corresponding impulse responses. The impulse responses show that
the model fit deteriorates when ! is set to zero instead of being set to its estimated value
of ! = −0.533. The marginal data density of the involuntary unemployment model with
! = 0 is about 60 log points lower than the baseline involuntary unemployment model with
! = −0.533.
Finally, Table 3 reports steady state properties of the estimated standard model as well
as the estimated baseline involuntary unemployment model, both evaluated at the posterior
mode of the parameters.
5.2. Impulse Response Functions of Macroeconomic Variables
Figures 1-3 display the results of the indicated macroeconomic variables to our three shocks.
In each case, the solid black line is the point estimate of the dynamic response generated
by our estimated VAR. The grey area is an estimate of the corresponding 95% probability
interval.35 Our estimation strategy selects a model parameterization that places the modelimplied impulse response functions as close as possible to the center of the grey area, while
not su§ering too much of a penalty from the priors. The estimation criterion is less concerned about reproducing VAR-based impulse response functions where the grey areas are
the widest.
The thick solid line and the line with solid squares in the figures display the impulse
responses of the standard model and the involuntary unemployment model, respectively,
at the posterior mean of the parameters. Note in Figures 1-3 that in many cases only
one of these two lines is visible. Moreover, in cases where a distinction between the two
lines can be discerned, they are nevertheless very close. This reflects that the two models
account roughly equally well for the impulse responses to the three shocks. This is a key
result. Expanding the standard model to include unemployment and the labor force does
not produce a deterioration in the model’s ability to account for the estimated dynamic
responses of standard macroeconomic variables to monetary policy and technology shocks.
35

We compute the probability interval as follows. We simulate 2,500 sets of impulse response functions by
generating an equal number of artificial data sets, each of length T, using the VAR estimated from the data.
Here, T denotes the number of observations in our actual data set. We compute the standard deviations of
the artificial impulse response functions. The grey areas in Figures 1-5 are the estimated impulse response
functions plus and minus 1.96 times the corresponding standard deviation.

29

Consider Figure 1, which displays the response of standard macroeconomic variables to a
monetary policy shock. Note how the model captures the slow response of inflation. Indeed,
the model even captures the ‘price puzzle’ phenomenon, according to which inflation moves
in the ‘wrong’ direction initially. This apparently perverse initial response of inflation is
interpreted by the model as reflecting the reduction in labor costs associated with the cut in
the nominal rate of interest.36 It is interesting that the slow response of inflation is accounted
for with a fairly modest degree of wage and price-setting frictions. The model captures the
response of output and consumption to a monetary policy shock reasonably well. However,
there is a substantial miss on capacity utilization. Also, the model apparently does not
have the flexibility to capture the relatively sharp rise and fall in the investment response,
although the model responses lie inside the grey area. The relatively large estimate of the
curvature in the investment adjustment cost function, S 00 , reflects that to allow a greater
response of investment to a monetary policy shock would cause the model’s prediction of
investment to lie outside the grey area in the initial and later quarters. These findings for
monetary policy shocks are broadly similar to those reported in CEE, ACEL and CTW.
Figure 2 displays the response of standard macroeconomic variables to a neutral technology shock. Note that the models do reasonably well at reproducing the empirically estimated
responses. The dynamic response of inflation is particularly notable. The estimation results
in ACEL suggest that the sharp and precisely estimated drop in inflation in response to
a neutral technology shock is di¢cult to reproduce in a model like the standard monetary
DSGE model. In describing this problem for their model, ACEL express a concern that the
failure reflects a deeper problem with sticky price models. Perhaps the emphasis on price and
wage setting frictions, largely motivated by the inertial response of inflation to a monetary
shock, is shown to be misguided by the evidence that inflation responds rapidly to technology shocks.37 Our results suggest a far more mundane possibility. There are two di§erences
between our model and the one in ACEL which allow it to reproduce the response of inflation to a technology shock more or less exactly without hampering its ability to account for
the slow response of inflation to a monetary policy shock. First, as discussed above, in our
model there is no indexation of prices to lagged inflation. ACEL follows CEE in supposing
that when firms cannot optimize their price, they index it fully to lagged aggregate inflation.
The position of our model on price indexation is a key reason why we can account for the
rapid fall in inflation after a neutral technology shock while ACEL cannot. We suspect that
36

For a defense, based on firm-level data, of the existence of this ‘working capital’ channel of monetary
policy, see Barth and Ramey (2001).
37
The concern is reinforced by the fact that an alternative approach, one based on information imperfections and minimal price/wage setting frictions, seems like a natural one for explaining the puzzle of the slow
response of inflation to monetary policy shocks and the quick response to technology shocks (see Maćkowiak
and Wiederholt, 2009, Mendes, 2009, and Paciello, 2011). Dupor, Han and Tsai (2009) suggest more modest
changes in the model structure to accommodate the inflation puzzle.

30

our way of treating indexation is a step in the right direction from the point of view of
microeconomic data. Micro observations suggest that individual prices do not change for
extended periods of time. A second distinction between our model and the one in ACEL
is that we specify the neutral technology shock to be a random walk (see (3.3)), while in
ACEL the growth rate of the estimated technology shock is highly autocorrelated. In ACEL,
a technology shock triggers a strong wealth e§ect which stimulates a surge in demand that
places upward pressure on marginal cost and thus inflation.38
Figure 3 displays dynamic responses of macroeconomic variables to an investment-specific
shock. The evidence indicates that the two models, parameterized at their posterior means,
do well in accounting for these responses.
5.3. Impulse Response Functions of Unemployment and the Labor Force
Figure 4 displays the response of unemployment and the labor force to our three shocks. The
key thing to note is that the model has no di¢culty accounting for the pattern of responses.
The probability bands are large, but the point estimates suggest that unemployment falls
about 0.2 percentage points and the labor force rises a small amount after an expansionary
monetary policy shock. The model roughly reproduces this pattern. In the case of each
response, the model generates opposing movements in the labor force and the unemployment
rate. This appears to be consistent with the evidence.
As discussed in section 3.6 above, Galí (2011) points out that the standard model has
implicit in it a theory of unemployment and the labor force. Figure 5 adds the implications
of the standard model for these variables to the impulses displayed in Figure 4 when data for
unemployment and the labor force are not part of the dataset used in the standard model.
Note that the impulses implied by the standard model are so large that they distort the scale
in Figure 5. Consider, for example, the first panel of graphs in the figure, which pertain to the
monetary policy shock. The standard model predicts a massive fall in the labor force after an
expansionary monetary policy shock. The reason is that the rise in aggregate consumption
(see Figure 1) reduces the value of work by reducing υ t in (3.25). The resulting sharp drop
in labor supply strongly contradicts our VAR-based evidence which suggests a small rise.
Given the standard model’s prediction for the labor force, it is not surprising that the model
massively over-predicts the fall in the unemployment rate after a monetary expansion.
An alternative approach to deduce the implications of the standard model for unemployment and the labor force is to impose the corresponding VAR impulse responses in the
38

An additional, important, factor accounting for the damped response of inflation to a monetary policy
shock (indeed, the perverse initial ‘price puzzle’ phenomenon) is the assumption that firms must borrow in
advance to pay for their variable production costs. But, this model feature is present in both our model and
ACEL as well as CEE.

31

estimation. When doing so, the unemployment rate and labor force responses are virtually
flat after the monetary shock, which is counterfactual with respect to the VAR evidence.
Basically, the estimation procedure selects parameters such that the unemployment rate and
labor force do not fall as much as displayed in Figure 5.39 However, selecting parameters
in the standard model to basically shut down the responses of unemployment and the labor
force comes at a heavy cost: the fit of all other macroeconomic data deteriorates sharply
in this case. See Figures A1 to A4 in the appendix and Table A.1 in the technical appendix for the estimated parameter values. Therefore, our model of involuntary unemployment
outperforms the standard model when both models face the same dataset including unemployment and the labor force. Quantitatively, the log data density at the posterior mode
for our involuntary unemployment model is about 200 log points higher than the one for
the standard model. See appendix section A.1 for an in-depth discussion of the underlying
estimation results for the standard model in this case.
The failure of the standard model raises a puzzle. Why does our involuntary unemployment model do so well at accounting for the unemployment rate and the labor force? The
puzzle is interesting because the two models share essentially the same utility function at
the level of the worker. One might imagine that our model would have the same problem
with wealth e§ects. In fact, it does not have the same problem because there is a connection
in our model between the labor force and employment that does not exist in the standard
model. In our model, the increased consumption premium from holding a job that occurs
in response to an expansionary monetary policy shock simultaneously encourages workers to
search for work more intensely, and to substitute into the labor force.
The standard model’s prediction for the response of the unemployment rate and the labor
force to neutral and investment-specific technology shocks is also strongly counterfactual.
The problem is always the same, and reflects the operation of wealth e§ects on labor supply.
The problems in Figure 5 with the standard model motivate Galí (2011) and Galí, Smets
and Wouters (2011) to modify the worker utility function in the standard model in ways that
reduce wealth e§ects on labor. Our view is that modifying the utility function is not the right
way to go as microdata evidence indicate substantial and immediate wealth e§ects on labor
supply. For example, Cesarini, Lindqvist, Notowidigdo and Östling (2017) find that winning
a lottery prize reduces individual labor earnings already within a year, with very persistent
e§ects thereafter. Earnings fall by approximately 1.1 percent of the prize amount per year.
Somewhat stronger e§ects are documented by Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote (2001) who find
that the discounted value of earnings falls by 11% in response to an exogenous increase in
39

Note that the standard model is not able to generate a rise in the labor force after an expansionary
monetary policy shock. Thus, the “best” response possible in that model is a zero labor force response to
the monetary shock.

32

unearned income, i.e. a lottery prize. There is also macroeconomic evidence indicating that
wealth e§ects on labor supply are non-negligible. Specifically, Mertens and Ravn (2011) use
VAR evidence to show that the economy contracts in response to anticipated tax cuts. They
then account for the VAR evidence by using a DSGE model with standard wealth preferences.
In e§ect, our involuntary unemployment model represents an alternative strategy for dealing
with these wealth e§ects. Our model has the added advantage of being consistent with all
three characteristics (i)-(iii) of unemployment described in the introduction.

6. Further Evidence in Favour of Our Model
Our model of unemployment has several interesting microeconomic implications that deserve
closer attention. The model implies that the consumption premium of employed workers over
nw
nw w
the non-employed, cw
t /ct , is procyclical or, equivalently, the replacement ratio, ct /ct , is
countercyclical. Although Chetty and Looney (2007) and Gruber (1997) report that there is
a premium on average, we cannot infer anything about the cyclicality of the premium from
the evidence they present. Studies of the cross section variance of log worker consumption
are a potential source of evidence on the cyclical behavior of the premium. To see this, let Vt
denote the variance of log worker consumption in the period t cross section in our model:40
+ + w ,,2
ct
Vt = (1 − ht ) ht log nw
.
ct
According to this expression, the model posits two countervailing forces on the cross-sectional
dispersion of consumption, Vt , in a recession. First, for a given distribution of the population across employed and non-employed workers (i.e., holding ht fixed), a decrease in the
consumption premium leads to a decrease in consumption dispersion in a recession. Second,
holding the consumption premium fixed, consumption dispersion increases as people move
from employment to non-employment with the fall in ht .41 These observations suggest that
(i) if Vt is observed to drop in recessions, this is evidence in favor of the model’s prediction
that the consumption premium is procyclical and (ii) if Vt is observed to stay constant or
rise in recessions then we cannot conclude anything about the cyclicality of the consumption
premium. Evidence in Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2010) suggests that the US was in
case (i) in three of the previous five recessions.42 In particular, they show that the dispersion
40

Note that the formula for Vt corresponds to the model developed in section 2 of this paper. For the
model with capital developed in section 3, the relevant formula is more complicated as it requires a nontrivial aggregation across households that supply di§erent types of labor services. To see how we derived the
formula in the text, note that the cross-sectional mean of log household consumption is Et = ht log (cw
t )+
2
2
w
nw
nw 2
(1 − ht ) log (cnw
− Et ) = ht (1 − ht ) (log cw
t ) so that Vt = ht (log ct − Et ) + (1 − ht ) (log ct
t − log ct ) .
41
This statement assumes that the empirically relevant case applies, i.e. ht > 1/2.
42
Of course, we cannot rule out that the drop in Vt in recessions has nothing to do with the mechanism in
our model but rather reflects some other source of heterogeneity in the data.

33

in log worker non-durable consumption decreased in the 1980, 2001 and 2007 recessions.43
We conclude tentatively that the observed cross-sectional dispersion of consumption across
workers lends support to our model’s implication that the consumption premium is procyclical. In addition, the fact that the duration of unemployment benefits routinely are extended
in recessions (e.g. in the US) is an indication that the income premium is procyclical empirically.
Another interesting implication of the model is its prediction that high unemployment
in recessions reflects the procyclicality of e§ort in job search. There is some evidence that
supports this implication of the model. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (2009) constructs
a measure of the number of discouraged workers. These are people who are available to
work and have looked for work in the past 12 months, but are not currently looking because
they believe no jobs are available. This statistic has only been gathered since 1994, and
so it covers just two recessions. However, in both the recessions for which we have data,
the number of discouraged workers increased substantially. For example, the number of
discouraged workers jumped 70 percent from 2008Q1 to 2009Q1. In fact, the number of
discouraged workers is only a tiny fraction of the labor force. However, to the extent that
the sentiments of discouraged workers are shared by workers more generally, a jump in the
number of discouraged workers could be a signal of a general decline in job search intensity
in recessions. But, this is an issue that demands a more careful investigation.
Interestingly, Shimer (2004) reports evidence that search e§ort may be acyclical or even
countercyclical. In his work, the number of di§erent search methods that the unemployed
use are counted at di§erent stages of the business cycle. We interpret Shimer’s finding
as reflecting an extensive margin of search, i.e. how many alternative search methods are
being used. By contrast, our model emphasizes the intensive margin of job search, i.e. how
intensely one particular method of search is being used by the unemployed. Therefore, our
model is not necessarily at odds with the evidence provided by Shimer.

7. Concluding Remarks
We constructed a model in which workers must make an e§ort to find work. Because e§ort
is privately observed, perfect insurance against labor market outcomes is not feasible. To
ensure that people have an incentive to find work, workers that find jobs must be better
o§ than people who do not work. With additively separable utility, this translates into the
proposition that employed workers have higher consumption than the non-employed. We
integrate our model of unemployment into a standard monetary DSGE model and find that
the model’s ability to account for standard macroeconomic variables is not diminished. At
43

A similar observation was made about the 2007 recession in Parker and Vissing-Jorgensen (2009).

34

the same time, the new model appears to account well for the dynamics of variables like
unemployment and the labor force.
The theory of unemployment developed here has interesting implications for the optimal
variation of labor market insurance over the business cycle. In a boom more labor is demanded by firms. To satisfy the higher demand, workers are provided with more incentives
to look for work by raising consumption for the employed, cw
t , relative to consumption of
nw
the non-employed, ct . Conversely, in a recession, the consumption premium falls and thus
w
the replacement ratio, cnw
t /ct , increases. Thus, our model implies a procyclical consumption
premium — or equivalently — a countercyclical replacement ratio. Put di§erently, optimal
labor market insurance is countercyclical in our model.
The empirical results highlight an important implication of our work. In particular, it
is in general not su¢cient to account for the response of only employment or total hours
worked to be able to draw conclusions about the unemployment rate. In particular, when the
standard model is estimated without data on unemployment and the labor force, the fit of
total hours of the model is in fact very good. By contrast, the implications of the model for
unemployment and the labor force are counterfactual. Conversely, when the standard model
is estimated on unemployment and labor force data too, the fit of these two variables improves
somewhat. However this improvement of fit comes at the cost of not fitting total hours well.
In other words, the standard model provides an example that it is not straightforward to
account for the dynamics of unemployment and labor force participation jointly with other
standard macroeconomic variables. By contrast, our model does a good job in this regard.
We leave it to future research to quantify the various ways in which the new model may
contribute to policy analysis. In part, we hope that the model is useful simply because labor
market data are of interest in their own right. But, we expect the model to be useful even
when labor market data are not the central variables of concern. An important input into
policy analysis is the estimation of ‘latent variables’ such as the output gap and the e¢cient,
or ‘natural’, rate of interest. Other important inputs into policy analysis are forecasts of
inflation and output. By allowing one to systematically integrate labor market information
into the usual macroeconomic dataset, our model can be expected to provide more precise
forecasts, as well as better estimates of latent variables.44 We also believe, in line with Veracierto (2008), that confronting models with labor market data such as unemployment and
the labor force provides an important test for any business cycle model.
44

For an elaboration on this point, see Basistha and Startz (2004) and Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin
(2011a).

35

References
[1] Altig, David, Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum and Jesper Lindé, 2004,
“Firm-Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle”, manuscript, Northwestern University.
[2] Alexopoulos, Michelle, 2004, “Unemployment and the business cycle”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 51 (2), pages 257—298.
[3] Andolfatto, David, 1996, “Business Cycles and Labor Market Search”, American Economic Review, Vol. 86, pages 112—132.
[4] Atkeson, Andrew and Robert E. Lucas, Jr., 1995, “E¢ciency and Equality in a Simple
Model of E¢cient Unemployment Insurance”, Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 66 (1),
pages 64—88.
[5] Atkeson, Andrew and Christopher Phelan, 1994, “Reconsidering the Costs of Business
Cycles with Incomplete Markets”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 9, pages 187—
207.
[6] Ball, Laurence and N. Gregory Mankiw, 2002, “The NAIRU in Theory and Practice”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16 (4), pages 115—136.
[7] Barth, Marvin J. III and Valerie A. Ramey, 2001, “The Cost Channel of Monetary
Transmission”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 16, pages 199—240.
[8] Basistha, Arabinda and Richard Startz, 2004, “Measuring the NAIRU with Reduced
Uncertainty: A Multiple Indicator-Common Component Approach”, manuscript, University of Washington.
[9] Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson and Randall Wright, 1991, “Homework in Macroeconomics: Worker Production and Aggregate Fluctuations”, Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 99 (6), pages 1166—1187.
[10] Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Galí, 2010, “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New
Keynesian Model with Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
Vol. 2(2), pages 1—30.
[11] Brown, Alessio J. G., Christian Merkl, and Dennis J. Snower, 2015, “An Incentive
Theory of Matching,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, Vol. 19 (3), pages 643—668.
[12] Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009, “Ranks of Discouraged Workers and Others Marginally
Attached to the Labor Force Rise During Recession”, Issues in Labor Statistics, U.S.
Department of Labor, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Summary 09-04/April, available
at: http://www.bls.gov/opub/ils/pdf/opbils74.pdf.
[13] Campolmi, Alessia and Stefano Gnocchi, 2016, “Labor market participation, unemployment and monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 79(C), pages 17—29.
[14] Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Matthew J. Notowidigdo and Robert Östling, 2017,
“The E§ect of Wealth on Individual and Worker Labor Supply: Evidence from Swedish
Lotteries,” American Economic Review, Vol. 107 (12), pages 3917—3946.

36

[15] Chetty, Raj and Adam Looney, 2007, “Income Risk and the Benefits of Social Insurance:
Evidence from Indonesia and the United States”, NBER Chapters, in: Fiscal Policy and
Management in East Asia, NBER-EASE, Volume 16, pages 99—121, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
[16] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum, 1992, “Current Real-Business-Cycle
Theories and Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, Vol.
82 (3), pages 430—450.
[17] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, 2005, “Nominal
Rigidities and the Dynamic E§ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy”, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 113 (1), pages 1—45.
[18] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2015. "Understanding the Great Recession." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7 (1):
110-67.
[19] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt, 2016, “Unemployment and Business Cycles,” Econometrica, 84 (4), 1523—1569.
[20] Christiano, Lawrence J., Cosmin Ilut, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno, 2008,
“Monetary Policy and Stock Market Boom-bust Cycles”, European Central Bank Working Paper No. 955.
[21] Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2011a, “DSGE Models
for Monetary Policy Analysis,” Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, edited by
B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford.
[22] Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2011b, “Introducing
Financial Frictions and Unemployment into a Small Open Economy Model”, Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 35 (12), pages 1999—2041.
[23] Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt and Karl Walentin, 2019, “Technical Appendix for: Involuntary Unemployment and the Business Cycle”, manuscript, available
at: http://sites.google.com/site/mathiastrabandt/home/downloads/CTWinvoluntary_techapp.pdf
[24] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler, 1999, “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVII
(December), pages 1661—1707.
[25] Cochrane, John H., 1991, “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance”, The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 99 (5), pages 957—97.
[26] den Haan, Wouter J., Ramey, Garey, Watson, J., 2000, “Job Destruction and Propagation of Shocks”, American Economic Review, Vol. 90 (3), pages 482—498.
[27] Dupor, Bill , Jing Han and Yi-Chan Tsai, 2009, “What Do Technology Shocks Tell
Us About the New Keynesian Paradigm?”, Journal of Monetary Economics 56, pages
560—569
[28] Erceg, Christopher J., Henderson, Dale, W. and Andrew T. Levin, 2000, “Optimal
Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol 46, pages 281—313.
[29] Christopher J. Erceg & Andrew T. Levin, 2014. "Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
Blackwell Publishing, vol. 46(S2), pages 3-49, October.
37

[30] Fisher, Jonas D. M., 2006, “The Dynamic E§ects of Neutral and Investment-Specific
Technology Shocks.”, Journal of Political Economy, June 2006, Vol. 114 (3), pages 413—
52.
[31] Galí, Jordi, 2011, “The Return Of The Wage Phillips Curve,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, Vol. 9 (3), pages 436—461.
[32] Galí, Jordi, Frank Smets and Raf Wouters, 2011, “Unemployment in an Estimated New
Keynesian Model,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 26.
[33] Gertler, Mark, Luca Sala and Antonella Trigari, 2008, “An Estimated Monetary DSGE
Model with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage Bargaining”, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, December, Vol. 40 (8), pages 1713—1764.
[34] Gornemann, Nils, Keith Kuester and Makoto Nakajima, 2016. “Doves for the Rich,
Hawks for the Poor? Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy,” International
Finance Discussion Papers 1167, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
[35] Groshenny, Nicolas, 2009, “Evaluating a Monetary Business Cycle Model with Unemployment for the Euro Area”, National Bank of Belgium Working Paper No. 173, July.
[36] Gruber, Jonathan, 1997, “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 87 (1), pages 192—205.
[37] Guerron-Quintana, Pablo, 2008, “Refinements on Macroeconomic Modeling: The Role
of Non-Separability and Heterogeneous Labor Supply”, Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, Vol. 32, pages 3613 — 3630.
[38] Hamermesh, Daniel S., 1982, “Social Insurance and Consumption: An Empirical Inquiry,” American Economic Review, Vol. 72 (1), pages 101—113.
[39] Hansen, Gary D., 1985, “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 16 (3), pages 309—27.
[40] Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri and Giovanni L. Violante, 2010, “Inequality in
Times of Crisis: Lessons From the Past and a First Look at the Current Recession”,
manuscript, University of Minnesota.
[41] Hopenhayn, Hugo and Juan Pablo Nicolini, 1997, “Optimal Unemployment Insurance”,
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 2, pages 412—438.
[42] Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin and Bruce I. Sacerdote, 2001, “Estimating the
E§ect of Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence
from a Survey of Lottery Players,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91(4), pages 778—
794.
[43] Imrohoroğlu, Ayşe, 1989, “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquidity
Constraints”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97, No. 6 (Dec.), pages 1364—1383.
[44] Robert G. King, Charles I. Plosser, Sergio T. Rebelo, 1988, “Production, growth and
business cycles : I. The basic neoclassical model”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.
21 (2-3), pages 195—232.
[45] Kocherlakota, Narayana, 1996, “Implications of e¢cient risk sharing without commitment”, Review of Economic Studies, 63, pages 595—609.
38

[46] Krusell, Per, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson and Aysegul Sahin, 2008, “Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor, Incomplete Markets and Labor Market Frictions”,
Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 55, 961—979.
[47] Krusell, Per, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson and Aysegul Sahin, 2011, “A
Three State Model of Worker flows in General Equilibrium”, Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 146 (3), pages 1107—1133.
[48] Krause, Michael U., David Lopez-Salido and Thomas A. Lubik, 2008, “Inflation dynamics with search frictions: A structural econometric analysis”, Journal of Monetary
Economics Vol. 55, pages 892— 916.
[49] Landais, Camille, Pascal Michaillat and Emmanuel Saez, 2012, “Optimal Unemployment Insurance over the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Papers 16526.
[50] Lechthaler, Wolfgang, Christian Merkl and Dennis Snower, 2010, “Monetary Persistence and the Labor Market: A New Perspective”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, Vol. 34 (5), pages 968—983.
[51] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1987, “Models of business cycles”, New York: Basil Blackwell.
[52] Maćkowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt, 2009, “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention”, American Economic Review, June, Volume 99(3), pages 769—803.
[53] Mendes, Rhys, 2009, “Information, Expectations, and the Business Cycle”, manuscript,
Research Department, Bank of Canada.
[54] Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn, 2011. “Understanding the Aggregate E§ects of
Anticipated and Unanticipated Tax Policy Shocks,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
Vol. 14(1), pages 27—54.
[55] Merz, Monika, 1995, “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle”, Journal
of Monetary Economics, Vol. 36, pages 269—300.
[56] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, 1994. "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment," Review of Economic Studies, Wiley Blackwell, vol. 61 (3), pages 397—415, July.
[57] Mulligan, Casey, 2001, “Aggregate Implications of Indivisible Labor”, Advances in
Macroeconomics, Vol. 1 (1), article 4.
[58] OECD, 2006, “OECD Employment Outlook 2006: Boosting Jobs and Incomes”, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Renouf Pub Co Ltd, ISBN
92-64-02384-4.
[59] Paciello, Luigi, 2011, “Does Inflation Adjust Faster to Aggregate Technology Shocks
than to Monetary Policy Shocks?”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 43,
pages 1663—1684.
[60] Parker Jonathan and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009, “Who Bears Aggregate Fluctuations
and How?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 99(2), pages 399—405.
[61] Prescott, Edward, 1986, “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement”, Quarterly
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, issue Fall, pages 9—22.

39

[62] Rogerson, Richard, 1988, “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 21 (1), pages 3—16.
[63] Rogerson, Richard and Randall Wright, 1988, “Involuntary Unemployment in
Economies with E¢cient Risk Sharing”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 22, pages
501—515.
[64] Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford, 1997, “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy”, in Bernanke, B. and J. Rotemberg,
eds., NBER, Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[65] Sala, Luca, Ulf Söderström, and Antonella Trigari, 2008, “Monetary policy under uncertainty in an estimated model with labor market frictions”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 55, pages 983— 1006.
[66] Shavell, Steven, and Laurence Weiss, 1979, “The optimal payment of unemployment
insurance over time”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 87 (6), pages 1347—1362.
[67] Shimer, Robert, 2004, “Search Intensity”, manuscript.
[68] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters, 2003, “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General
Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area”, Journal of the European Economic Association,
Vol. 1 (5), pages 1123—75.
[69] Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, 2007, “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles”,
American Economic Review, Vol. 97 (3), pages 586—606.
[70] Stock, James and Mark Watson, 1999, “Forecasting Inflation”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 44, pages 293—335.
[71] Sveen, Tommy and Lutz Weinke, 2008, “New Keynesian perspectives on labor market
dynamics”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 55, pages 921— 930.
[72] Sveen, Tommy and Lutz Weinke, 2009, “Inflation and labor market dynamics revisited”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 56, pages 1096—1100.
[73] Thomas, Carlos, 2011, “Search frictions, real rigidities and inflation dynamics”, Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 43, pages 1131—1164.
[74] Trigari, Antonella, 2009, “Equilibrium Unemployment, Job Flows, and Inflation Dynamics”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 41 (1), pages 1—30.
[75] Veracierto, Marcelo, 2008, “On the cyclical behavior of employment, unemployment and
labor force participation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 55 (6), pages 1143—1157.
[76] Walsh, Carl, 2005, “Labor market search, sticky prices, and interest rate policies”,
Review of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 8, pages 829—849.
[77] Yun, Tack, 1996, “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business
Cycles”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 37(2), pages 345—370.

40

Table 1: Non-Estimated Parameters in Medium-sized Model
Parameter
Value Description
δ
0.025 Depreciation rate
β
0.99678 Discount factor
π
1.00625 Gross inflation rate
ηg
0.2
Government consumption to GDP ratio
κw
1
Wage indexation
λw
1.01
Wage markup
ξw
0.75
Wage stickiness
400lnµz+
1.7
Annual output per capita growth rate
400lnµz+ µΨ
2.9
Annual investment per capita growth rate

Table 3: Medium-sized Model Steady
Standard
Involuntary
Variable
Model
Unemp. Model
pk0 k/y
8.765
7.665
c/y
0.519
0.554
i/y
0.281
0.246
H=h
0.628
0.628
nw w
c /c
1.000
0.797
R
1.014
1.014
real
R
1.0075
1.0075
u
0.059
0.055
m
0.665
∗
l
0.668
˚
l
0.504
&
1.936
0.609
σL
0.165
4.287
η
-0.467
a
1.170

41

State at Posterior Mode for Parameters
Description
Capital to GDP ratio (quarterly)
Consumption to GDP ratio
Investment to GDP ratio
Steady state labor input
Replacement ratio
Gross nominal interest rate (quarterly)
Gross real interest rate (quarterly)
Unemployment rate
Labor force (involuntary unemployment model)
Labor force (standard model)
Share of workers with p(e; η̃) = 1
Slope, labor disutility
Curvature, labor disutility
Intercept, p(e; η̃)
Slope, p(e; η̃)

Table 2: Priors and Posteriors of Parameters in Estimated Medium-sized Model
Parameter
Prior
Posterior
Distribution
Mode
Mode
[bounds]
[2.5% 97.5%]
[2.5% 97.5%]
Standard
Involuntary
Model
Unemp. Model
Price Setting Parameters
Price Stickiness
ξp
Beta
0.67
0.616
0.727
[0, 1]
[0.45 0.83]
[0.55 0.71]
[0.67 0.78]
Price Markup
λf
Gamma
1.19
1.230
1.399
[1.001, 1]
[1.01 1.40]
[1.10 1.36]
[1.29 1.54]
Monetary Authority Parameters
Taylor Rule: Int. Smoothing
ρR
Beta
0.76
0.873
0.890
[0, 1]
[0.37 0.93]
[0.82 0.90]
[0.85 0.91]
Taylor Rule: Inflation Coef.
rπ
Gamma
1.68
1.395
1.414
[1.001, 1]
[1.41 2.00]
[1.19 1.65]
[1.19 1.69]
Taylor Rule: GDP Coef.
ry
Gamma
0.07
0.077
0.113
[0, 1]
[0.02 0.21]
[0.03 0.14]
[0.05 0.18]
Preference Parameters
Consumption Habit
b
Beta
0.75
0.761
0.776
[0, 1]
[0.64 0.83]
[0.72 0.79]
[0.74 0.80]
Inverse Labor Supply Elast.
σz
Gamma
0.26
0.165
0.334
[0, 1]
[0.13 0.52]
[0.08 0.23]
[0.17 0.43]
Replacement Ratio
cnw /cw
Beta
0.75
−
0.797
[0, 1]
[0.69 0.79]
−
[0.76 0.82]
Labor Force Impact on p(e, η̃) !
Normal
0.0
−
-0.533
[-1, 1]
[-1.96 1.96]
−
[-0.74 -0.38]
Technology Parameters
Capital Share
α
Beta
0.32
0.31
0.270
[0, 1]
[0.28 0.37]
[0.25 0.33]
[0.24 0.31]
Technology di§usion
θ
Beta
0.50
0.052
0.015
[0, 1]
[0.12 0.86]
[0.01 0.80]
[0.01 0.05]
Capacity Adj. Costs Curv.
σa
Gamma
0.31
0.462
0.256
[0, 1]
[0.09 1.22]
[0.21 0.56]
[0.10 0.59]
00
Investment Adj. Costs Curv.
S
Gamma
7.50
11.56
15.72
[0, 1]
[4.56 12.29] [8.46 14.92]
[11.46 18.78]
Shocks
Autocorr. Invest. Tech.
ρ
Beta
0.78
0.703
0.704
[0, 1]
[0.53 0.91]
[0.54 0.77]
[0.59 0.82]
Std.Dev. Neutral Tech. Shock σ n
Inv. Gamma
0.06
0.211
0.194
[0, 1]
[0.04 0.44]
[0.18 0.25]
[0.17 0.23]
Std.Dev. Invest. Tech. Shock σ
Inv. Gamma
0.06
0.125
0.115
[0, 1]
[0.04 0.44]
[0.09 0.17]
[0.08 0.15]
Std.Dev. Monetary Shock
σR
Inv. Gamma
0.22
0.496
0.449
[0, 1]
[0.14 1.49]
[0.41 0.60]
[0.37 0.53]
42

Figure 1: Dynamic Responses to a Monetary Policy Shock
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

GDP (%)

Standard Model

Inflation (APR)

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.1

Involuntary Unemployment Model

0.2

Federal Funds Rate (APR)

0

0

-0.2

0

-0.4

-0.1

-0.6

-0.2
0

5

10

0

Consumption (%)

5

10

0

Investment (%)

5

10

Capacity Utilization (%)
1

1

0.2

0.5

0.1

0.5

0
0

0

-0.5

-0.1
0

5

10

0

Rel. Price Investment (%)

5

10

Hours (%)
0.3

0.2

0

5
10
Quarters

10

Real Wage (%)

0

0.1

0

5

0.05

0.2
0.1

0

-0.05

0

-0.1

-0.1

-0.15
0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

Figure 2: Dynamic Responses to a Neutral Technology Shock
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

GDP (%)

Standard Model

Involuntary Unemployment Model

Inflation (APR)

0.6

-0.2

Federal Funds Rate (APR)
0

0.4
-0.4

0.2

-0.2

-0.6

0

-0.8
0

5

10

-0.4
0

Consumption (%)

5

10

Investment (%)

1

0.4

5

10

Capacity Utilization (%)
0.5

1.5

0.6

0

0

0.5
-0.5

0

0.2

-0.5
0

5

10

0

Rel. Price Investment (%)
0
-0.1

5

10

Hours (%)

0

5
10
Quarters

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
0

5
10
Quarters

5

10

Real Wage (%)

0.4

-0.2
-0.3

0

0

5
10
Quarters

Figure 3: Dynamic Responses to an Investment-Specific Technology Shock
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

GDP (%)

0.6

Standard Model

Inflation (APR)

Involuntary Unemployment Model

0.4

Federal Funds Rate (APR)

0
0.2

0.4
-0.2

0

0.2
-0.4

0
0

5

10

-0.2
0

Consumption (%)

5

10

0

Investment (%)

5

10

Capacity Utilization (%)

0.6
1

1
0.4

0.5
0

0.2

0
-1
0

5

10

0

Rel. Price Investment (%)

5

10

0

Hours (%)
0.4

5

10

Real Wage (%)
0.2

-0.2
0.2

0

-0.4
0
-0.6

-0.2
0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

Figure 4: Dynamic Responses of Unemployment and Labor Force to Three Shocks
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

Involuntary Unemployment Model

Monetary Shock

0
-0.1
-0.2
2

4

6

8

10

12

Unemployment Rate (PP)
0.1
0
-0.1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

0
-0.1
-0.2
2

4

6
8
Quarters

10

12

0.05
0
0

14

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

12

14

12

14

Labor Force (%)
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05

14

Unemployment Rate (PP)

0

0.1

14

Neutral Tech. Shock

Neutral Tech. Shock

0

Invest. Tech. Shock

Labor Force (%)

0

Invest. Tech. Shock

Monetary Shock

Unemployment Rate (PP)

2

4

6

8

10

Labor Force (%)
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
0

2

4

6
8
Quarters

10

Figure 5: Dynamic Responses of Unemployment and Labor Force to Three Shocks
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

Standard Model

Involuntary Unemployment Model

Monetary Shock

-1
-2
-3

Neutral Tech. Shock

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

0

-1

-2
2

4

6

8

10

12

-0.5

-1
4

6
8
Quarters

10

12

-2
-3
0

14

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

12

14

12

14

Labor Force (%)
0

-1

-2
0

Invest. Tech. Shock

0

2

-1

14

Unemployment Rate (PP)

0

0

14

Unemployment Rate (PP)

0

Invest. Tech. Shock

Labor Force (%)

Neutral Tech. Shock

Monetary Shock

Unemployment Rate (PP)
0

2

4

6

8

10

Labor Force (%)
0

-0.5

-1
0

2

4

6
8
Quarters

10

Appendix
A. Relationship of Our Work to Galí (2011)
In this section, we discuss the relationship of our work to Galí (2011) beyond those remarks
made in the introduction and in section 3.6. Our paper emphasizes labor supply in its
explanation of the dynamics of unemployment and the labor force. Galí adopts a similar
perspective. To better explain our model, it is useful to compare its properties with those
of Galí’s model. Galí demonstrates that with a modest reinterpretation of variables, the
standard DSGE model already contains a theory of unemployment. In particular, one can
define the unemployed as the di§erence between the number of people actually working and
the number of people that would be working if the marginal cost of work were equated to the
wage rate. This di§erence is positive and fluctuating in the standard DSGE model because
of the presence of wage-setting frictions and monopoly power. In e§ect, unemployment is a
symptom of social ine¢ciency. People inflict unemployment upon themselves in the quest
for monopoly profits. By contrast, in our model unemployment reflects frictions that are
necessary for people to find jobs. The existence of unemployment does not require monopoly
power. This point is dramatized by the fact that we introduce our model in the CGG
framework, in which wages are set in competitive labor markets. At the same time, the logic
of our model does create a positive relationship between monopoly power and unemployment.
In our model, the employment contraction resulting from an increase in the monopoly power
of unions produces a reduction in the incentives for workers to work. Workers’ response to
the reduced incentives is to allocate less e§ort to search, implying higher unemployment.
So, our model shares the prediction of Galí’s model that unemployment should be higher in
economies with more union monopoly power. However, our model has additional implications
that could di§erentiate it from Galí’s. Ours implies that in economies with more union power
both the labor force and the consumption premium for employed workers over non-employed
workers are reduced. Galí’s model predicts that with more union monopoly power, the labor
force will be larger. The exact amount by which the labor force increases depends on the
strength of wealth e§ects on leisure.
Other important di§erences between our model of unemployment and Galí’s is that the
latter fails to satisfy characteristics (i) and (iii) in the introduction. Galí’s model assumes,
as most of the related literature, that the available jobs can be found without e§ort. Because
the model does not satisfy (i), unemployment does not meet the o¢cial U.S. definition of
unemployment. In addition, the presence of perfect insurance in Galí’s model implies that
the employed have lower utility than the non-employed, violating (iii).
48

There are more di§erences between ours and Galí’s theory unemployment. In standard
DSGE models, labor supply plays little role in the dynamics of standard macro variables
like consumption, output, investment, inflation and the interest rate. The reason is that the
presence of wage setting frictions reduces the importance of labor supply. This is why the
New Keynesian literature has been relatively unconcerned about all the old puzzles about
income e§ects on labor and labor supply elasticities that were a central concern in the real
business cycle literature. However, we show that these problems are back in full force if
one adopts Galí’s theory of unemployment. This is because labor supply corresponds to
the labor force in that theory. To see how this brings back the old problems, we study the
standard DSGE model’s predictions for unemployment and the labor force in the wake of an
expansionary monetary policy shock. Because that model predicts a rise in consumption, the
model also predicts a decline in labor supply, as the income e§ect associated with increased
consumption produces a fall in the value of work. The drop in labor supply is counterfactual,
according to our VAR-based evidence. In addition, the large drop in the labor force leads to
an counterfactually large drop in unemployment in the wake of an expansionary monetary
policy shock.
Galí (2011) and Galí, Smets and Wouters (2011) show that changes to the worker utility
function that o§set wealth e§ects reduce the counterfactual implications of the standard
model for the labor force. In e§ect, our paper proposes a di§erent strategy. We preserve the
additively separable utility function that is standard in monetary DSGE models, and our
model nevertheless does not display the labor force problems in the standard DSGE model.
This is because in our model the labor force and employment have a strong tendency to comove. In our model, the rise in employment in the wake of an expansionary monetary policy
shock is accomplished by increasing people’s incentives to work. The additional incentives
not only encourage already active workers to intensify their job search, but also to shift into
the labor force. More generally, the analysis highlights the fact that modeling unemployment
requires thinking carefully about the determinants of the labor force.45
A.1. Estimating the Standard Model on Unemployment and Labor Force
In this section, we complement the discussion in section 5.3 when the standard model is
also estimated on data for the unemployment rate and the labor force. In this case, the
dataset used in the estimation of our involuntary unemployment model and the standard
model is identical. Interestingly, there are four parameters that take on very di§erent values
at the posterior mode compared to the parameter estimates reported in Table 2 when the
45

Our argument complements the argument in Krusell, Mukoyama, Rogerson, and Sahin (2011), who also
stress the importance of understanding employment, unemployment and the labor force.

49

standard model is not estimated on unemployment and the labor force. These parameters
are, the inverse labor supply elasticity, σ z = σ L , the steady state gross wage markup, λw ,
the curvature of capacity adjustment costs, σ a and the Taylor rule coe¢cient, rπ . All other
parameters listed in Tables 1 and 2 are a§ected only relatively little when the additional
labor market data are taken on board in the estimation of the standard model. See Technical
Appendix Table A.1 for the details.
For convenience, let’s repeat the equation from section 5.3 that determines the reaction
ˆ + +w
b̄ t
b̄ t denote the
of the labor force in the standard model, ˆlt∗ = z σ,tL , where ˆlt∗ , ˆ z+ ,t and w
labor force, marginal utility of consumption and the real wage, respectively. In the wake
of an expansionary monetary policy shock, marginal utility of consumption falls much more

than the real wage increases. Thus the labor force falls in the standard model while it
rises according to the VAR. The only way the standard model can come close to the VAR
responses is to drive σ z = σ L to infinity and thereby shut down the response of the labor
force. Setting σ z = σ L to infinity, however, implies a zero labor supply elasticity and will
therefore be harmful to the model in replicating the VAR responses for e.g. total hours.
Thus, the estimation needs to balance the “miss” of the model for the labor force and e.g.
total hours. It does so by selecting a posterior mode of σ z = σ L = 18.12 which is much higher
than the value of about 0.165 reported in Table 2. Note that a value of σ z = σ L as high
as 18.18 relative to 0.165 generates a steady state unemployment rate close to zero when all
other parameters are held fixed. In other words, the labor supply curve becomes essentially
vertical. To enable maximum comparability with the model versions estimated in Table
2, we impose the same steady state unemployment rate of 5.5 percent in this experiment
too. To do so, we need to set the gross wage markup λw = 2.79 at the posterior mode.
The higher values of σ z = σ L and λw imply that marginal costs rise much more steeply in
response to e.g. an expansionary monetary policy shock. To at least partly o§set this, the
estimation wants to select a much higher steady state gross price markup λf >> 2 which
creates numerical issues in the estimation so that we have set λf to the estimated value of
1.23 in the estimated baseline standard model. Further, to at least partly o§set the surge
in marginal cost, the estimation selects a lower curvature of capacity adjustment costs of
σ a = 0.02, compared to Table 2. Appendix figures A1 to A4 show the responses of the model
to the two technology shocks and to the monetary shock. Indeed, the standard model now
delivers a worse fit for the standard macro variables. Still, the fit for unemployment and the
labor force is not satisfactory. In terms of fit, the log data density at the posterior mode of
our involuntary unemployment model is about 200 log points higher than for the standard
model. Overall, it turns out that our model outperforms the standard model when both
models face the same dataset including unemployment and the labor force.
50

Figure A.1: Dynamic Responses to Monetary Policy Shock When Unemployment Rate and
Labor Force Data are Included in Estimation of Standard Model
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

GDP (%)

Standard Model

Inflation (APR)

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.1

Involuntary Unemployment Model

0.2

Federal Funds Rate (APR)

0

0

-0.2

0

-0.4

-0.1

-0.6

-0.2
0

5

10

0

Consumption (%)

5

10

0

Investment (%)

5

10

Capacity Utilization (%)
1

1

0.2

0.5

0.1

0.5

0
0

0

-0.5

-0.1
0

5

10

0

Rel. Price Investment (%)

5

10

Hours (%)
0.3

0.2

0

5
10
Quarters

10

Real Wage (%)

0

0.1

0

5

0.05

0.2
0.1

0

-0.05

0

-0.1

-0.1

-0.15
0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

Figure A.2: Dynamic Responses to Neutral Technology Shock When Unemployment
Rate and Labor Force Data are Included in Estimation of Standard Model
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

GDP (%)

Standard Model

Involuntary Unemployment Model

Inflation (APR)

0.6

-0.2

Federal Funds Rate (APR)
0

0.4
-0.4

0.2

-0.2

-0.6

0

-0.8
0

5

10

-0.4
0

Consumption (%)

5

10

Investment (%)

1

0.4

5

10

Capacity Utilization (%)
0.5

1.5

0.6

0

0

0.5
-0.5

0

0.2

-0.5
0

5

10

0

Rel. Price Investment (%)

5

10

Hours (%)
0.4

0
-0.1

0

5

10

Real Wage (%)
0.4

0.2

0.2

-0.2
0

-0.3

0
0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

Figure A.3: Dynamic Responses to Investment-Specific Technology Shock When
Unemployment Rate and Labor Force Data are Included in Estimation of Standard Model
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

GDP (%)

0.6

Standard Model

Inflation (APR)

Involuntary Unemployment Model

0.4

Federal Funds Rate (APR)

0
0.2

0.4
-0.2

0

0.2
-0.4

0
0

5

10

-0.2
0

Consumption (%)

5

10

0

Investment (%)

5

10

Capacity Utilization (%)

0.6
1

1
0.4

0.5
0

0.2

0
-1
0

5

10

0

Rel. Price Investment (%)

5

10

0

Hours (%)
0.4

5

10

Real Wage (%)
0.2

-0.2
0.2

0

-0.4
0
-0.6

-0.2
0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

0

5
10
Quarters

Figure A.4: Dynamic Responses of Labor Market Variables to Three Shocks When Unemployment
Rate and Labor Force Data are Included the Estimation of Standard Model
VAR 95%

VAR Mean

Standard Model

Involuntary Unemployment Model

Monetary Shock

0
-0.1
-0.2
2

4

6

8

10

12

Unemployment Rate (PP)
0.1
0
-0.1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

0
-0.1
-0.2
2

4

6
8
Quarters

10

12

0.05
0
0

14

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

12

14

12

14

Labor Force (%)
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05

14

Unemployment Rate (PP)

0

0.1

14

Neutral Tech. Shock

Neutral Tech. Shock

0

Invest. Tech. Shock

Labor Force (%)

0

Invest. Tech. Shock

Monetary Shock

Unemployment Rate (PP)

2

4

6

8

10

Labor Force (%)
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
0

2

4

6
8
Quarters

10

