                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SIMPLE ANALYTICS AND EMPIRICS OF THE GOVERNMENT SPENDING MULTIPLIER
                  AND OTHER “KEYNESIAN” PARADOXES

                                         Casey B. Mulligan

                                        Working Paper 15800
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15800


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




I appreciate comments by Gary Becker, Jeff Miron, Kevin Murphy, and Rob Shimer. I will provide
updates on this work on my blog www.panic2008.net. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Simple Analytics and Empirics of the Government Spending Multiplier and Other “Keynesian”
Paradoxes
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 15800
March 2010, Revised February 2011
JEL No. E24,E62,H3

                                           ABSTRACT~

Factor supply increases (depresses) output for many of the same reasons that the government
spending multiplier might be less (greater) than one. Data from three 2008-9 recession episodes –
the labor supply shifts associated with the seasonal cycle, the 2009 federal minimum wage hike, and
the collapse of residential construction spending – clearly show that markets absorb an increased
supply of factors of production by increasing output. The findings contradict the “paradox of toil”
and suggest that the government spending multiplier is less than one, even during this recession.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
I.     Introduction


       The Great Recession of 2008-9 has brought forth some intriguing claims about
public policy and the nature of factor supply. Using “New Keynesian” models to guide
the discussion, a number of economists suggest that government purchases might
stimulate private spending, rather than crowd it out, thereby increasing total spending
more than dollar-for-dollar (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2009; Eggertsson,
2009; Woodford, 2010). At the same time, few have evaluated current macroeconomic
policies on the basis of the incentives they provide to supply labor and other factors of
production. Is it possible that factor supply does not matter during a recession? Or even
worse, that our economy suffers from a “paradox of toil:” expansions in factor supply
actually reduce aggregate output (Eggertsson, 2010a)?
       Economic theory suggests that the government spending multiplier and the
paradox of toil are related, because both involve the (general equilibrium) relationship
between factor supply conditions and private sector factor demand.             Models with
crowding out predict that a reduction in the supply of factors to the private sector – either
because the government is using some of those factors or because a distortion causes
some of the supply to be withheld – ultimately reduces private sector output and factor
usage. One mechanism achieving this result is that private sector employers pass on their
factor costs into output prices, which causes their customers to demand less.             In
“Keynesian” models, this pass through doesn’t happen and perhaps even the high factor
rental rates feed back to increased demand for private sector goods.




                                                                                           1
           One approach to these questions would be to use historical data to measure the
government spending multiplier (Barro, 1981; Alesina and Ardagna, 2009; Barro and
Redlick, 2009; Mountford and Uhlig, 2009; Ramey, 2009) or to measure output effects of
factor supply growth.       But it has been claimed that historical output responses to
government spending impulses ought to be atypical of those that occur today, because
today we are in a deep recession, and monetary policy is fundamentally different than it
was in the past (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2009; Eggertsson, 2009;
Woodford, 2010).
           Even without the added burden of estimating a separate multiplier for deep
recessions, clear and significant shifts in government demand that are economically
similar to the kinds of spending proposed in government “stimulus” laws are difficult to
find, and thereby difficult to translate into an accurate estimate of the government
spending multiplier. The purpose of this paper is to exploit the ready availability of
obvious factor supply shifts during this recession to test the Keynesian pass-through
hypothesis that is at the heart of the paradox of toil and government spending multiplier
results.     The empirical analysis can be interpreted as tests of whether government
spending stimulates private spending that are admittedly indirect, but not reliant on the
historical data.
           Sections II and III use a variant of the Sidrauski (1967) and Calvo (1983) models
to show how the government purchases multiplier is related to the output effect of factor
supply shifts, and how both of these differ according to whether output prices are
“sticky” rather than clearing the market. As in Woodford (2010), for the purposes of
illustration I focus on a conception of “sticky prices” for which crowding out is exactly
zero (the government purchases multiplier is exactly one), and contrast it with the
“flexible price” case in which crowding out is strictly positive. Section IV explains how
an economy with sticky output prices may nonetheless occasionally behave like one with
flexible prices, as it might under particular monetary rules. Thus, under the sticky price
hypothesis, the government purchases multiplier and the output effect of factor supply
vary over time, and might be different during this recession than in previous years.
           Section V examines three events that happened during this recession, for the
purpose of determining whether the outcomes confirm the paradoxes rather than showing



                                                                                          2
significant resource reallocation among competing uses of the economy’s output. Those
events are: the labor supply shifts associated with the annual seasons, the minimum wage
hike of July 24, 2009, and the collapse of residential construction spending. Section VI
concludes.




II.      A Simple Model for Comparing Flexible and Sticky Price Outcomes


         The economic mechanisms behind the government spending multiplier and other
Keynesian paradoxes can be illustrated in a variant of the Sidrauski (1967) model without
capital.1 Because the economic issues to be examined relate to factor supply and nominal
prices, my version of the model distinguishes leisure or work time from commodities,
and includes a numeraire commodity called “money.” Nt denotes aggregate work hours
over the tth time interval (an interval might, for example, be a month, or a week). In
order to consider the effects of changes in one sector’s demand on the amount and
composition of total output, I group the other goods in the economy into two categories:
C and G. As my primary example, Ct denotes the real quantity of privately purchased
goods during time interval t, and Gt the real quantity of public purchases.
         There is a representative consumer and worker with preferences u(ct,gt,mt/Pt,nt,t)
that potentially vary over time. I consider the limit of continuous time, so mt denotes the
quantity of money held by the consumer at moment t, Pt the price level (mt/Pt is the real
money balance), lower case nt denotes the consumer’s labor at moment t, and ct and gt
denote the consumer’s rate of consumption of the two consumption goods.                              For
simplicity, and to be transparent about the meaning of “demand shifts” over time, I
assume     that    the   utility   flow     is   additively     separable     in   all   four    goods:




1
  As regards the model tastes and technology, the model above is a continuous-time extension of Eggertson
(2009, 2010) and Woodford (2010) in which seasonal cycles and the money stock appear explicitly, a
richer time pattern of taste shocks is modeled, and the production function is potentially concave. For
simplicity, I omit one feature of Eggertson (2010): his paper has a rate of time preference that varies
stochastically over time, which he analyzes by considering a linear approximation of the model in the
neighborhood of the steady state.


                                                                                                        3
u (c, g , m / P, n, t ) = α t uc (c) + u g ( g ) + um (m / P) − γ t un (n) , with uc′, un′, un″ > 0 and uc″, um″

< 0.2 The flow is discounted over time at constant time preference rate ρ.
         The preference parameter time paths αt ∈ [0,1] and γt ∈ [0,1] model fluctuations
over time in the demand for c and supply of labor as, for example, they vary over the
academic year and the Christmas season. Normalizing one unit of time to be a calendar
year, we have αt = αt-1 and γt = γ t-1 for all t, which means that the seasonal preference
cycle is the same every year. I also assume that α and γ are piecewise continuous
functions of time. For simplicity, the preferences for m and g are constant.
         Pt denotes the time t nominal price of Ct and Gt. Aggregate consistency requires
that ct = Ct, nt = Nt, gt = Gt, and mt = Mt, where Mt is the aggregate supply of money at
date t. The details are not considered here, but Ct and Gt can be interpreted as composite
commodities, produced by many independent firms (see Blanchard and Kiyotaki, 1987,
and many subsequent papers using the Dixit-Stiglitz setup). Under this interpretation, the
output of each firm contributes to the composite symmetrically, but as imperfect
substitutes with each of the others.
         Aggregate production F(N) is strictly increasing and weakly concave in the
amount of labor N:


                                              Ct + Gt = F ( N t )                                           (1)


Firms hire date t labor at nominal rate Wt, and workers receive rate (1-τt)Wt, with the
amount τtWtNt going to the government as nominal labor income tax revenue. The
government finances the remainder of its spending with a lump sum tax Lt (or, if τtWtNt >
Gt, a lump sum transfer).
         With short duration loans available at date t at instantaneous nominal interest rate
Rt, and money balances earning no interest, the representative consumer has the time zero
intertemporal budget constraint:



2
  um(x) does not have to be a monotone function: there could be a finite real balance x* at which point
consumers are satiated. Nor do I rule out the possibility that labor supply is, say, quite inelastic with
respect to the real wage.


                                                                                                              4
                                  t

                             e ∫0 [(1 − τ t )Wt nt − Lt − Pc
                         ∞
                                                           t t − Rt mt ] dt + m0 = 0
                              −
                     ∫
                                 Rs ds
                                                                                                        (2)
                        0



where Rtmt is the nominal flow opportunity cost of holding money balances in the amount
mt. For now, I assume that the second consumption good g is publicly provided (financed
with some combination of lump sum and labor income taxes), so that it does not appear
directly in (2).
        The consumer’s demand for private commodities and supply of labor satisfy two
first order conditions equating marginal rates of substitution in utility to Rt and
(1-τt)Wt,/Pt, respectively. When combined with the aggregate consistency conditions,
those conditions are:

                                                  um′ ( M t / Pt )
                                                                   = Rt                                 (3)
                                                   α t uc′ (Ct )


                                              γ t un′ ( N t )             W
                                                              = (1 − τ t ) t                            (4)
                                              α t uc′ (Ct )               Pt


        The intertemporal first order condition is:

                                      d ⎡                   u ′ ( M t / Pt )    P
                               −        ln α t uc′ (Ct ) ⎤ = m               −ρ− t                      (5)
                                      dt ⎣               ⎦   α t uc′ (Ct )      Pt

where dots indicate derivatives with respect to time.                          Equation (5) is the familiar
consumption Euler equation because the left hand side is the growth rate of marginal
utility (times minus one) and the right hand side is the difference between the nominal
interest rate (see equation (3)) and the inflation rate.
        The profits of the representative firm are nonnegative if and only if:


                                                 t ( N t ) − Wt N t ≥ 0
                                                PF                                                      (6)




                                                                                                         5
         If each firm could change its price continuously, optimal price setting from the
perspective of the representative firm would equate marginal revenue to marginal cost at
each moment:
                                                        Pt
                                              μ=                                                           (7)
                                                   Wt / F ′( N t )


where μ ≥ 1 is a constant reflecting the possibility that the representative firm may face a
downward sloping demand for its product (that is, a gap between marginal revenue and
Pt) and mark up its price accordingly.

Definition (Flexible Price Equilibrium)                  Given piecewise continuous time paths
{Gt , M t ,τ t ,α t ,γ t }t =0 , and a pair of scalars (μ,ρ), a flexible price equilibrium is a list of
                          ∞


time paths {Ct , N t ,Wt , Rt , Pt }t∞= 0 satisfying equations (1), (3), (4), (5), and (7) for all t ≥ 0.3


         In order to capture the sluggish price response that might occur with staggered
price setting, I assume that the aggregate price index adjusts gradually to the level at
which marginal revenue equals marginal cost for the representative firm, with the
constant λ > 0 parameterizing the speed of adjustment:

                                 d2               ⎡            ⎛   Wt ⎞ ⎤
                                      ln P  = λ 2
                                                  ⎢ ln P  − ln ⎜ μ          ⎟⎥                             (8)
                                                               ⎝ F ′( N t ) ⎠ ⎦
                                          t             t
                                 dt 2             ⎣
As shown by Calvo (1983), the second order differential equation (8) is the reduced form
of a staggered price setting model in which firms alternate in their opportunity to set
prices, at which time a firm sets its price equal to a weighted geometric average of its
own marginal cost (times the markup factor μ) and its competitors’ prices anticipated to
prevail until the price can be revised again.
         Having committed to their price, firms have the choice of whether to produce or
not at any time t, but otherwise must produce whatever their time t customers demand at
the given price Pt.



3
  Throughout the paper, I assume that Gt is close enough to zero that a flexible price equilibrium exists (that
is, I rule out cases in which Gt ever exceeds the market economy’s production capacity). See Baxter and
King (1993) for an early quantitative study of fiscal policy in general equilibrium.


                                                                                                             6
Definition (Sticky Price Equilibrium)                    Given piecewise continuous time paths
{Gt , M t ,τ t ,α t ,γ t }t =0 and three scalars (P0,μ,ρ), a sticky price equilibrium is a list of time
                          ∞


paths {Ct , N t ,Wt , Rt , Pt }t∞=0 satisfying equations (1), (3), (4), (5), (8), and the inequality (6)
for all t ≥ 0.

           In order to examine the paradox of toil and the government spending multiplier, it
helps to define a steady state seasonal cycle that would be an equilibrium for the sticky
price model when the preference and policy impulses were themselves in a seasonal
steady state.


Definition (Steady State Seasonal Cycle)          Given time paths {M t , Gt ,τ t }t∞=0 for the
money stock, government consumption, and the marginal tax rate that do not vary year-
over-year, and given time paths {α t , γ t }t∞= 0 and a pair of scalars (μ,ρ), a steady state
seasonal cycle is a list of time paths {Ct , N t ,Wt , Rt , Pt }t∞= 0 that are a sticky price
equilibrium and do not vary year-over-year. On the time interval [0,1], the consumption,
labor, and price paths solve the boundary value problem:

            d2               ⎡                  ⎛ α (1 − τ t ) ⎞      ⎛ F ′( N t ) ⎞                  ⎤
                 ln Pt = λ 2 ⎢ln uc′ (Ct ) + ln ⎜ t            ⎟ + ln ⎜            ⎟ − ln un′ ( N t ) ⎥
            dt 2
                             ⎣                  ⎝    γt        ⎠      ⎝ μ ⎠                           ⎦
               d ⎡                   u ′ ( M t / Pt )      d
           −     ln α t uc′ (Ct ) ⎤ = m               − ρ − ln Pt                                              (9)
               dt ⎣               ⎦   α t uc′ (Ct )        dt
                                                         d                     d
           s.t. F ( N t ) = Ct + Gt , P1 = P0 ,             ln Pt          =      ln Pt
                                                         dt         t =0       dt       t =1



           After substitution from the first order conditions (3) and (4), the two differential
equations included in the definition are the sticky price equilibrium consumption Euler
equation (5) and price adjustment equation (8). By assumption, none of the impulse
variables vary year-over-year, so the state of the system (9) is exactly the same at time 1
as it was at time 0, so the steady state seasonal cycle beyond time 1 satisfies
Ct = Ct −1 , N t = N t −1 , etc.4


4
    When the impulse variables are constant over time – both within and across years – a steady state seasonal
cycle is just the more familiar “steady state”: a list of scalars (C , N ,W , R , P ) so that the time paths
{Ct = C , N t = N ,Wt = W , Rt = R , Pt = P}t∞= 0 are a sticky price equilibrium given
{Gt = G, M t = M ,τ t = τ ,α t = α , γ t = γ }t∞= 0 .


                                                                                                                7
        This paper considers the effects of short run changes in the policy variables M, G,
τ, so I do not assume that they are constant year-over-year. However, for convenience I
do assume that, for large t, the time paths {Gt , M t ,τ t }t∞= 0 approach time paths that are
constant year-over-year so that sticky price equilibrium paths eventually approach
seasonal steady state paths. Thus, a sticky price equilibrium is the solution to the
boundary value problem (10):

             d2               ⎡                     ⎛ α t (1 − τ t ) ⎞      ⎛ F ′( N t ) ⎞                  ⎤
                  ln P  = λ 2
                              ⎢ ln u   ′ (C  ) + ln ⎜                ⎟ + ln ⎜            ⎟ − ln u  ′ ( N t ⎥
                                                                                                          )
             dt 2
                      t
                              ⎣
                                     c     t
                                                    ⎝      γt        ⎠      ⎝ μ ⎠
                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                            ⎦
                 d ⎡                   u ′ ( M t / Pt )      d
             −     ln α t uc′ (Ct ) ⎤ = m               − ρ − ln Pt                                             (10)
                 dt ⎣               ⎦   α t uc′ (Ct )        dt

                                                     uc′ (Ct )           P
             s.t. F ( N t ) = Ct + Gt , lim                    = 1, lim t = 1, P0 given
                                              t →∞
                                                     uc′ (Ct )      t →∞ Pt
where {Ct }t∞= 0 is the steady state seasonal cycle for private consumption corresponding to

the long run steady state seasonal cycle of the impulse variables {Gt , M t ,τ t ,α t ,γ t }t∞=0 .




III.    Analytics of the Multiplier and Other Paradoxes
        Prices are a means by which consumer purchases reflect factor market conditions:
in the flexible price model (7) prices always reflect marginal cost, whereas the sticky
price model has them move only gradually in the direction of marginal cost. Propositions
1-3 contrast comparative statics of flexible and sticky price equilibria, showing how
government spending and marginal tax rates affect total spending to degrees that depends
on the price mechanism. Simply put, supply does not matter at the margin in the sticky
price model, so that temporary changes in marginal tax rates do not affect outcomes, and
temporary increases in government spending do not run into supply constraints.
        Seasonal cycles in the preference parameters induce seasonal cycles for labor and
consumption that depend on whether prices are sticky or flexible, unless the cycles for
tastes are exactly offset by cycles in monetary or fiscal impulses. Proposition 4 shows
how the seasonal cycles in the flexible and sticky price models are different in the same




                                                                                                                  8
way, and for exactly the same reason, that the fiscal policy comparative statics are
different in the two models.


Proposition 1 (Crowding Out)           For any t ≥ 0, lump-sum tax financed government
purchases Gt, holding constant government purchase at all other dates, reduce private
spending Ct in the flexible price equilibrium and have no effect on private spending in the
sticky price equilibrium. Gt increases total period t spending in both cases.
        The comparative statics dCt/dGt in the flexible and sticky price cases are,
respectively (the notation dPt = 0 indicates the sticky price comparative static):

                          F ′′( N t ) ′
                                      un ( N t ) − un′′ ( N t )
         dCt              F ′( N t )                                                 dCt
             =                                                          ∈ (−1,0) ,                   =0   (11)
         dGt u ′′ ( N ) − F ′′( N t ) u ′ ( N ) − F ′( N ) 2 u ′′ ( N )
                                                   [         t ]
                                                                                     dGt   dPt = 0
                          F ′( N t )
               n     t                 n     t                   c   t




Proposition 2 (Labor Supply)               For any t ≥ 0, a reduction in the labor income tax
rate τt, financed with a change in lump-sum taxes Lt and holding constant the tax rate at
all other dates, increases labor usage Nt and private spending Ct in the flexible price
equilibrium and has no effect on employment and private spending in the sticky price
equilibrium.
         The comparative static dCt/dτt in the flexible and sticky price cases are,
respectively:
                               F ′( N t ) ′
                                          un ( N t )
                 dCt            1−τt                       dCt     dCt
                      =                                        <0,             =0        (12)
                 dτ t − F ′′( N t ) u ′ ( N ) + u ′′ ( N ) dGt     dτ t dP = 0
                          F ′( N t )
                                     n      t       n   t                 t




Because F(Nt) = Ct + Gt, the comparative statics for labor usage are:

                               dN t    1 dCt                 dN t
                                    =               <0,                       =0                          (13)
                               dτ t F ′( N t ) dτ t          dτ t   dPt = 0




Proof The flexible price version of the proofs is straightforward, given the time-
separable determination of equilibrium quantities. The flexible price equilibrium amount
of date t labor usage, Nt, is implicitly defined by a single algebraic equation:
μγ t un′ ( N t ) = α t uc′ ( F ( N t ) − Gt ) (1 − τ t ) F ′( N t ) . The formal sticky price model proof
shown in the Appendix is based on the system of differential equations (10), but can be
simply understood by noting that the system has the price level and the inflation rate as
its only state variables, so the only way that Gt or τt can affect Pt is by affecting the time
path of marginal costs prior to date t. The marginal costs prior to date t depend on the
amount consumed and worked prior to date t, and these behaviors are linked to date t


                                                                                                            9
fiscal policies through the household intertemporal budget constraint, but the lifetime
wealth effects of Gt or τt are negligible by assumption that the policy change is
temporary.5

         The limiting case of constant consumption preferences α = 1 and extremely
sluggish price adjustment λ Æ 0 helps to illustrate the proofs of Proposition 1 and 2. As
λ gets small, the system (10) evolves more slowly so that the inflation rate and the
consumption growth rates are essentially zero. The money demand equation becomes
(14):

                                            um′ ( M t / Pt )
                                                             =ρ                                        (14)
                                              uc′ (Ct )


Equation (14) can be inverted to calculate the private “demand” for goods C(M/P), which
is decreasing in its own price P relative to money. The shape of this demand function
depends only on three components of the utility function: ρ, uc′, and um′.
         The demand for goods C(M/P) can be used to begin a calculation of the demand
for labor at any point in time, because, as long as profits are non-negative, enough labor
must be used to satisfy the demand C(M/P) + G:


                            ⎪⎧ F ( C ( M t / Pt ) + Gt ) if PF
                                −1
                                                             t ( N t ) − Wt N t ≥ 0
                       Nt = ⎨                                                                          (15)
                            ⎪⎩          0                      otherwise


Figure 1 graphs labor usage Nt on its horizontal axis, and the real (pre-tax) wage rate on
the vertical axis.       Over the range in which profits are non-negative, sticky price
equilibrium labor demand does not depend on the real wage rate and the equilibrium
amount of labor usage does not vary with labor supply preferences γt, or with the
marginal tax rate τt. The government can add to distortions by raising marginal tax rates,


5
  The propositions describe both an unanticipated fiscal policy change (that is, one occurring at time zero)
and an anticipated fiscal policy change (that is, one occurring well after time zero). As noted by Woodford
(2010), a permanent increase in government purchases would markedly reduce private consumption, even
when prices are sticky. A long-lived, but less than permanent, increase in government consumption would
reduce private consumption in the short run by something in between that amount and the zero crowd-out
reported in Proposition 1 for a momentary increase in the sticky price model.


                                                                                                         10
imposing minimum wage rules, etc., and, as long as the price level is fixed and profits are
non-negative, have no effect on labor usage. Labor market conditions only affect wage
rates paid by employers and received by employees.
        In the flexible price model, prices adjust in response to the various impulses.
Producers raise prices in response to an increase in government demand, and this induces
the private sector to economize on its spending. At a given employment level, an
improvement in labor market distortions reduces the amount employers pay for their
labor – regardless of whether output prices are fixed or flexible – and in the flexible price
model producers pass on the cost savings to their customers in the form of lower prices.
Producers lower their prices knowing that consumers will demand more, so the producers
use more labor in order to have that additional production.
        For the purposes of characterizing the flexible price equilibrium, the sticky price
labor demand curve (15) is not particularly helpful, because the curve would have to be
shifted for every instance of price adjustment. The flexible price analysis features a labor
demand or marginal productivity schedule for which movements along include the output
price adjustments. The flexible price labor demand curve drawn in Figure 1 is therefore
the inverse of equation (7) rather than the inverse (15) of equation (1) used to represent
the sticky price equilibrium. In this case, Figure 1 clearly shows that labor distortions
reduce flexible price equilibrium employment (see also the proof of Proposition 2).
        In both the flexible and sticky price models, Propositions 1 and 2 are closely
related because the crowding out of activity in one sector as a result of demand in another
is about factor supply. In both models, factors of production are needed to satisfy
government demand, but only in the flexible price model does competition for factors
cause the private sector to economize on its factor usage.
        The aggregate effects of unemployment benefit payments financed with lump sum
taxes are one application of Proposition 2, because unemployment benefits are a transfer
payment with positive (implicit) marginal labor income tax rates.6 Economists debate the
magnitude of the incentive effects, but they generally agree that unemployment benefits
normally reduce aggregate employment. But the 2008-9 recession has been said to be

6
 The marginal tax rate is positive because unemployment benefits cease once the beneficiary becomes
employed, which affects the beneficiary’s tradeoff between unemployment and employment (Meyer,
1990).


                                                                                                      11
abnormal in this regard: as one economist put it, “Traditionally, many economists have
been leery of prolonged unemployment benefits because they can reduce the incentive to
seek work. But that should not be a concern now because jobs remain so scarce.”7 One
way to rationalize this view: the economy is often adequately described by the flexible
price model, but during a recession the sticky price model offers the better description.
Proposition 2 shows how, in this case, the payment of unemployment benefits would
normally reduce aggregate employment, but would not reduce it during a recession. This
is why it is important to have empirical evidence on recession-era aggregate effects of
labor supply.


Proposition 3 (Tax Contraction)       Assuming that the economy is on the upward
sloping part of the Laffer curve, labor income tax financed government purchases Gt, t ≤
T, can reduce labor usage Nt and total spending Ct + Gt in the flexible price equilibrium
but necessarily increase them in the sticky price equilibrium.

Proof By definition of “upward sloping part of the Laffer curve”, an increase in the
labor income tax rate τ for a given amount of government purchases requires budget
balance via a decrease in lump sum taxes, rather than an increase or no change. Combine
Proposition 1 with Proposition 2.

        At first glance, a “stimulus” law that had the government purchase goods and
services and finance those purchases with public debt would seem to be better described
by Proposition 1 than Proposition 3, because the former holds marginal tax rates constant.
However, in practice much “stimulus” spending raises marginal tax rate because the
government purchases are targeted toward persons with low incomes.8 In this case,
Proposition 3 helps frame the debate about the aggregate effects of stimulus laws: if the
recession economy is described by the sticky price model, then the incentive effects of
stimulus spending do not matter and that spending does not crowd out private spending.
In the flexible price model, stimulus spending crowds out private spending and may
ultimately reduce aggregate labor usage.

7
  As quoted by Eckholm (2009).
8
  Formally, a means test can be modeled by writing the government transfer L as a lump sum minus a linear
function of labor income Wn. Once substituted into the representative houshold’s intertemporal budget
constraint (2), note that both the means test and labor income tax terms are linear functions of labor
income, and interpret their combined coefficients as “the marginal tax rate.” See Mulligan (2010a) for an
instance from this recession when a means-tested transfer created very large marginal tax rates.


                                                                                                      12
        The government purchases multiplier of exactly one, and the exactly zero
employment effect of labor market distortions help illustrate a number of paradoxes that
arise in public policy discussions, but readers should recognize that other factors can push
the multipliers up or down. For example, the government purchases multiplier would be
lower in both models if those purchases were close substitutes with private purchases
(Barro, 1981, p. 1091 has such a model). Depending on the future of government
purchases and tax rates, the government purchases multiplier could be greater than one in
both flexible price and sticky price models with capital to the degree that investment
reacts in the short run to the anticipation of greater labor usage in the long run (Aiyagari,
Christiano, and Eichenaum, 1992). In a model of heterogenous preferences, government
spending could have the additional effect of redistributing purchasing power from
households with a strong preference for money balances to households with a weak
preference, which would increase consumption demand at a given price. Thus, additional
government purchases or additional labor market distortions could actually increase
private consumption spending in variations of the sticky price model.
        Because the magnitude of the government spending multiplier depends on the
importance of supply and demand at the margin, the seasonal cycle is related to the
multiplier. In order to make the comparison more formally, it helps to define a “short
season” analogous to the short duration fiscal policy shocks examined in Propositions 1-
3:
Definition (Short Seasonal) Let the money stock, government consumption, and
marginal tax rates be constant within and across years. There are two perpetually
recurring alternating seasons of duration S and 1-S, with the first season commencing at
time zero. The preference parameters α and γ vary over the seasons, and are constant
within seasons and constant year-over-year. A short seasonal steady state is list of on-
season and off-season outcome values Con , N on , Won , Ron , Pon , Coff , N off , Woff , Roff , Poff ,
respectively, such that the seasonal steady state cycle corresponding to the assumed
impulses approaches, in the limit as S Æ 0, the time paths that take on the on-season
values for the first fraction S of each year and the off-season values otherwise.

        In the flexible price model, consumption and labor at any point in time depend on
both the preferences for consumption and the preferences for labor supply, according to
the condition relating the marginal product of labor to the marginal rate of substitution:




                                                                                                    13
μγ t un′ ( N t ) = α t uc′ ( F ( N t ) − Gt ) (1 − τ t ) F ′( N t ) . But Proposition 4 shows how seasonal
fluctuations in the sticky price model depend only on the seasonal for demand:

Proposition 4 (Seasonal Supply and Demand)     The short seasonal fluctuations in
consumption and labor depend only on the seasonal fluctuations in the consumption
preference parameter, and not on the seasonal fluctuations in the labor preference
parameter.

Proof Because the off-season is essentially the entire year, consumption and labor
during the off-season are independent of the on-season taste parameters. The proposition
then follows from the no-jump condition for marginal utility: α on uc′ (Con ) = α off uc′ (Coff ) .

The proof of Proposition 4 is related to the proof of Propositions 1 and 2: labor supply
can only affect consumption through prices, which do not change in the short run of the
sticky price model. At the same time, prices are the means by which consumption
demand changes are mitigated by crowding out, but prices do not change in the short run
in the sticky price model.
         Proposition 4 can be applied to a season like the summer when, for a short
duration of time, a larger fraction of the population is available to work. If the summer
surge in labor supply is not offset by monetary or fiscal policy – and thereby prices have
to fall in order for the market to absorb the additional workers – then there will be no
labor supply surge in the sticky price model. It can also be applied to a season like
Christmas when the demand for goods is high for a short duration of time. If the
Christmas demand surge is not offset by monetary or fiscal policy – and thereby prices
have to rise in order for the market to voluntarily supply the extra demand – then the
Christmas labor surge will be larger in the sticky price model than in the flexible price
model.




IV.      Market Clearing Mechanisms


         A rich literature has examined historical data in order to determine whether
government purchases crowd out private purchases, and whether labor market distortions
like taxes, minimum wages, and the moral hazards of unemployment insurance, reduce


                                                                                                       14
labor usage and output (e.g., the studies cited in Moffitt, 2002). But it is claimed that
these empirical results are neither informative about the effects of fiscal policy during the
2008-9 recession nor corresponding to comparative statics like those I examined in
Propositions 1-3. In particular, the stock of money might “normally” respond to changes
in tastes, technology, and fiscal policy in the direction of stabilizing prices, in large part
because of deliberate actions by the monetary authority, but Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Rebelo (2009) and others suggest that the usual kinds of monetary adjustments could not
occur during this recession because of the “zero interest lower bound.”9
         It is true that monetary policy has historically responded to oil shocks (Bernanke,
Gertler, and Watson, 1997), the seasonal cycle (Sharp, 1988), and other changes in
economic fundamentals. “Taylor rules” for targeting the federal funds rate prescribe such
responses, and are said to characterize actual postwar monetary policy in the United
States (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2000). Thus, the historical effects of fiscal policy on
private spending could be a combination of a direct effect – the comparative statics
featured in my Proposition 1-2 are direct effects – and a possible indirect effect through
changes in monetary policy. For example, while an increase in the marginal tax rate τt
does not directly reduce labor usage in the sticky price model (Proposition 2), it does
create “inflationary pressures,” and the monetary authority might have reacted in the past
to those pressures by reducing the money stock below what it would have been.10
Because less money means less consumption and labor in the sticky price model, a higher
marginal tax rate could reduce labor usage in the sticky price model through this
mechanism. If the effects of fiscal policy on the money stock were enough to fully
neutralize inflationary pressures created by fiscal policy, then fiscal policy would have
the same effects in the fixed and flexible price models.
         It is also true that money markets behaved quite differently during the 2008-9
recession than they had in the past. For example, the federal funds rate throughout 2009
was close to zero and, contrary to prior years, well above what the Taylor rule prescribed
(Rudebusch, 2009). For years, the amount of reserves of depository institutions held with
9
  In this regard, McGrattan and Ohanian’s (2008) analysis of the World War II multiplier is especially
relevant because short term government securities also had near zero yields at that time.
10
   In the context of my model, inflationary (deflationary) “pressure” means a price level that is less (greater)
than the representative firm’s marginal revenue product of labor divided by the nominal wage rate,
respectively. By equation (8), the price level is rising (falling) and the inflation rate is falling (rising).


                                                                                                            15
the Federal Reserve system corresponded closely to the amount of required reserves, but
in late 2008 excess reserves increased by a factor of 400 in a matter of four months (at the
same time the fed funds rate fell to zero, see http://research.stlouisfed.org/). During those
same four months, consumer prices fell four percent (that is, deflation at a 12 percent
annual rate, see www.bls.gov).
          Thus, it is unlikely that either monetary policy or other money market events even
approximately eliminated deflationary pressures during the 2008-9 recession, and
unlikely that they would offset any change in those pressures that might have been
created by fiscal policy, or changes in tastes and technology, during the recession.
Perhaps this monetary state of affairs occurred because a zero lower bound on the fed
funds rate,11 but in any case it suggests that the money-stock constant comparative statics
examined in my Propositions 1-3 would better describe the effects of shocks to labor
market distortions and spending during the recession than it would during the previous
years. It also suggests that evidence on the effects of changes in supply and demand
during the recession would be especially valuable for determining whether the fixed or
flexible price model better describes the recession-era effects of supply and demand
shocks.
          The “sticky” versus “flexible” price dichotomy has received much attention in
macroeconomic theory over the years, and that attention has spawned a number of
empirical studies of whether actual prices are sticky (Davis and Hamilton, 2004;
Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008). However, the real issue here is whether something in
the economy operates to reallocate output among competing uses in response to changes
in tastes, technology, or public policy. For the purpose of applying the paradoxes, the
real question is whether public spending somehow significantly crowds out private
spending and whether consumers somehow consume significantly less when the
producers of the consumer goods find it more difficult to hire.
          Monetary policy is not the only such mechanism.                   For example, the U.S.
government purchased military equipment during World War II, while it also put controls
on consumer prices. In a flexible price world, one private sector response would be an

11
  As noted by Curdia and Woodford (2010) and Ohanian (2010), the nominal interest rate in the model’s
consumption Euler equation is not the same as the fed funds rate, and the gap between the two may well
have changed during the recession because financial intermediaries were under stress.


                                                                                                     16
increase in the prices of private sector goods (autos, refrigerators, etc.) that would be
produced with many of the same resources used by the military equipment sector. In
fact, the government ordered that former consumer durable factories be converted to
military equipment production, and rationed many of the consumer durables that were put
out of production. The end result was that government purchases significantly reduced
private spending, which is a result that accords with the flexible price model rather than
the sticky price model (Barro, 1987).
       Or consider an increase in the minimum wage that raises employers’ costs of
hiring. In the flexible output price model, consumers would ultimately purchase a lesser
volume of goods because the producers of those goods pass their added employment
costs into output prices. But in reality other mechanisms could produce this response,
even (especially) if output prices were fixed. For example, prior to the minimum wage
increase, a fraction of producers might have had a price that barely covered their variable
costs, and the minimum wage increase pushes them to cease production all together. To
the degree that the goods going out of production were imperfect substitutes in utility
with the remaining goods, total production and labor usage would fall.
       In summary, the government spending multiplier depends critically on whether
factor market costs are somehow passed through to consumers, and whether this pass-
through occurs during recessions.       Pass-through can occur through a variety of
mechanisms, so the empirical question is whether private consumption falls when tastes,
technology, or fiscal policy changes during a recession affect the factors costs of the
firms producing those goods.




                                                                                        17
V.     The Great Recession Economy Resembles a Flexible Price Economy


       A contribution of this paper is therefore to consider three events that happened
during this recession, and examine whether the outcomes confirm the paradoxes rather
than showing significant resource allocation among competing uses of the economy’s
output. Those events are: the labor supply shifts associated with the annual seasons, the
minimum wage hike of July 24, 2009, and the collapse of residential construction
spending. The events are used to test the hypothesis that factor supply expands output,
both at the industry and aggregate levels.


V.A. The Seasonal Cycle Proceeded as Usual
       Gauti Eggertsson (2010a, p. 1) poses the hypothetical question “What happens [if]
everyone wakes up [one day] with exactly the same idea: Let’s go out and look for some
more work?” He suggests that partial equilibrium answers to this question are highly
misleading, and that the answer is that aggregate employment may fall, at least if the
macroeconomy were caught in a liquidity trap, much like the one purported to
characterize the U.S. economy during the recession of 2008-9.
       The end of the academic year is remarkably similar to the question posed
(Mulligan, 2009). Schools vary somewhat on the exact day that their academic years
end, but during the month of May academic years end rather abruptly around the United
States, and many of the teenage students storm into the job market to look for work.
Academic years begin just as abruptly in late August and early September.
       To see how the actual labor market responds to such an event, consider the United
States Census Bureau’s monthly household survey, whose employment totals have been
summarized by the Bureau as national aggregates for each of several age groups. I have
used their seasonally unadjusted series for persons aged 16-19 to calculate monthly
employment deviations from each year’s December to December trend. Those deviations
are averaged for the five years 2003-7 prior to the current recession, and the April-




                                                                                      18
October result displayed as the black series in Figure 2.12 For example, a value of 1357
for July means that July teen employment was 1,357,000 above the December to
December trend, on average for 2003-7. Figure 3 shows the same calculation for total
employment (all ages 16+). Figure 4 shows teen unemployment.
         Teen employment is sharply higher in June, and sharply higher again in July, for a
total April-July increase of 1,649,000 teen employees.                     Figure 3 shows how total
employment also increases significantly, so the teen rush into the labor market does not
merely reallocate jobs from older persons to teens.
         The summer teen employment surge is largely a consequence of seasonality in
supply, not demand.13 To see this, note that a pure summer demand surge would draw
teens into the labor market with low teen summer unemployment, high summer real
wages, and low summer unemployment among persons not enrolled in school during the
academic year.14 Figure 4 shows that, in fact, teen unemployment spikes in June as the
labor market absorbs more than one million teens. Unemployment of persons aged 25
and older (not shown in the figures) is high throughout the summer, peaking in July at
almost 700,000 persons above trend. Median nominal and real weekly wages for teens
are often at their lowest of the year in the third quarter (July – September), and
presumably hourly wages are even lower due to longer teen summer work weeks.
These patterns reverse when the academic year ends.
         Also consistent with the supply interpretation, Mulligan (2010b) shows how age
groups with the largest summer log employment and log unemployment spikes are those
with the greatest school enrollment rates during the academic year, and the summer log
employment spike may even be negative for groups with near zero school enrollment.
Nor do many of the summer jobs for teens appear to be in industries that have a
significant spike in labor demand, because 77% of those jobs are in industries that expand
their employment of persons aged 25-34 less than two percent, if at all.15

12
   The prior literature on teen summer employment has used April as its academic year benchmark (U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009).
13
   For the purposes of testing the fixed versus flexible price models, it is not necessary to assume that the
summer surge is only the result of supply (see Mulligan, 2010b, for a formal analysis of this point).
14
   The hypothetical demand surge would also have to be quite large – about as large as doubling the size of
the nation’s military in a mere two months – because the end result is about a million new jobs for teens.
15
   These are based on calculations using the May, July, and September 2005 Current Population survey.
The top industry hiring teens in the summer was “arts, entertainment, and recreation” (accounting for 19


                                                                                                           19
        The recession years of 2008 and 2009 were no different in this regard: the
academic year came to an end as it usually does, and got started again in the fall. Figures
2, 3, and 4 display series for each of 2008 and 2009 in blue and red, respectively.
Consistent with the flexible price model, both teen employment and total employment
increased significantly at the beginning of the summer, and fell back to trend when
summer ended. The summer teen employment spike is a bit smaller in 2008 and 2009
than it was in prior years, and the summer total employment spike is a bit larger in
2009.16 These data provide no support for the sticky price model hypothesis that the
annual rush of teens into a recession labor market would fail to increase employment, and
no support for Eggertsson’s hypothesis that it would decrease employment.


V.B.    The 2009 Minimum Wage Hike Reversed the Trend for Part-time Work, and
Further Reduced Low-Skill Full-time Employment
        Taken literally, the variable τ in my model is the labor income tax rate because it
enters the government budget constraint. However, with an adjustment of the lump sum
tax term L that does not affect any of the model’s first order conditions, τ can be
interpreted as anything that drives a wedge between the marginal rate of substitution and
the marginal product of labor, or anything that shifts the marginal rate of substitution in
the direction of less labor supply. Under any of the interpretations, an increase in the
labor market distortion τ, such as an increase in a binding minimum wage rate, raises
employer costs. The flexible price model says that the higher costs are passed on to
consumers, who demand less product from those employers, and the employers reduce
their labor usage. The sticky price model predicts no labor usage effect.
        In July 2007, the federal minimum hourly wage was increased for the first time in
10 years, to $5.85 from $5.15. It was increased again a year later to $6.55, and increased
yet again on July 24, 2009 to $7.25 (Dept. of Labor, 2009). Consumer prices were

percent of the teen summer jobs), which had no change in the number of persons aged 25-34 employed.
The second industry (also accounting for 19 percent) is “accommodation and food services,” which actually
cut its employment of persons aged 25-34 by 4 percent during the summer.
16
   Mulligan (2010b) analyzes these patterns over a longer time frame, and for various age groups,
regressing the summer log employment spike on a smooth function of time and a dummy
variable for recessions, finding no statistically or economically significant difference between the
summer spike in recessions and the summer spike in other years. He also finds that, contrary to the sticky
price theory, the Christmas demand shock does not have larger employment impacts during recessions.


                                                                                                       20
generally rising prior to the summer of 2008, but fell 2.1 percent from July 2008 to July
2009.17 Thus, the real minimum wage hike was large in July 2009, and began from the
highest base, and is therefore expected to have the largest effect on the costs of firms that
employ low-hourly-wage workers.
        Part-time and teen employees are especially likely to have hourly wages near the
federal minimum. Table 1 displays the number of persons who are paid an hourly wage
at or below the federal minimum wage, expressed as a percentage of employment, for
selected demographic groups reported by the Census Bureau for 2008, the last full year
that the federal minimum wage would be below $7.25. The percentage is 6.0 for all
employees aged 16-24, and is presumably even greater for the narrower group of teens
(ages 16-19). Part-time employees also have about a six percent incidence of earning at
or below the federal minimum. Full-time employees, especially men working full-time,
were quite unlikely to earn minimum wage. Based on the patterns shown in Table, the
July 2009 federal minimum wage hike is expected to affect, if anything, the employment
of teens and part-time workers, and to have little effect on the number of adults employed
full-time.
        Figure 5’s red series displays seasonally adjusted national part-time employment
by month, from the Census Bureau’s monthly household survey. Prior to July 2009, part-
time employment increased by about 3 million during the recession. July 2009 was the
peak level of part-time employment. In order to investigate the possibility that the July
2009 hike stopped further increases in part-time employment, and perhaps affected other
employment categories, I estimated an auto-regressive monthly model of national part-
time and full-time employment per capita for each of twelve demographic groups
distinguished according to race, gender, and age (white vs. nonwhite, male vs. female,
and 16-19 vs. 20-54 vs. 55 and over):




17
  The July CPI (NSA) for all items was 219.964 and 215.351 in 2008 and 2009, respectively
(www.bls.gov/cpi).


                                                                                            21
               ⎛ PTit    ⎞              ⎛ PTi ,t −1 ⎞ PT ⎛ FT0, t              ⎞ PT ⎛ FT0,t −1 ⎞
                         ⎟ = ai + β i ⎜⎜                ⎟⎟ + b0i ⎜⎜            ⎟⎟ + b1i ⎜⎜            ⎟⎟
                               PT    PT
               ⎜
               ⎝ POPit   ⎠              ⎝ POP  i , t −1  ⎠        ⎝ POP0, t     ⎠        ⎝ POP0, t −1 ⎠
                                       ⎛ FTi , t    ⎞         ⎛ FTi ,t −1 ⎞
                                +δ 0PT
                                    i ⎜             ⎟⎟ + δ1i ⎜⎜
                                                           PT
                                                                            ⎟⎟ + ε it
                                                                                    PT
                                       ⎜ POP
                                       ⎝      i,t    ⎠        ⎝ POPi , t −1 ⎠
                                                                                                           (16)
               ⎛ FTit    ⎞              ⎛ FTi , t −1 ⎞ FT ⎛ FT0, t             ⎞ FT ⎛ FT0,t −1 ⎞
                         ⎟ = ai + β i ⎜⎜             ⎟⎟ + b0i ⎜⎜               ⎟⎟ + b1i ⎜⎜            ⎟⎟
                               FT    FT
               ⎜
               ⎝ POPit   ⎠              ⎝ POPi ,t −1 ⎠         ⎝ POP0, t        ⎠        ⎝ POP0, t −1 ⎠
                                       ⎛ PTi , t    ⎞         ⎛ PTi ,t −1 ⎞
                                +δ 0FT
                                    i ⎜             ⎟⎟ + δ1i ⎜⎜
                                                           FT
                                                                            ⎟⎟ + ε it
                                                                                    FT
                                       ⎜ POP
                                       ⎝      i,t    ⎠        ⎝ POPi , t −1 ⎠


where PTit, FTit , and POPit denote demographic group i’s month t part-time employment,
full-time employment, and population, respectively, and the a’s, β’s, b’s and δ’s are
regression coefficients. Demographic group i = 0 is comprised of prime-aged (ages 20-
54) white males. Each demographic group’s two per capita not-seasonally-adjusted
employment series18 were separately seasonally adjusted by taking the residual from
regressions of log per capita employment on twelve month dummies over the fifteen year
period 1993 – 2007. Using the seasonally adjusted series, I estimated the model (16)
over the period January 2004 – July 2009. Holding fixed the post-hike time series for
population and the number of full-time positions held by prime-aged males,19 I used the
model to dynamically forecast part-time and full-time employment for each demographic
group for August 2009 through December 2010 (by construction, the full-time forecast
for prime-aged males coincides with the actual). The aggregate deviation of the part-time
predictions from the actual was added to the red series in Figure 5 to arrive at the
aggregate part-time prediction shown as Figure 5’s solid blue series.20
         After falling 9.3 million during the recession through July 2009, aggregate full-
time employment fell another 1.8 million by the end of the year, and still remained below
July 2009 levels at the end of 2010. Some people laid off from their full-time jobs likely


18
   Census Bureau (various issues). CPS Monthly Tables A-13 and A-18.
19
   Table 1 reported that only 0.6 percent of all full-time employed men were hourly workers paid at or
below the federal minimum; presumably the percentage among prime-aged (ages 20-54) full-time
employed men was even lower.
20
   The aggregate of my seasonally adjusted actual part-time employment series is slightly different from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics’ seasonally-adjusted aggregate; BLS does not report seasonally adjusted series
for specific demographic groups.


                                                                                                            22
had trouble finding another suitable full-time job, and some of them may be working
part-time while they search.21 Part-time jobs pay less than full-time jobs — even on an
hourly basis — so some employers may also be using part-time employees to accomplish
tasks where they previously might have used full-time jobs.                       Consistent with these
stories, my estimates of the pre-hike regression model (16) predict that part-time
employment would have continued to increase during the second half of 2009 because,
prior to the hike, part-time employment tended to increase with full-time job losses. For
example, the part-time regression (16) for prime-aged white women has estimates
β = 0.18, b0 + b1 = 0.07, and δ0 + δ1 = -0.50, so that a persistent reduction in their own
(prime-aged male) full-time employment was associated with more (less) of their own
part-time employment, respectively.22
         The actual and predicted series depart dramatically beginning in September 2009,
with actual part-time employment 1.2 million below predicted part-time employment by
December, and averaging 975,000 part-time positions below predicted over the months
August 2009 – December 2010. One reason to attribute much of the gap between actual
and predicted part-time employment to the July 24, 2009 minimum wage hike is that, as
noted above, the real federal minimum wage was substantially different after July 2009
than it was before, but not expected to significantly affect the full-time employment of
prime-aged males that are the basis for the forecasting model. Moreover, my forecasting
model (16) permits me to decompose the aggregate gap by demographic group, with the
findings matching the theory. Figure 6 is a scatter diagram comparing percentage gaps
between predicted and actual after July 2009 to first quartile hourly earnings in 2008,23
for six demographic groups distinguished by age and employment status. The three
lowest wage groups – the groups expected to have the largest employment impact – are


21
   To the extent that part-time employment rises during recessions as terminated full-time employees took
part-time employment with different employers, this by itself suggests that, contrary to the sticky price
model, part-time employers increase employment and output during a recession in response to an additional
supply of part-time workers.
22
   An early version of this paper arrived at a similar aggregate part-time forecast merely by fitting an
aggregate part-time employment model, with full-time employment as the only independent variable, over
the months December 2007 through July 2009.
23
   2008 first quartile hourly earnings are calculated from respondents to the March 2009 CPS who reported
positive hours, earnings, and weeks worked, and zero self-employment earnings in 2008. 2008 workers are
considered “full-time” if in full-time positions for at least 75 percent of the weeks they worked in 2008, and
part-time otherwise.


                                                                                                           23
the ones with the largest (negative) estimated impacts, with their impact rank among
groups identical to their rank in terms of first quartile earnings. The three highest wage
groups have estimated employment impacts of essentially zero.
         The 829,000 estimated employment effect of the federal minimum wage hike
(975,000 part-time and -146,000 full-time positions) is consistent with the flexible price
model.     For a back-of-the-envelope calculation that follows the economic model
presented above, assume that all types of labor are substitutes in production (i.e., the
cross-price elasticities of labor demand are positive), and a fraction ω << 1 of the
workforce would have worked at a wage between $7.25 and $6.55 if the minimum wage
had remained constant. Given the assumptions that types of labor are substitutes, and that
the fraction ω is small, the short run own wage elasticity of labor demand for that group
of ω workers is between -∞ and the wage elasticity of overall labor demand, depending
on the degree to which various types of labor are substitutes. As of July 2009, the
Economic Policy Institute (2009) estimated that 2.8 million people – 2.0 percent of the
July 2009 workforce of 139.8 million – earned less than $7.25 per hour. The wages of
some of those 2.8 million people would not be covered by the new minimum of $7.25
because they did seasonal work, received tips, or worked in some other job not covered
by the law. Other employers may succeed in changing the nature of the affected jobs
(e.g., reducing the amount of “free” training provided) so that worker productivity would
rise with the new minimum. For these reasons, the number of jobs ultimately covered by
the hike would be more like 1 – 2 million rather than the full 2.8 million earning less than
$7.25. Assuming that aggregate production is Cobb-Douglas in total labor, with labor’s
share 0.7, the flexible-price theoretical short run employment impact of raising the
minimum wage from $6.55 to $7.25 would be between 0.3 million and 2.0 million.24


V.C. Housing Investment Crowds Out Non-Residential Construction
         In the sticky price model, a demand increase in one sector increases output in that
sector (say, the public sector), without reducing output in other sectors because the
competition for factors of production is not passed into output prices that would
24
 The short run wage elasticity of total labor demand would be -4 if the production function were Cobb-
Douglas with labor share equal to 0.75. I assume that most of the ω workers with wage below $7.25 had
wage at or below $6.55.


                                                                                                         24
otherwise cause production to be reallocated to the demanded sector (see Proposition 1).
For the same reason, a reduction in demand in one sector would not cause the other
sectors to produce more.
         The private residential and nonresidential building sectors are an interesting case
study, because the demand for housing surged 2000-2005, and collapsed thereafter.
Admittedly, looking at the economy as residential versus nonresidential is not the same as
looking at it as public versus private, but the former gives us some information about how
different sectors are connected through factor markets, and this connection is at the heart
of the crowding out hypothesis. In fact, measuring the effects of residential building on
non-residential building offers a tough test of the crowding out hypothesis because the
housing collapse left so many unemployed and, depending on the degree to which factors
employed in building sectors (residential and non-residential) are substitutes for factors
employed in the rest of the economy, crowding out by housing demand could largely
occur in the rest of the economy, rather than the non-residential building sector that is my
focus here.
         Figure 7 displays quarterly real residential and real non-residential structures
investment since 2000 Q1.25 Non-residential investment remained low throughout the
housing boom. Both residential and non-residential investment turned at almost exactly
the same time, in opposite directions. Non-residential investment increased throughout
2006, 2007, and 2008, while residential investment was collapsing.
         The large reduction in the workforce that became apparent by 2009, not to
mention tight credit, likely reduced the desired stock of non-residential buildings and this
by itself would cut non-residential investment activity, so it helps to separate the effect of
an increased supply of resources for non-residential investment from reduced demand. I
attempt to do so by examining the two investment series in a regression framework that
includes measures of the business cycle.
         I use quarterly data on male employment rates and per capital real structures
investment from 1996Q1 through 2010Q3.26 Each column of Table 2 reports estimates of


25
  Figure 7 is reproduced and updated from Mulligan and Threinen (2008).
26
  I obtained quantity indices for residential and non-residential structures investment from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis’ NIPA Table 5.3.3 and mid-quarter population from their NIPA Table 2.1. Based on
the assumption that building factors would move between the two sectors on roughly a dollar-for-dollar


                                                                                                         25
a time series regression with real per capita non-residential structures investment as the
dependent variable. The independent variables include a linear time trend, real per capita
residential structures investment, and the log of the male employment rate. In some of
the specifications, lags of the independent variables are included in which case the table
displays the sum of the coefficients estimated on all lags (including lag zero).27 Both
investment variables are measured in 2005 dollars, so a coefficient of -1 on the residential
investment variable would be found if the only fluctuations in building activity were the
substitution of building activity in one sector for the same amount of building activity in
the other sector. The log employment rate series was rescaled by multiplying by the
1996Q1 – 2007Q4 average of the dependent variable: its coefficient can therefore be
interpreted as an elasticity.
         Columns (1) and (2) differ only in terms of the estimation method – levels versus
first-differences – and both report an economically and statistically significant negative
relationship between structures investment in the two sectors.                     The point estimates
suggest that one hundred units more housing investment is associated with 30-32 units
less non-residential structures investment, which is consistent with a significant amount
of crowding out of one sector’s building by building in the other sector. Column (3)
omits any lags of the independent variables, but reports a similar negative relationship
between the two sectors’ structures investment.
         Columns (1)-(3) use only data from before 2008, and it has been argued that
crowding out would not occur during the recession, even while it occurred in years
before. As one way to examine this possibility, I estimated two least squares versions of
each of Table 2’s columns (1) and (2), again using only the data prior to 2008, and then
used those estimates to predict non-residential building through 2010Q3. One version
has the same independent variables as used in columns (1) and (2) of the Table. The
other version omits the housing investment variable, so that the difference between the
two predictions can be interpreted as the expected effect of the housing crash on non-

basis, I converted each sector’s quantity index series (which were equal to 100 in 2005) to 2005 dollars by
multiplying the series by the sector’s 2005 nominal investment expenditure from BEA Table 5.3.5 (results
are similar if investment is measured as the log of the per capita quantity index, rather than in chained
dollars). Male employment rates are used rather than overall employment rates to focus on the business
cycle rather than secular changes in the propensity of women to work.
27
   Time-to-build and price measurement errors are good reasons to include lagged price terms in the
investment regressions.


                                                                                                         26
residential structures investment since 2007.                 The predictions for non-residential
structures investment were made by using the estimated coefficients (and, for the level
specifications, adjusting the constant term so that the models exactly fit 2007Q4 non-
residential structures investment28) and the actual data through 2010Q3 for housing
investment and the male employment rate.
         The predictions are shown in Figures 8a and 8b, together with the actual
investment series, with the vertical line to the left of 2008Q1 indicating the quarters that
were excluded from the regressions used to make the predictions. When the housing
investment variable is ignored, non-residential building is predicted to drop all quarters
(the black series in Figure 8a) or all quarters but one (the black series in Figure 8b) since
2007.29 In fact, non-residential building peaked in 2008Q2 and remained pretty flat
through the end of the year. The models including the housing investment variable (blue
series in Figures 8a and 8b) correctly predict this pattern, as well as the actual sharp drop
to begin 2009. Overall, the models without housing investment consistently under-
predicts non-residential building whereas the predictions based on the housing investment
variable are closer, having predictions on both sides of the actual series. Figure 8a and 8b
are inconsistent with the claim that crowding out disappeared during the recent recession.
        Table 2’s columns (4) and (5) further explore the possibility that crowding out is
different in recessions than other times by interacting the independent variables with a
recession indicator. One of the recession indicators is a dummy for the quarters since
2007, and the other is an indicator for the quarters coded as recession by the National
Bureau of Economic Research. If crowding out were zero during a recession, then the
coefficient on the housing investment interaction would be positive and equal in
magnitude to the negative coefficient on the un-interacted housing investment term.
Instead, the estimated coefficient on that interaction term is economically and statistically



28
   The specifications without housing investment ignore crowding out even before 2008 and thereby grossly
under-predict non-residential investment for 2007Q4 – my procedure of adjusting the constant allows the
model to fit 2007Q4 in order to see whether crowding out is needed to predict the non-residential
investment changes during the recession. The adjustment of the constant for the specification including
housing investment is quite small, because that model predicts 2007Q4 well.
29
   Each Figure 8a, 8b is based on two regressions. Alternatively, each Figure could have been based on a
single regression, with the “emp. only” prediction calculated by setting the employment coefficients to zero
– this alternative calcalution turns out to be very similar to the “emp. only” series shown.


                                                                                                        27
insignificant.   Thus, Table 2 is inconsistent with the claim that recessions have
significantly less crowding out.




VI.    Conclusions
       From a partial equilibrium perspective, it would be surprising if government
spending did not crowd out at least some private spending, and that a reduction in factor
supply did not result in less output. Yet some “New Keynesian” models, not to mention
much public policy commentary, claim that today’s economy has turned this partial
equilibrium reasoning on its head, even while it might have been historically valid.
Among other things, individual firms and the aggregate private sector are alleged to leave
their production invariant to changes in factor supply conditions during this recession.
This paper shows how the government spending multiplier and the “paradox of toil” are
related in theory, and examines evidence from this recession on the output effects of
factor supply.
       The academic year concluded twice during this recession, and both times over a
million teens entered the labor market. Well over a million of them found employment,
and as a result total employment for the economy was significantly higher in July than it
was in April. This pattern reversed itself the two times that the academic year resumed
during this recession. The real federal minimum wage was hiked at the end of July 2009
from an already high level relative to the CPI. Employers of part-time workers appeared
to respond by significantly cutting part-time employment after July 2009, despite the fact
that part-time employment had trended strongly up prior to the hike. The hike appears to
have reduced nationwide employment by about 800,000 on average between August
2009 and the end of 2010. Finally, the collapse of housing construction served to shift
resources into non-residential building.
       Despite the presence of perhaps the deepest recession of our lifetime, and nominal
interest rates on government securities that were essentially zero, these three episodes
show how factor markets seemed to behave as if output prices were flexible at the
margin. In particular, markets absorb an increased supply of factors of production – even
during a recession like this one – and do so by increasing output. The seasonal patterns



                                                                                       28
and minimum wage episode show this result at the aggregate level, while the minimum
wage and housing episodes illustrate it at a sectoral level.
        This paper does not contain a numerical estimate of the government purchases
multiplier. However, its examination of data exclusively from the 2008-9 recession
suggests that sectoral and aggregate employment and output vary with supply conditions
in much the same way they did before the recession. The results contradict Keynesian
claims that the government purchases multiplier would be significantly greater during the
recession than it was before 2008, suggesting instead that historical estimates of the
effects of fiscal policies are informative about fiscal policy effects in more recent years.
Moreover, the supply incentives created by government spending cannot be ignored
merely because 2008 and 2009 were recession years; rather incentives mattered as much
as ever. Government purchases likely moved factors away from activities that would
have supported private purchases. Unemployment insurance, food stamps, and other
expanding means-tested government programs likely reduced employment and output
during this recession, in much the same way they did in years past.
        Nothing about my results implies that this recession was efficient, or that
government spending necessarily reduces efficiency. Indeed, my “flexible price model”
includes a distortion in the output market (recall the parameter μ) and a distortion in the
labor market (recall the parameter τ).30 As noted by Woodford (2010), the presence of
distortions by itself does not tell us whether government spending stimulates private
spending, or how output responds at the margin to factor supply shifts.
        This is not to say that output prices were actually flexible during the recession,
because producer entry and exit and a variety of other market mechanisms could have
many of the qualitative effects of flexible prices. Moreover, even if it were shown that
output prices actually were flexible during this recession, that does not preclude the
possibility that those prices would be inflexible in response to smaller shocks. But, when
it comes to this recession, models that feature sticky prices have been a poor description
of actual events in the real economy.
30
  Another theory is that labor market outcomes during this recession were inefficient as a result of rigid
nominal wages. My minimum wage findings are consistent with that theory, but my results for the seasons
and for non-residential construction caution against going so far as assuming, as in “old Keynesian”
models, that rigid nominal wages rendered supply irrelevant for determining market outcomes during the
recession.


                                                                                                       29
VII.   Appendix – Remainder of Proof of Proposition 1


       By definition, a equilibrium {Ct , N t ,Wt , Rt , Pt }t∞=0 corresponding to benchmark

time paths {Gt , M t ,τ t ,α t ,γ t }t∞=0 solves the boundary value problem (10). The same time
paths, with the exception that Nt is large enough to provide for the extra government
demand at time t, solves the boundary value problem perturbed to have different values
for G and τ at date t only. To see this, note that the proposed solution has the same time
path for the rate of change of the inflation rate (that is, the second derivative of lnPt with
respect to time), except at moment t when it is greater by a finite amount (no matter how
different are Gt and τt from their benchmark values). With only a momentary finite
change in the rate of change of the inflation rate from the benchmark equilibrium, the
inflation rate itself, and the price level at time t, are also the same as in the benchmark
equilibrium. It follows that the proposed solution also has the same rate of growth for
uc′(C) as the benchmark equilibrium, and thereby the same private consumption and
uc′(C) as the benchmark equilibrium.




                                                                                            30
Table 1. Hourly Workers at or Below the Federal Minimum Wage, 2008
Selected Groups of Wage & Salary Workers


Group                                    Percentage who work hourly at or below Fed. Minimum Wage
Employed, Ages 16-24                       6.0%
Employed Part-time, Ages 16+               6.0%
Employed, Ages 16+                         1.7%
Employed Full-time Female, Ages 16+        1.1%
Employed Full-time Male, Ages 16+          0.6%

Source: Census Bureau. Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey .
Numbers employed from Table A-18.
Numbers who work hourly at or below federal minimum wage from Table 44.
Table 2. Crowding Out of Real Inv. in Non-Res. Structures
Each column of the Table reports results from a real per capita non-residential structures
investment regression.
                                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)
                       end sample: 2007Q4 2007Q4 2007Q4 2010Q3 2010Q3
                 estimation method:        levels first diff.    levels     levels       levels

       no. of current & lagged terms:            4         4          1           1          1

     sum of coef's on real per capita        -0.32     -0.30     -0.29       -0.29      -0.24
          housing investment terms           (0.09)    (0.13)    (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.07)

 sum of coef's on log male emp. rate          8.05      8.05      2.23        2.22       4.80
        terms, converted to elasticity       (1.14)    (2.00)    (1.13)      (1.14)     (0.78)

             recession measured as:            N/A       N/A        N/A    2008Q1-      NBER
                                                                            2010Q3       dates
                   recession indicator                                        -5.10      0.92
                                                                              (2.95)    (2.05)
recession indicator * (real per capita                                         0.06      0.11
                housing investment)                                           (0.30)    (0.17)
  recession indicator * (rescaled log                                          2.98     -0.57
             male employment rate)                                            (1.79)    (1.26)

     time trend (constant in first diff.)    0.003     0.003     0.001       0.001      0.001
                                            (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)

                               constant      -13.6       N/A       -3.4        -3.4       -7.8
                                              (2.0)                (2.0)       (2.0)      (1.4)

                        Observations         48        48         48          59         59
                  Adjusted R-squared         0.88      0.26       0.73        0.74       0.78
                                 s.e.       0.010     0.010      0.012       0.012      0.012

Notes: (a) quarterly observations beginning 1996Q1
(b) regressions are estimated with the Prais-Winsten correction for first-order serial
correlation (STATA command "prais")
(c) standard errors in parentheses
(d) independent variables are current and lagged (up to three lags) real housing per capita
housing investment and log male emp. rate (rescaled by the mean of the dependent variable)
and, when applicable, a recession indicator interacted with the those terms.
(e) both structures investment variables are measured in 2005 dollars per capita
 Fig 1. Labor Market Equilibrium with Fixed and Flexible Output Prices
When output price Pt is fixed, employers demand the number of employees needed to produce the output demanded, shown as the vertical curve in the Figure.
When Pt is flexible, employer demand for labor is elastic according to the marginal product of labor schedule, because wage costs are at least partly passed on to
                customers (who have elastic demand curves). The Figure displays a single labor “supply” curve that is common to both models.


                         Wt / Pt
                                                    Demand with fixed P

   C ( M t / Pt ) + Gt
                                            Nt = F −1 ( C ( M t / Pt ) + Gt )                                    Wt MRSt
                                                                                                                   =
F −1 ( C ( M t / Pt ) + Gt )                                                                                     Pt 1 − τ t




                                *
                    ⎛ Wt ⎞
                    ⎜ ⎟
                    ⎝ Pt ⎠                                                                  Demand with flexible P
                                                                                         Wt / Pt = F ′( Nt ) / μ


                                                                                                                   Nt
                                                                   Nt*
                                                          Fig 2. Teen Employment by Month

                                      1,500




                                      1,200
1000s, deviation from Dec-Dec trend




                                       900                                                  2003-7
                                                                                            2008
                                                                                            2009
                                       600




                                       300




                                         0
                                              Apr   May         Jun       Jul      Aug      Sep      Oct


                                      -300
                                                     Fig 3. Employment by Month, All Ages 16+

                                      2,500



                                      2,000
1000s, deviation from Dec-Dec trend




                                      1,500



                                      1,000



                                        500



                                          0
                                               Apr   May       Jun        Jul       Aug         Sep   Oct

                                                                                 2003-7
                                       -500
                                                                                 2008
                                                                                 2009

                                      -1,000
                                                      Fig 4. Teen Unemployment by Month

                                      1,000




                                       800
1000s, deviation from Dec-Dec trend




                                       600                                                2003-7
                                                                                          2008
                                                                                          2009
                                       400




                                       200




                                         0
                                              Apr   May      Jun       Jul      Aug       Sep      Oct


                                      -200
                          Millions of Employees, seas. adj.




              24.5
                              25.5
                                                                                26.5
                                                                                            27.5
                                                                                                                         28.5




         24
                     25
                                                                           26
                                                                                       27
                                                                                                     28
                                                                                                                                                  29


Dec‐07

Feb‐08

Apr‐08

Jun‐08

Aug‐08

Oct‐08
                                                                                                   last month federal




Dec‐08
                                                                                                   minimum is at $6.55




Feb‐09

Apr‐09

Jun‐09

Aug‐09

Oct‐09

Dec‐09

Feb‐10
                          Actual




Apr‐10
                                                                                                                                Fig 5. Part‐time Employment by Month




Jun‐10

Aug‐10

Oct‐10

Dec‐10
                                     Predicted from full‐time job losses
                                                           Fig 6. Estimated Employment Impact of July 2009 Min. Wage Hike,
                                                                               by Demographic Group
                                                                                        1st Quartile Hourly Earnings in 2008
                                                     5           6           7           8           9          10         11           12         13          14
                                             0.02
                                                                         Part-time, ages 55+
log Employment Impact, avg Aug-09 - Dec-10




                                             0.00                                                               Full-time, ages 20-54        Full-time, ages 55+


                                             -0.02
                                                                                        Part-time, ages 20-54

                                             -0.04


                                             -0.06


                                             -0.08


                                             -0.10              Full-time, ages 16-19


                                             -0.12


                                             -0.14       Part-time, ages 16-19


                                             -0.16
Real investment            Fig 7. Real Investment in Structures: Residential vs. Nonresidential
   index, SA
 2000:Q1 = 100
140
                               Residential Structures                                        recession begins
130                            Nonresidential structures


120


110


100


 90


 80


 70


 60


 50
      2000‐I      2001‐I    2002‐I     2003‐I       2004‐I   2005‐I     2006‐I   2007‐I   2008‐I       2009‐I   2010‐I
                                                              Quarter
Real investment          Fig 8a. Real Investment in Non‐Residential Structures: Crowding Out
   index, SA
                                             (out‐of‐sample predictions from level specifications)
 2000:Q1 = 100
120
                  recession begins
                                                                                            actual
110                                                                                         predicted from housing inv. and emp.

                                                                                            predicted from emp. only
100



 90



 80



 70



 60



 50
       2007‐IV       2008‐I      2008‐II   2008‐III   2008‐IV   2009‐I     2009‐II   2009‐III   2009‐IV   2010‐I       2010‐II   2010‐III
                                                                    Quarter
Real investment            Fig 8b. Real Investment in Non‐Residential Structures: Crowding Out
   index, SA
                                            (out‐of‐sample predictions from first diff. specifications)
 2000:Q1 = 100
120
                  recession begins
                                                                                             actual
110                                                                                          predicted from housing inv. and emp.

                                                                                             predicted from emp. only
100



 90



 80



 70



 60



 50
      2007‐IV        2008‐I      2008‐II   2008‐III   2008‐IV     2009‐I     2009‐II    2009‐III      2009‐IV   2010‐I   2010‐II    2010‐III
                                                                    Quarter
VIII. References


Aiyagari, S. Rao, Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum. “The Output,
       Employment, and Interest Rate Effects of Government Consumption.” Journal of
       Monetary Economics. 30(1), October 1992: 73-86.
Alesina, Alberto F. and Silvia Ardagna. “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes Versus
       Spending.” NBER working paper no. 15438, October 2009.
Barro, Robert J.   “Output Effects of Government Purchases.”     Journal of Political
       Economy. 89(6), December 1981: 1086-1121.
Barro, Robert J. Macroeconomics. New York: John Wiley, 1987.
Barro, Robert J. and Charles J. Redlick. “Macroeconomic Effects from Government
       Purchases and Taxes.” NBER working paper no. 15369, September 2009.
Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King. “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium.” American
       Economic Review. 83(3), June 1993: 315-34.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Mark Watson. “Systematic Monetary Policy and
       the Effects of Oil Price Shocks.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 19(1),
       December 1997: 91-157.
Blanchard, Olivier and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. “Monopolistic Competition and Effects of
       Aggregate Demand.” American Economic Review. 77(4), September 1987: 647-
       66.
Calvo, Guillermo A. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-maximizing Framework.” Journal of
       Monetary Economics. 12(3), September 1983: 383-398.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo.            “When is the
       Government Spending Multiplier Large?”       NBER working paper no. 15394,
       October 2009.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler. “Monetary Policy Rules and
       Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics. 115(1), February 2000: 147-180.
Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford. “Credit Spreads and Monetary Policy.” Journal
       of Money, Credit and Banking. 42(1), 2010: 3-35.




                                                                                   31
Davis, Michael C. and James D. Hamilton. “Why Are Prices Sticky? The Dynamics of
       Wholesale Gasoline Prices.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking. 36(1),
       2004: 17-37.
Eckholm, Erik. “Prolonged Aid to Unemployed is Running Out.” New York Times.
       August 1, 2009.
Eggertsson, Gauti. “What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?” Federal
       Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 402, November 2009.
Eggertsson, Gauti. “The Paradox of Toil.” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
      New York, January 2010a.
Eggertsson, Gauti. “A Comment on Casey Mulligan’s Test of the Paradox of Toil.”
      Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May 2010b.
Employment Policies Institute.    “Minimum Wage Issue Guide.”       July 21, 2009.
      http://www.epi.org/page/-/mwig/epi_minimum_wage_issue_guide.pdf
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Lee E. Ohanian. “Does Neoclassical Theory Account for the
      Effects of Big Fiscal Shocks? Evidence from World War II.” International
      Economic Review. 51(2), May 2010: 509-32.
Meyer, Bruce D.           “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells.”
       Econometrica. 58(4), July 1990: 757-782.
Moffitt, Robert A. “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply.” in Alan J. Auerbach and
       Martin Feldstein, eds. Handbook of Public Economics. Volume 4, 2002: 2393-
       430.
Mountford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig. “What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?”
       Journal of Applied Econometrics. 24(6), 2009: 960-992.
Mulligan, Casey B. “School’s Out for Summer: A Gem in the Jobs Report.” New York
       Times Economix Blog, August 11, 2009.
Mulligan, Casey B.       “Foreclosures, Enforcement, and Collections under Federal
       Mortgage Modification Guidelines.” NBER working paper no. 15777, February
       2010a.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Does Labor Supply Matter During a Recession? Evidence from the
       Seasonal Cycle.” NBER working paper no. 16357, September 2010b.




                                                                                 32
Mulligan, Casey B. and Luke Threinen. “Market Responses to the Panic of 2008.”
       NBER working paper no. 14446, October 2008.
Ohanian, Lee E. “Discussion of: ‘What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?’
       NBER Macroeconomics Annual. 25, 2010.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
       Cost Models.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(4), November 2008: 1415-
       64.
Ramey, Valerie A. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing.”
       NBER working paper no. 15464, October 2009.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis.”
       Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter. 2009-17, May 22,
       2009.
Sharp, Keith P.   “Tests of U.S. Short and Long Interest Rate Seasonality.” Review of
       Economics and Statistics. 70(1), February 1988: 177-182.
Sidrauski, Miguel. “Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy.”
       American Economic Review. 57(2), May 1967: 534-544.
United Status Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Summer Youth Labor Force.” August 2009.
United States Census Bureau.       “Table A-13: Employment Status of the Civilian
       Noninstitutional Population by Age, Sex, and Race.” Labor Force Statistics from
       the Current Population Survey, various issues.
United States Census Bureau. “Table A-18: Employed and Unemployed Full- and Part-
       time Workers by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity.” Labor
       Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey, various issues.
United States Department of Labor, Wages and Hours Division. “History of Federal
       Minimum Wage Rates Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 1938 – 2009.” 2009
       http://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/chart.htm.
Woodford, Michael. “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier.”
       NBER working paper no. 15714, January 2010.




                                                                                      33
