                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONEY DEMAND PREDICTABILITY




                         V. Vance Haley


                     Working Paper No. 1580




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 1985




The research reported here is part of the WRER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NEER Working Paper #1580
                                              March 1985




                         Honey Demand Predictability

                                   ABSTRACT


    The performance of empirical money demand equations over the past

decade raises serious questions about money demand predictability. A

variety of specifications were presented to explain past episodes of

apparent money demand instability, but their success in predicting future

money demand is limited in most instances. In particular, the unprecedented

decline in the velocity of Ml during 1982 and 1983 was not captured fully

by any of the previously-modified conventional specifications. This paper

evaluates a variety of the approaches and specifications proposed in

previous money demand studies to explain the behavior of the narrowly

defined money stock from the mid 1970ts through 1983. The empirical

results cast doubt on the appropriateness of the conventional money demand

specification in both the pre- and post- 1974 periods.




                                              V. Vance Roley
                                              Department of Finance DJ-10
                                              Graduate School of Business Administration
                                              University of Washington
                                              Seattle, WA 98195
                                              (206) 545—7476
                                                            Revised
                                                            December 1984


                        MONEY DEMAND PREDICTABILITY
                                            *
                              V. Vance Roley



     The considerable amount of research devoted to the demand for money

is justified by its fundamental role in the Federal Reserve's formulation

and implementation of monetary policy, and the potential impact of mone-

tary policy on both economic activity and inflation)' As a whole, how-

ever, the performance of empirical money demand equations over the past

decade raises serious questions about its predictability. A vast major-

ity of the specifications presented to explain past episodes of apparent

money demand instability achieved only limited success in predicting

future money demand.

     Empirical research on money demand prior to the mid l970s, culmin-

ating in Goldfeldts (1973) exhaustive study, suggested that the demand

for money exhibited a stable relationship with a small set of macroecono-

mic variables. As noted by Gordon (1984a), however, Goldfeld's empirical

relationships were estimated using data generated from the relatively

tranquil economic period beginning in the early 1950s and ending in the

early l97Os. This period is in sharp contrast to the subsequent period

characterized by supply shocks, high and volatile inflation, and large

and erratic swings in economic activity. The Federal Reserve also began

to formalize the use of the narrowly defined money stock as an intermedi-

ate target of monetary policy in the early l97Os. Moreover, the Federal

Reserve adopted different monetary control procedures in the October 1979—

October 1982 period. Thus, empirical money demand equations from the
                                    —2—


pre—1974 period might not be expected to describe the latter period with

the same precision.

     The episode of the "missing money" that occurred in the mid l970s

(e.g., Enzler, Johnson, and Paulus 1976 and Goldfeld 1976) In fact indi-

cated that conventional money demand equations systematically overpre—

dicted actual money balances. As noted by Judd and Scadding (1982), this

in turn led to two strands of research on money demand. First, to take

into account the financial Innovation and deregulation since the early

1970's, a number of researchers modified existing money demand specifica—

tions. In particular, money demand equations were selectively modified

to reflect commercial banks' authority to issue savings accounts to state

and municipal governments in November 1974 and to small businesses in

November 1975, the growth of negotiable order of withdrawal (Now) accounts

in New England, accelerated use of cash management practices by businesses

along with more intensive use of overnight repurchase agreements (RPs) and

overnight Caribbean Eurodollar deposits, and the rapid gains in money mar-

ket mutual funds (NMMFs). To capture the effects of these institutional

events, variables such as interest—rate ratchets (e.g., Goldfeld 1976 and

Quick and Paulus 1977), time trends (e.g., Lieberman 1977), brokerage fee

proxies (e.g., Porter and Of fenbacher 1982), and debits (e.g., Enzler,

Johnson, and Paulus 1976 and Goldfeld 1976) have been included as explana-

tory variables. Some studies additionally included dummy and other shift

variables to represent the effects of deregulation and innovation on the

narrowly defined money stock (e.g., Hafer and Rein l982a and Cagan 1983).

Other researchers added various financial instruments such as RI's (Garcia

and Pak 1979, Wenninger and Sivesand 1979, and Tinsley, Garrett, and Friar
                                    —3—


 1981), Eurodollar deposits (e.g., Simpson and Porter 1980 and Cagan 1983),

 and money market mutual funds (e.g., Wenninger, Radecki, and Hammond 1981)

 either to the existing definition of narrowly defined money or as a deter—

min.ant of the shift.

      Second, the experience during the mid to late l970s led others to

 reevaluate conventional money demand specifications. Judd and Scadding

 (1981) and Carr and Darby (1981) presented empirical models emphasizing the

 role of money supply shocks. Clower and Howitt (1978), Akerlof (1979),

Akerlof and Milbourne (1980), and Santomero and Seater (1981), among others,

presented theoretical models as alternatives to conventional transactions

approaches. In addition, .Laidler (1980), Cooley and LeRoy (1981), Goodfriend

 (1983), and Gordon (1984a, 1984b) raised important issues concerning the

econometric properties of estimated money demand equations, casting serious

doubt on the robustness of any past empirical specification.

      While many of the above studies presented money demand equations cap-

able of explaining the behavior of the mid to late 1970s, the experience

during the early 1980s has once again raised questions about money demand

predictability. The unprecedented decline in the velocity of Ml during

1982 and 1983 was not captured fully by any of the previously—modified con-

ventional specifications. Moreover, the apparent "nonshiftt' in 1981

:despite the introduction of nationwide NOWs (e.g., Bennett 1982 and Cagan

.1983) was puzzling to many. Studies focusing on the recent period ——   includ-
ing those by Judd and McElhattan (1983), Tatom (1983), Cagan (1983), Hamburger

(1983), Hafer (1984), Gordon (1984a), and Simpson (1984) —— have not reached

a consensus concerning the underlying factors accounting for the behavior of

Ml.
                                     —4—


     The purpose of this paper is to evaluate a variety of the approaches

and specifications proposed in previous money demand studies to explain

the behavior of the narrowly defined money stock from the mid l970s through

1983. In the process, fundamental econometric issues relating to both pre—

and post—1974 studies as well as issues relating to proposed modifications

to conventional money demand specifications are investigated. In an attempt

to further isolate the sources of the alleged shifts, the sectoral demands

by households and businesses also are examined.

     In the first section of this paper, estimation and simulation results

from conventional log—levels specifications are summarized. In the second

section,   the conventional partial—adjustment specification is initially
examined using first—differenced data from usual sources. It is then fur-
ther tested using alternative data sources for the narrowly defined money

stock and the short—term interest rate to evaluate the consequences of tem-

poral aggregation. Other specifications, including that proposed by

Hamburger (1977), are considered in the third section. In the fourth sec-

tion, estimation and simulation results of sectoral demands for Ml are pre-

sented. The interest elasticity of Ml, an important factor in explanations

of the 1982—83 experience in studies by Brayton, Parr, and Porter (1983),

Cagan (1983), and Hamburger (1983), is examined more closely in the fifth

section. In the final section, the implications of the results presented

here for both the 1982—83 velocity decline and monetary policy are considered.



1.   CONVENTIONAL MONEY DEMAND SPECIFICATIONS

     In this section, estimation and simulation results of conventional log—

levels money demand specifications are presented. Preceding these results,
                                          —5—


the model and data are briefly reviewed. The empirical results presented

in this section provide benchmarks for comparisons in subsequent sections.

     A. Specification and Data

         The traditional starting point in most money demand studies, and

that taken here, is the Batunol (1952)—Tobin (1956) model of the transac-

tions demand for money. Converting the usual square—root expression into

real magnitudes, substituting real GNP for the volume of transactions, and

taking natural logarithms yields the familiar expression

                         =         ÷ Sr + 2t'                                (1)


where m is the narrowly defined money stock, Ml, deflated by the price

level; r is the nominal interest rate on the riskless asset;          is real

CNP (all in natural logarithms); and             3l and   are parameters. The

parameters are related to the transactions model by the constraints

             =    (l/2)ln(b)   —   (l/2)ln(2),
             = —1/2,                                                     -
                                                                             (2)
             =    1/2,

where b is the real brokerage charge in converting the riskless asset into

money balances.

     The conventional transactions model has been relaxed in a number of

ways to reflect other factors not captured because of its inherent simpli-

city. Appealing to portfolio motives, for example, Hamburger (1971, 1983)

included yields on assets such as long—term bonds and equities.' The

inclusion of these variables could alternatively be justified in the stoch-

astic version of the transactions model presented by Buiter and Armstrong

(1978), with the additional ass-tueption of imperfect asset substitutability.
                                          —6—


Again based primarily on portfolio motives, B. Friedman (1978) recently

emphasized the possible influence of wealth on money demand.-' Laidler

(1977, 1980) additionally suggested, based on the results of Cagan (1956)

and Goldfeld (1973), among others, that expected inflation is another

direct determinant of money demand apart from its indirect effect through

nominal interest rates. To better represent the own rate of return on

transactions balances, Barro and Santomero (1972) and Klein (1974) also

relax the zero own—yield restriction by constructing and using measures

of the demand deposit rate. Finally, as noted in the introductory section,

a variety of additional variables have been considered in response to the

economic events of the 1970s and early l980s.

     Allowing for the possible inclusion of at least some of these addi-

tional factors, and following the usual convention that equation (1) repre-

sents desired money balances, equation (1) may be rewritten as

                      =       + S1'r +              +

where m denotes desired real money balances,              is a row vector of other

possible explanatory variables, and 8 is a column vector of parameters. To

further permit the possibility of less—than—immediate adjustment to desired

money holdings, the short—run demand for money is typically described by

either the real (e.g., Chow 1966 and Goldfeld 1973) or nominal (e.g.,

ColdIeld 1976) partial adjustment models

                      —
                                = O(m     —
                                              m1)                               (4)


                          —
                              1"t—l
                                      =   0(M   —
                                                     hh1M_i)                    (5)


where M is nominal Ml; 1nM =          +             is the natural logarithm of the
                                 m
price level; and S is the partial adjustment parameter. Combining the
                                     —7—


 nominal adjustment model (5) with desired money holdings (3), the short—

 run demand for money becomes

         =
             U(8 ÷ S1.r +       +      + 0t—1 +                            (6)


The real adjustment model only differs from (6) in that the last term ——

which approximately equals the negative of actual inflation —— has a coef-

ficient equal to zero. However, if actual inflation serves as a proxy for

expected inflation, a term such as         may nevertheless appear as a

statistically significant determinant in the real adjustment model.

     Despite the widespread adoption of partial adjustment models to specify

money demand, their use has at times been questioned. Feige (1967) claimed

that the partial adjustment specification merely reflects individuals' adap-

tive estimates of permanent income. More recently, Goodfriend (1983)

attacked the theoretical rationale used in applying the partial adjustment

model to money demand and presented an alternative explanation for the sta-

tistical significance of lagged money in money demand regressions. While

the initial results reported here employ the partial adjustment specifica-

tion (6), it is considered in more detail in the next section.

     Seasonally—adjusted quarterly data are used to estimate both real and

nominal versions of (6), beginning in l959:Ql and ending in 1983:Q4. With

current definitions of the monetary aggregates, the Federal Reserve's Ml

series starts in 1959. Ml data are initially employed as quarterly averages.

As mentioned previously, real GNP is taken as the transactions variable, and

the price level is represented by the GNP deflator.-1 To represent the

opportunity cost of holding transactions balances, quarterly averages of the

3—month Treasury bill yield and the 6—month commercial paper rate are alter-

natively used, along with the savings deposit rate.' The total value of
                                         —8—


equities, as of the end of the quarter, is used as the wealth variable.!'

While this variable excludes important components of wealth, it most likely

reflects a significant portion of the variation in alternative measures of

wealth as well as returns on equities.

     B. Estimation and Simulation Results

         Estimation results for several permutations of the conventional

log—levels money demand specification are reported in Table 1. Estimation

results are presented for two subsamples. The initial observation in the

first subsample reflects the current starting date of the Ml series, taking

lagged money values and the serial correlation correction procedure into

account. The sample is divided at the end of 1973, prior to the onset of

the alleged missing money episode. The second subsample spans the 1974:Ql—

l983Q4 period.

     The usual practice of simply adding subsequent years of data to earl-

ier estimation periods is not followed here. Given the different character-

istics of the post—1974 economy, as noted previously, pooling pre— and post—

1974 data may bias the estimation results for both periods. Moreover, the

Federal Reserve's greater commitment to monetary targeting during the l970s

and particularly the change in monetary control procedures from October 1979

to October 1982 would seem to provide classic examples for the potential

applicability of the Lucas (1976) critique.!1

     As is also apparent itt   the   table, a serial correlation correction pro-

cedure is used when significant serial correlation is evident. Following

Fackler and MeMillin (1983), the Hildreth—Lu technique is used to avoid

potential problems with the Cochrane—Orcutt procedure.!1 Other researchers

(e.g., Lawnas and Spencer 1980 and Hafer and Rein 1982a, 1982b) have used
                                    — 9.—




Hatanaka's (1974) efficient estimator of p with only slight differences

in the estimation results.

     Equations (1.1) through (1.4) use the commercial paper rate as the

short—ten market interest rate. In equation (1.1), the wealth variable

is included along with the change in the logarithm of the price level.

Equation (1.2) only differs from (1.1) in that the wealth variable is

deleted. Equations (1.3) and (1.4) are similar to (1.1) and (1.2), respec-

tively, except that the price variable is constrained to conform to the

nominal adjustment model (6). These same four specifications are repeated

in equations (1.5) through (1.8), where the Treasury bill yield replaces

the commercial paper rate. Again, both of these yields are calculated as

quarterly averages. A comparison of the performances of these yields is

included in Table 1 because of the reliance placed on end—of—quarter Trea-

sury bill yield data in subsequent sections, which departs from the tradi-

tional use of the commercial paper rate. The greater availability of end—

of—quarter Treasury bill yield data from public sources dictated this choice.

     The results reported for equations (1.1) through (1.8) exhibit several

characteristics. First, when included, the wealth variable is statistically

significant at the 5 percent level with the anticipated sign. Second, the

estimated elasticities of both the commercial paper rate and the Treasury

bill yield are statistically significant, with the former exhibiting slightly

larger absolute values. Other estimated coefficients are relatively

unaffected by the choice of the short—ten interest rate. Third, the esti-

mated coefficient on the price term, in comparison to the coefficient on

lagged real money balances, indicates that the nominal adjustment model can-

not be rejected at low significance levels. Fourth, the serial correlation
                                    —10—


correction procedure yields significant estimates of p, perhaps indicating

misspecification. Finally, despite the autocorrelation correction in addi-

tion to the presence of the lagged dependent variable, serial correlation

in the estimated equations persists, especially when wealth is excluded.

These statistical properties could be symptomatic of either problems with

the data (e.g., Goodfriend 1983) or more basic flaws in the specifications.

     On the bottom half of Table 1, the same eight specifications are esti-

mated over the l974:Q1 — 1983:Q4 period. Again, several features of these

results are noteworthy. First, the wealth variable is uniformly insignifi-

cant in this latter period. Second, the estimated elasticity of the short—

term market rate is statistically significant at the 10 percent level in

only the most restrictive specifications, (1.12) and (1.16). Third, the

results suggest that serial correlation correction is not needed. Fourth,

the nominal adjustment model again cannot be rejected at low significance

levels, but the speed of adjustment is implausibly slow. Moreover, the

significantly larger coefficient estimate on lagged money in the 1974:Q1 —

l983:Q4 period seems contrary to assertions about greater cash management
and overall economization on transactions balances during this period.

     To further examine the properties of conventional log—levels specif 1—

cations, selected equations in Table 1 are simulated over the 1974:Ql —

l983:Q4 and l982:Ql — 1983:Q4 periods. Following Hem (1950), post—sample
                                                                              I
static   simulation results are reported. In these simulations, lagged real

money balances equal historical values. This methodology is selected

mainly for diagnostic reasons. In particular, it is much more straight-

forward to distinguish between permanent level, increasing, and transitory

shifts using this approach. Moreover, dynamic simulation errors are merely
                                     —11—


combinations of past static simulation errors.

       Post—sample static simulation results for the 1974:Ql — 1983:Q4 period

using equations (1.3) and (1.7) ——   the   nominal adjustment specification

with alternative market interest rates ——    are   reported in the first four

columns of Table 2. Simulation errors are reported as both real dollar

amounts and percentages. Both of these money demand equations exhibit the

downward shift usually found in similar specifications starting in 1975 and

continuing throughout the 17970s. In particular, actual real money balances

are on average 1.9 and 1.7 percent below predicted levels for equations

(1.3) and (1.7), respectively, in the period spanning l974:Ql —      198l:Q4.
For 1982—83, the simulation results for equations (1.3) and (1.7) continue

to reflect a downward shift in comparison to the pre—1974 period, but the

mean errors of —2.6 and —2.3 percent, respectively, are smaller in absolute

value than those in the preceding two years.!! These results suggest that

concern about the 1982—83 episode may be misdirected. Instead, the relevant

puzzle may concern a temporary downward shift in 1980 and 1981, where mean

errors averaged —3.3 and —3.0 percent for equations (1.3) and (1.7), respec-

tively.

      Simulation results for equations (1.11) and (1.15) ——    reestimated   over

the l974:Ql —   l981:Q4 period —— are presented in the last two rows of the
table. On average, the prediction errors are positive, but they amount to

only $l.6b and $1.7b, respectively, or percentage errors of about 0.7 per-

cent in each case2" Furthermore, the largest error ——       occurring   in l982:Q4 ——

is   only about 2½ times the within—sample root—mean—square error. The esti-

mated equations which generated these results may, nevertheless, be criti-

cized on the basis of some of their properties. In addition to those
                                          —12—



mentioned     previously, the only statistically significant coefficient in

the nominal—adjustment forecasting equations is on lagged money, and it

is not significantly different from unity.



2.     FURTHER EXAMINATION OF THE PARTIAL ADJUSTMENT MODEL

       The   results   in the previous section cast doubt on the robustness of

conventional money demand equations. As noted, conventional log—levels

relationships estimated with data ending before 1974 are consistent with

the missing money hypothesis. Using data beginning in 1974, conventional

money demand equations exhibit implausibly slow adjustment to desired

money balances, and potential determinants apart from lagged money are

typically not statistically significant. In this section, the conventional

model is further examined along two lines. Estimation with first—differ—

enced data is initially considered. Then, alternative data sources are

employed to examine the consequences of temporal aggregation.

      A. First—Difference Specification

             Hafer and Rein (1980), Fackler and McMillin (1983), and Gordon

(l984a) all recommend that the conventional money demand specification

should at least be considered in first—difference f on. Following Granger

and Newbold (1974). this practice is desirable as an informal specifica-

tion test in that the possibility of spurious correlation due to trends
                                                                                 t
is   reduced. Plosser and Schwert (1978) recommend this procedure more

strongly. They suggest that if an equation is properly specified, its

estimated coefficients should be robust over alternative orders of differ—

encing. The presence of a lagged dependent variable, however, potentially

complicates the interpretation of estimation results from first—difference
                                    —13—


specifications. Plosser, Schwert, and White (1982) devised a specification

test for this case involving instrumental variables, but as Cooley and LeRoy

(1981) noted in a similar context, plausible instruments also are likely to

be correlated with the error term in money demand equations. First—differ—

encing is nevertheless applied below to help eliminate trends and possibly

autocorrelated error terms.

     First difference estimates of the equations in Table 1 are presented in

Table 3. For the l959:Q3—1973:Q4 periods the estimation results reported in

equations (3.1) through (3.8) are generally quite similar to those reported

for analogous log—levels specifications. Apart from the lower estimated

Treasury bill yield elasticity in equations (3.5) through (3.8), the only

other noteworthy difference with respect to estimated coefficients is the

more rapid adjustment speed. The first—difference specification also appears

to have eliminated the autocorrelation problems in Table 1.

     In contrast to the results from the earlier subsample, the estimation

results obtained after differencing the data in the 1974:Ql—1983;Q4 period

differ substantially from those reported in Table 1. The primary conflict

occurs with the estimated coefficient on the lagged dependent variable. This

coefficient declines from a value of about 0.9 to 0.3. Thus, the results in

Table 3 indicate that the speed of adjustment has risen, not declined, in

the post—1974 period. A futher consesuence is that the nominal adjustment

model can be rejected in each case at the 5 percent level of significance. In

other words, actual inflation is estimated to have an independent and statis-

tically significant effect on money demand.

     The post—sample properties of selected first difference specifications

are examined in Table 4. The first four columns report the static simulation
                                       —14—


errors of equations (3.3) and (3.7) ——    which only differ by the definition

of the short—term yield ——   for   the l974:Q1—l983:Q4 period. In contrast to

the results for the log—levels specifications, these equations exhibit

only slight negative bias through 1981:Q4, and then small positive bias for

the 1982—83 period.111 These equations also yield greatly reduced root—mean—

square errors in comparison to analogous specifications in Table 2. The

simulation results for a money demand equation estimated from 1974:Ql

through 198l:Q4 are reported in the last two coiumns)?" While the predic-

tive performance of this equation is less accurate than the others in the

table, the mean error is nevertheless lower than the within—sample root—
                    13/
mean—square error..—

     As a whole, the relatively accurate simulation results obtained after

differencing suggest that more elaborate specifications may not be needed

in order to predict future money demand. Moreover, estimation results for

the pre—1974 period yielded stable point estimates for levels and first—

difference specifications. However, the plausibility of the estimates may

be questioned, particularly concerning partial adjustment. In addition,

the estimation results for the 1974—83 sample period are neither sensible

nor robust.

     B. Consequences of Temporal Aggregation

           The data used in the Federal Reserve's policy analysis are con—
                                                                                1
structed   as daily averages over months or quarters. For this reason, along

with the discrete nature of money withdrawals in the Baumol—Tobin model,

temporally aggregated data are used almost exclusively in money demand

studies.' Despite the seemingly widespread acceptance of this practice,

temporal aggregation can lead to biased estimates in many applications (e.g.,
                                      —1.5—



Zeliner   and Montmarquette 1971). One prominent example was presented by

Working (1960), who demonstrated that data following a random walk, when

averaged, will have correlated first differences. Thus, it is at least

possible that some of the statistical properties of conventional money

demand equations are a consequence of the temporal aggregation of finan-

cial data)
     To investigate the effects of temporal aggregation, two additional

sources of Ml data are considered. One is the Ni data taken from the flow

of funds accounts (MFF). These data presumably reflect money balances as

of the last day of the quarter)á' The other source is the Federal

Reserve's weekly Ml series, which corresponds to daily—average money bal-

ances over a given week. These data are currently available from 1975,

and the balances during the last week of the quarter are used here (MW).

To avoid potential aggregation problems with other financial data, the 3—

month Treasury bill yield on the last day of the quarter replaces the pre-

vious averaged yield. Also, as mentioned previously, the wealth variable

is already constructed as an end—of--quarter quantity)hd'

     The correlations between alternative Ml data ——   both   in terms of levels

and differences ——   are reported in Table 5. The flow—of--funds Ml data also
are averaged (AMFF) and compared to other measures. On the top half of the

table, the correlations between traditional Ml, end—of—quarter Ml, and aver-

aged end—of—quarter Ml are calculated for the entire 1959—83 sample period.

The levels corresponding to these different measures are very highly corre-

lated reflecting a strong time trend. The averaged flow—of—funds data also

are highly correlated (0.86) with the traditional data after differencing,

while the end—of—quarter data are less highly correlated with both measures.
                                          —16—


Similar results are reported for the 1975—83 period, conforming to the cur-

rent availability of the weekly Ml series. Again, all level measures are

highly correlated, and the averaged flow—of—funds data yield the highest

correlation (0.72) with the traditional data after differencing. As a

whole, the correlations suggest that these alternative measures are broadly

consistent.

     Estimation results using end—of—quarter, averaged end—of—quarter and

last—week—in—the—quarter Ml data are reported in Table 6. The 1959:Q3—1973:

Q4 and 1974:Ql—l983:Q4 sample periods are employed as before, as well as

the l975Q3—l983:Q4 sample period to consider the weekly Ml data series.

For each measure of Ml, three specifications are estimated. The first

corresponds to the most general specification in Table 1, including both

wealth and an unrestricted price term. The second applies an autocorrela—

tion correction procedure to the same specification. The lagged dependent

variable is dropped in the third specification to compare the partial

adjustment model with the serial correlation alternative.

     With the exception of the interest—rate elasticities, the results for

the pre—1974 sample period using averaged flow—of—funds data ——      equations
(6.4) —   (6.6)   ——   are similar to those reported in Table 1. The differences
are that the estimated Treasury bill yield elasticity is positive and the

savings deposit rate is statistically significant..L&t The nominal adjust—

ment model (b6         b7) cannot, however, be rejected, while the real adjustment

model (b7 = 0) can be rejected at low significance levels. Moreover, the

coefficient on the lagged dependent variable is statistically significant

in equations (6.4) and (6.5), and despite its presence in addition to the

serial correlation correction procedure in (6.5), substantial serial
                                        —'7—


correlation remains as in Table 1.

     Estimation results using end—of-quarter data in the pre—1974 period

are presented in equations (6.1) through (6.3). Using these data, the

appropriateness of the real versus the nominal partial adjustment model

cannot be determined. Moreover, the partial adjustment framework in gen-

eral may be questioned, as the alternative serial correlation specifica-

tion (6.3) yields a smaller estimated standard error (0.0061) than either

equations (6.1) or (6.2).121 All specifications, however, eliminate the

significant autocorrelation exhibited in Table 1. Also, similar to equa-

tions (6.4) —   (6.6),   the savings deposit rate has a statistically signif i—

cant coefficient with the anticipated sign, while the Treasury bill yield

is positive and insignificant.

     Estimation results for the l974:Q1—1983:Q4 period are reported in

equations (6.7) —   (6.12).   Using averaged data, equation (6.10) exhibits

the larger coefficient on lagged money found in Table 1, but this coeff i—

cient diminishes in size once the equation is corrected for serial corre—

lation (6.11). In this latter specification, the nominal adjustment model

also can be rejected, in contrast to Table 1. Using end—of—quarter data,

the serial correlation specification (6.9) again gives a lower estimated

standard error than the partial adjustment specification (6.7), and it

also implies that actual inflation influences money demand directly.

     In the last six rows of the table, end—of—quarter and last—week—in—

the—quarter data are considered over the 1975:Q3—1983:Q4 sample period.

In contrast to results from the entire post—1974 sample, estimates of the

partial adjustment model using end—of—quarter data (6.13) imply a signif i—

cantly negative Treasury bill yield elasticity. The serial correlation
                                        -18—


specification (6.15) also yields a somewhat higher estimated standard

error in this case. Using last-week—in—the—quarter data, the estimated

standard error of the autocorrelation specification (6.18) again is

somewhat higher than that of the partial adjustment alternative (6.16),

and the estimated elasticity of the market rate is statistically signi-

ficant at the 5 percent level in equations (6.16) —       (6.17).   Because of

the similarities to equations (6.13) —     (6.15),   the properties of equa-

tions (6.16) —   (6.18)   appear to be more of a function of the later start-

ing date of the estimation period than different sources of Ml data.

     To further examine the properties of the specifications in Table 6,

first difference money demand equations are estimated using alternative

Ml data in Table 7. The same three subsamples as before are considered.

As a whole, the only equations not rejecting the partial adjustment model

i.e., exhibiting a statistically significant coefficient on the lagged

dependent variable —— use averaged end—of—quarter data (equations 7.2 and

7.4). Combined with the results in Table 6, the evidence suggests that

the traditional use of temporally aggregated data is largely responsible

for the prominence of the partial adjustment model. That is, temporal

aggregation in this case appears to both increase the magnitude of the

coefficient on lagged money and the degree of serial correlation in the

residuals. Using end—of—quarter data, which reduces the possibility of
                                                                                 I
spurious   correlation, the partial adjustment model is not unambiguously

better than the alternative involving complete adjustment of money demand

within each quarter.

     To examine the predictive ability of end-of—quarter money demand

equations, post—sample static simulations of both the partial adjustment
                                     —19—


and serial correlation specifications are presented in Table 8.' In com-

parison to the results using traditional Ml data in Table 2, the 1974—83

simulations yield substantially larger errors. In addition, both the par-

tial adjustment and serial correlation specifications strongly support the

notion that money demand was subject to continued downward shifts through

1981. As before, however, the results indicate that the downward shift

diminished in 1982—83, but money demand remains lower than predicted based

on pre—1974 data.' Also similar to the results in Table 2, equations esti-

mated from 1974:Q1 through 198l:Q4 predict the 1982—83 period with much

greatS accuracy. Positive biases are evident, but they amount to less

than 1 percent for both the partial adjustment and serial correlation speci—

fications.4V The underlying equations used to form these post—sample predic-

tions nevertheless have some questionable characteristics. In particular,

interest rates and wealth are not statistically significant in these equa-

tions. Furthermore, if the partial adjustment model is the true specifica-

tion, then the slower speed of adjustment in the post—1973 period must be

rationalized. If the partial adjustment model is instead deemed to be

untenable, then the alternative complete—adjustment model is plagued by

serially correlated residuals, suggesting possible misspecificatiofl.




2.   OTHER SPECIFICATIONS

     In this section, the role of expectations in the demand for money is

initially considered. The statistical significance of actual inflation in

a number of the previous empirical money demand equations, among other fac-

tors, motivates this investigation. Next, the robustness of Hamburger's

(1977, 1983) money demand model is examined using the methodology of the
                                    —20—


previous sections. Hamburger has presented money demand equations capable

of relatively accurate predictions in both the 1970s and early 19505.124"

     A. Expectations and Money Demand

         The statistically significant direct impact of actual inflation

in a variety of the estimated money demand equations in the previous sec-

tions may reflect the sensitivity of the demand for money to expected infla-

tion. One possible justification for this effect is that, in the absence of

implicit yields adjusting to market yields, the expected own real rate of

return on money balances moves negatively with changes in expected infla-

tion. A vast majority of previous studies implicitly assume that the real

own—yield on money balances equals the negative of expected inflation, and

then subtract this rate from the other real rates of return entering the

money demand equation. This procedure leads to rates of return specified

as nominal yields, thereby eliminating the direct effect of inflation. Such

a procedure implicitly imposes a zero within—equation adding—up constraint

on the coefficients multiplying real rates of return on money and money sub-

stitutes. However, in a multi—asset framework with imperfect asset substitu-

tability, and in the absence of perfect certainty about future inflation

making all assets risky, such within—equation constraints are in most cases

unwarranted (Roley l983a).

     In the first two rows of Table 9, a variable representing expected infla-

tion replaces the previous measure of actual inflation. The specifications

most closely correspond to equations (6.1) and (6.7) in Table 6, and end—of—

quarter financial data are used in both instances.IY In comparison to the

equations reported previously, the only noticeable difference is the point

estimate of the coefficient on expected inflation in the post—1974 sample
                                    —21—


period. The estimated standard errors of both equations (9.1) and (9.2)

are virtually the same as those reported for (6.1) and (6.7).

     The role of expectations is expanded in the subsequent two equations

reported in Table 9. In these specifications, expectations measures are

formed for income as well as the price level. The price term also is

respecif led to enable a comparison of nominal and real partial adjustment

models. The results again are comparable to similar estimated equations

reported in Table 6, and neither set can be unambiguously preferred on the

basis of these results.

     The final four rows consider a random—walk model of money demand (e.

g., Sims 1982). The basic notion behind specifications (9.7) and (9.8) is

that at the end of a given period, money balances held by economic agents

reflect all available information concerning interest rates, income, and

the price level. That is, current information is used to predict future

real transactions, the price level, and the opportunity cost of holding

money balances. On the basis of these forecasts, economic agents determine

their current money holdings to finance future real transactions. It also

is assumed that adjustment to desired holdings is accomplished at every

point in time. At the end of the next period, then, money demand will only

differ from that of the previous period due to innovations in its determin-

ants. The alternative hypothesis, represented by equations (9.5) and (9.6),

is that current expectations of the determinants of money demand also are

useful in predicting.future money balances. For the pre—1974 estimation

period, the random—walk hypothesis can be rejected at the 5 percent level of

significance. In the 1974:Q1—1983:Q4 sample, however, the expectations data

as a group do not significantly affect money demand, and the random—walk
                                         —22—


hypothesis ——     involving   the additional constraint b6 = 1 —— cannot be

rejected at the 5 percent level. The evidence regarding this model must,

nevertheless, be regarded as mixed due to the results reported for the

earlier subsample. Also, on the basis of the complete set of results in

Table 9, variables constructed to represent expectations apparently do

not unambiguously improve the characteristics of empirical money demand

equations.

       B. Hamburger's Model

             As mentioned, through several adaptations of the conventional

money demand specification, Hamburger (1977, 1983) has been able to esti-

mate equations with somewhat improved post—sample predictive ability over

the 1970s and early 1980s. Appealing to portfolio motives, the specifica-

tion includes the dividend—price yield and a Treasury bond yield. Excluded

from   the   specification is a market yield on a short—ten financial asset.

The price level is constrained as in the nominal adjustment model, and the

long—run income elasticity also is constrained to unity.

       Hamburger's (1977) model is empirically examined in Table 10 by considering

its robustness with respect to the use of end—of—quarter Ml data and differ—

encing..?L" On the top half of Table 10, Hamburger's log—levels specification

is estimated over both pre— and post—1974 samples, with both traditional

Ml and end—of—quarter Ml data. The price level and income constraints also

are relaxed in some of the estimated equations. Comparing equation (10.1)

and (10.5), which are estimated with temporally aggregated Ml, the esti-

mated coefficients are quite similar across the different subsamples. In

the earlier estimation period, however, the equation exhibits significantly

autocorrelated residuals, and the estimated standard error is about one—half
                                      —23—


that in the later sample period. While the income constraint can be

rejected in the pre—1974 sample (equation 10.2), it cannot be rejected

using post—1974 data (equation 10.6). Similar results emerge using

end—of—quarter Ml data (equations.10.3, 10.4, 10.7, and 10.8), but in

this case the income constraint can be rejected in both estimation

periods.

     Differencing the specification causes the robustness of Hamburger's

model to deteriorate. All constraints can be rejected in both the pre—

and post—1974 periods, with the exception of the price constraint using

both traditional and end—of—quarter Ml data in the pre—1974 sample. More-

over1 the estimated coefficient on lagged money is much smaller than in

log—levels specifications, implying more plausible speeds of adjustment

in some equations. Using end—of—quarter data, however, causes this esti-

mated coefficient to become insignificantly different from zero when the

constraints are relaxed (equations 10.12 and 10.16). As was the case with

other specifications, this model does not appear to exhibit the stability

necessary for policy analysis.



4.   SECTORAL DEMANDS FOR Ml BALANCES

     Part of the relatively poor within— and post—sample performances of

empirical money demand equations could be due to aggregation across diverse

groups of economic agents. Indeed, some of the proposed remedies ——   involv-
ing interest—rate ratchet variables and more recently explicit own yields

on transactions balances ——   focus directly on either business or household
demand for money. As a consequence, the separate demands for money by these

two sectors are examined in this section.
                                        —24—


     Following Goldfeld (1976), and also to enable comparisons with the

results reported previously, flow—of—funds data are used in this

investigations For households, the basic money demand specification is

identical to that considered previously in, for example, Table 6. For

businesses, the savings deposit rate and the wealth variable are deleted.

As before, estimation results for both log—levels and changes in logs

specifications are presented.

     Estimation results for both the 1959:Q3—l973:Q4 and l974:Q1—1983:Q4

sample periods are presented in Table 11. Estimated household money

demand equations are roughly comparable to those reported in Table 6. The

estimated income elasticities in both subsamples are, however, substanti-

ally larger than before, as is the estimated coefficient on the lagged

dependent variable in the earlier subsample (equations 11.1 and 11.5).

Deleting lagged money, it is apparent that the partial adjustment model

(11.1 and 11.5) does not yield any major gains in within—sample fit over

the alternative serial correlation specification (11.2 and 11.6). As

before, either through the implied nominal adjustment model —— imposing

b6 = b7 in equation (11.5) ——   or   directly in equation (11.6), inflation

is estimated to have a significant impact on household money demand in the

post—1974 period.'

     Estimated money demand equations for the business sector exhibit

somewhat more peculiar properties. First, as is evident in Table 11, a

time trend was included in these specifications. In order to obtain a

positive, although statistically insignificant, estimated income elasti-

city, the addition of a time trend was found to be necessary. Second,

in the partial adjustment specifications, the estimated speed of adjustment
                                        —25—


is implausibly slow in the 1959:Q3—1973:Q4 sample. Finally, in the auto—

correlation specification (11.4 and 11.8), inflation is estimated to have

an effect similar to that estimated for household money demand in the post—

1974 period, but the short—term market interest rate does not exhibit a

statistically significant effect in any of the aLternative specifications.

     To further examine these sectoral demands, the specifications are

reestthated after differencing. As indicated on the bottom half of Table

11 (equations 11.9 —   11.12),   the estimated equations in at least one major

respect change dramatically from those estimated in log—levels form. In

particular, not only does the estimated coefficient on lagged money become

insignificantly different f row zero, but the point estimates are negative

in every instance. The impact of inflation on the sectoral demands does,

however, appear to be robust in the post—1974 estimation period.

     Despite some of the implausible characteristics of the estimated equa-

tions in Table 11, selected specifications are simulated for comparison

with previous results. In the simulations, the remaining Mi balances not

held by households and businesses are treated as exogenous. Thus, the simu-

lation errors reported for aggregate Ml may be downward biased.

     The simulation results for household, business, and the implied aggre-

gate Ml balances are reported in Table 12. Both partial adjustment and

serial correlation specifications are simulated. In simulations over the

1974:Q1—1983:Q4 period, the static simulation errors suggest that despite

the emphasis typically placed on the business sector, household money demand

shifted downward in comparison to the pre—1974 period. The errors are, how-

ever, only a fraction of those reported for sectorally aggregated Ml in

Table 8. The results for business money demand exhibit only small biases,
                                         —26--



but the underlying specifications include time trends which shift these

equations progressively downward over time. The results for total Ml

balances predominatly reflect the behavior of household money demand.

The results again suggest that the 1982—83 experience may not be as

unusual as that in 1980—81. where a further downward shift is evident,

some of which was offset in 1982 and 1983.

     Post—sample simulations using equations estimated through l981:Q4

exhibit improved predictive ability on average. In these simulations,

reported on the right—hand side of Table 12, only the household money

demand equations yield positive mean errors. When combined with business

money demand equations, the mean errors are slightly negative over the

1982—83 period. The significant role of inflation in the equations under-

lying the simulations primarily accounts for this performance.



5.   A CLOSER LOOK AT THE INTEREST ELASTICITY OF Ml DEMAED

     As noted in the introductory section, the erratic behavior of Ml

demand since the early l970s has frequently been attributed to financial

innovation and deregulation. To capture the greater economization on

transactions balances supposedly originating primarily in the business

sector, a variety of additional variables have been included in conven-

tional money demand equations. Two of these variables —— a simple time
                                                                                   a
trend and an interest—rate ratchet variable ——      are   briefly examined here.

A third variable ——    introduced   by Cagan (1983) to reflect the own yield

on NOW accounts ——    also   is considered, as it has figured prominently in

discussions of the 1982—83 experience. Following the empirical investiga-

tion on the roles of these variables, more fundamental issues regarding
                                    —27—


the identification and bias of estimated interest elasticities are considered.

     A. Time Trends, Ratchets, and Own Yields

         In examining the demand f or money by businesses in the previous sec-

tion, a linear time trend was found to be necessary to obtain a positive esti-

mated income elasticity, at least among the limited number of alternative

explanatory variables considered. This time trend, while not statistically

significant in the pre—1974 estimation period, exhibited a statistically signi-

ficant negative effect on business money demand in the post—1974 sample.

     The role of a time trend in explaining total end—of—quarter money demand

is considered in the first four rows of Table 13. Both the partial adjustment

and serial correlation models are estimated over the pre— and post—1974 sam-

ples. As may be expected based on the results reported in Table 7, where

first—differenced data were used, a linear time trend is not found to be sta-

tistically significant in either estimation period.

     In the remaining rows of Table 13, an interest—rate ratchet is included

in business and total money demand equations. Following Simpson and Porter

(1980) and Cagan (1983), this variable is defined as the previous peak yield

on 5—year constant maturity Treasury securities. The previous linear time

trend is excluded in all of these specifications.

    The estimation results reveal that in only two of the eight specifica-

tions is the interest-rate ratchet significant at even the 10 percent level

(equations 13.9 and 13.12). In both instances, the estimation results are

obtained in the l974:Ql—l983:Q4 sample period using the partial adjustment

specification. In specifications in which the lagged dependent variable

is dropped, the inflation variable appears to statistically dominate the

interest—rate ratchet. The relevance of this variable therefore depends on
                                          —28—


 the appropriateness of the partial adjustment model. The serial correla-

 tion alternative nevertheless yields lower estimated standard errors in

 both cases (equations 13.10 and 13.12).

        The variable presented by Cagan (1983) and also adopted by Hamburger

 (1983) to improve the predictive performance of money demand equations

over the 1983—84 period is considered in the last four rows of Table 13.

This variable —— formed by multiplying the fraction of other checkable

deposits in Ml by 5.25 percent ——    is   subtracted from the other rates of

return entering the estimated equations. Because this variable presum-

ably reflects the increased sensitivity of households to changes in the

rates of return on competing assets, both household and total money demand

equations are estimated. Also, estimation results are only presented for

the post—1974 sample period since the own—yield variable is either trivi-

ally small or equal to zero throughout the pre—1974 period.

        In comparison to the results in Table 11, the addition of this own

yield   gives virtually no improvement over previous results for the house—

-hold sector (equations 13.13 and 13.14). The estimated Treasury bill yield

elasticities do increase slightly in absolute value, but they unif only

remain insignificant at the 5 percent level. With one exception, the

results for total money demand also exhibit similar properties to earlier

estimates reported in Table 6. The exception involves the partial adjust—

ment specification (equation 13.15), in which the Treasury bill yield

elasticity becomes statistically significant at the 5 percent level. On

the basis of this one regression, however, it is difficult to argue for the

relevance of this variable. Nevertheless, its role in the 1982—83 period

is considered explicitly in the concluding section.
                                                       —29—



     B.   Identification and Bias

          In a very thorough analysis concerning the identification of and

simultaneity biases in empirical money demand equations, Cooley and LeRoy

(1981) reach very pessimistic conclusions. In particular, they conclude

that there is no obvious way to identify money demand equations. As a

consequence, they suggest that all previous empirical money demand equa-

tions are subject to simultaneity bias, and a coefficient likely to be

affected is the interest elasticity of money demand. Laidler (1980) and

Gordon (1984b) also examine simultaneity bias in detail, and their results

suggest that there is potential for significant bias due to both inappro-

priate assumptions about causality among economic time series and neglect

of Federal Reserve reaction functions.

     Following Cooley and LeRoy (1981), the potential simultaneity bias

in estimated interest—rate coefficients is considered here by focusing on

the Federal ReserveTs monetary control procedures. The analysis extends

that presented by Cooley and LeRoy in two directions. First, a somewhat

more detailed model of financial market equilibrium is presented, focus-

ing explicitly on Federal Reserve policy behavior. Second, because pro-

blems concerning biases are frequently ignored due to their unknown magni-

tudes, percentage biases in estimated interest rate coefficients are cal-

culated under alternative assumptions about the parameters of the model.

     The model--based on that presented by Roley and Walsh (l985)--may be

represented as —
              27 /




     m=a0_a.i+u                                                               (7)

            =    (n   +   j)g   +
                                    mn    +   (l-X)     [in1 -(n-l)g -   m]   (8)


     rr =       nbr + b0        +
                                    b(i   -
                                              d)   +
                                                       v,                     (9)

                k +
     rr =           m2.                                                       (10)
                                      —30-


where         is the logarithm of real money balances; i is the nominal short-

ten rate; rr is the logarithm of required reserves; nbr is the logarithm

of nonborrowed reserves; d is the Federal Reserve's discount rate;
                                                                        a0, a,
A, g, b0 b, and k are positive parameters; and u and v are stochastic

error terms. To avoid analytical complications involving temporal aggregation,

the model is analyzed in a weekly time frame.

       The demand for money in this model is represented by equation (7),

where all deterininan other than the interest rate are implicitly represented

by the constant term, a0. The error term in the money demand equation is

assumed to follow a first-order autoregressive process

          =
              P'u + e.                                                      (11)

       Equation (8) represents the Federal Reserve's short-run money stock

targets. In the absence of shocks, the money stock target for the jth

future period,           simply equals the long run target (n+j)g +   -n'   where

       is the logarithm of the base level of the money stock set n weeks

previously, and g is the target long-run growth rate. In the event of a

deviation from target in the previous week's money stock, m1 -(n-l)g -

all   future short-tun targets are altered to reflect the Federal Reserve's

partial accomodation of this shock. The parameter A reflects the rate at

which the deviation of money from its long-run target is offset.

       The supply of reserves is represented by equation (9). Under the assumption

that excess reserves equal zero, required reserves equal nonborrowed reserves

plus the quantity of borrowed reserves as determined by the borrowings

function. The borrowings function is in turn represented by a constant

amount of frictional borrowing (b0) and the spread between the short-ten

interest rate and the discount rate.-1
                                          —31—


       Equation (10) represents the demand for reserves under lagged reserve

requirements. In this specification, k is the logarithm of the reserve

requirement ratio. Under the alternative contemporaneous reserve require-

ments (CRR) systems imposed prior to late 1968 and after January l984, some

reserve settlement lags are also involved in practice. Under the current

CRR system, the lag is essentially two days (e.g. Sellon 1984).

       In this simplified model, the Federal Reserve may choose the level of

the short-term interest rate or nonborrowed reserves in an attempt to achieve

its short-run policy objectives. As implied by LeRoy (1979) and Hetiel (1982),

however; the nonborrowed reserves operating procedure can be regarded as being

very similar to the money markets conditions procedure in the absence of strict

contemporaneous reserve requirements. The main difference is that under the

nonborrowed reserves procedure, the short-term rate fluctuates according to

the error in the borrowings function,            while under the money markets

conditions procedure, the short-term rate is approximately constant throughout

the policy period.

      To illustrate the biases in estimating the demand for money (7), it is

assumed that the money markets conditions procedure is being implemented by

the Federal Reserve. In estimating money demand (7), the estimated interest—

rate coefficient, —a, may be represented as

           —a =   —a   + (El u )/(Xi2).                                          (12)
                         t    t tt
For simplicity1 it is assumed that all data are detrended and than (n + j)

8   + m = rn,   for all j.    It   is also asstmied that, because of reporting

lags, the previous week's money stock is not known by either the public

or the Federal Reserve. Under these assumptions, the bias can be represented

in terms of the parameters of the model. As an intermediate step, however,
                                           —32—

 it is informative to note that the equilibrium interest rate and its uncon-

ditional variance can be represented as


             -(l/a) + (l/a)p(p + A-1)[             (i_A)i          pk_]ej,              (13)
                                             j=O             k=j

                2              2
             = p (p + A—i)         [1 + (I—X)p]     -

               a    (i—p )[l—(1—A)p][l—(i—A) J


     Using (13) and (14), and following some tedious derivations, the percent-

age bias of the negative of the estimated interest—rate coefficient (a >               0)
can be expressed as

      plim (a) -    (a) —-     - p[1-(1-A)2J
            a                (p + A—1)[1 + (i—A)p]                                      (15)


First note that this expression Implies that single—equation estimation of

money demand yields consistent estimates in two cases. First, if the demand

for money has uncorrelated errors (p =        0),       the bias (15) equals zero. In

this case, i and u are uncorrelated since past values of the residual do

not provide information about future money demand. Second, if the Federal

Reserve accommodates all money demand shocks fully (A =             0),   the interest rate

again is uncorrelated with current and past residuals leading to consistent

estimates.

     Biases are calculated for intermediate cases in Table 14. As is apparent

in the table, the magnitude of the bias is extremely sensitive to moderate

changes in the parameters. Also, the bias can be either positive or nega—

tive, the former occurring when the monetary authority more than accommodates

the money demand shock. That is, a positive bias occurs if the effect of the

money demand shock deteriorates more rapidly over time, based on the autocor—

relation coefficient, than the short—run money path approaches the long—run

target.
                                    —33—


     These results have direct implications for the empirical money demand

equations presented previously. In particular, the estimates of conven-

tional money demand equations presented in Table 1 exhibit some biases in

the pre—1974 period. If the partial adjustment model is rejected, then all

estimation results using either traditional Ml or end-of—quarter Ml data

also are biased, and the biases could be large. If the partial adjustment

model using end—of—quarter data represents the true model, however, the

estimated coefficients are consistent on the basis of this analysis. Unf or—

tunately, in this case the majority of the estimated interest—rate coeff i—

cients are not statistically significant, and the estimated partial adjust-

ment parameter exhibits instability over different estimation periods.

     C. Other Factors Relating to the Interest Elasticity

         Most recent discussions concerning the interest elasticity of money

demand have focused on the implications of the greater availability of

close money substitutes paying market rates of return as well as the increas-

ingly competitive rates of return that have been and will continue to be paid

on transactions balances. As a consequence, it has been suggested that these

factors have increased the interest elasticity of money demand. In addition,

further increases are hypothesized for the future, at least until the point

is reached in which rates of return on transactions balances completely

reflect market yields.

     These recent analyses, however, seemingly assi.nne that   the   interest—

elasticity is invariant to other factors. An exception is provided by Walsh

(1982, 1984), who examines the effects of different monetary policy regimes

on the interest elasticity of money demand. In particular, in either Tobin's

(1958) model of the speculative demand for money or the stochastic version
                                   —34—


of the transactions model presented by Buiter and Armstrong (1978), the

sensitivity of money demand to interest rates depends on the variance of

the market yield. As represented by (14), this variance in turn depends

on other factors including the Federal Reservets short—run policy para-

meter, A. Moreover1 this expression also is influenced by the Federal

Reserve's choice of its monetary control procedure. In particular, a non—

borrowed reserves procedure introduces the variance of the error in the

borrowings function, v1, into the variance of the interest rate (14).

Given the dramatic rise in the volatility of interest rates in the 1979—82

period (e.g., Roley l983b), as well as the coincident change in monetary

control procedures, these factors may have exerted a greater influence

on the interest elasticity of money demand than those related strictly to

financial innovation and deregulation. Furthermore, in contrast to these

latter factors, an increased variance of the market yield typically reduces

the interest—rate coefficient (e.g., Walsh 1982, 1984).

     The empirical results presented earlier also do not provide any evid-

ence that the interest rate elasticity of money demand increased when com-

paring the pre— and post—1974 periods. Estimated Treasury bill yield elas-

ticities in Table 1 for the conventional log—levels specification are uni-

formly lower in the post—1974 period. Similar results are obtained when

this specification is estimated in differenced form in Table 3. Moreover,

estimated Treasury bill yield elasticites using end—of—quarter data are

typically insignificant in both subsamples, as reported in Tables 6 and 7.

     In addition to the possible estimation biases mentioned previously,

two other reasons for these results appear to be logical candidates. First,

all specifications are estimated either with an inflation variable or with
                                    —35—


nominal adjustment imposed, which embodies an indirect inflation effect.

Given that nominal short—term yields are highly correlated with infla-

tion, these specifications may have led to downward biased estimates of

the interest elasticity. To examine this possibility, several equations

in Table 6 were reestimated without the inflation term,            In the
                                                          Pt
1959—73 sample period, the deletion of the inflation term does not

change either the positive sign or the magnitude of the estimated Treasury

bill yield elasticity in equation (6.1).   In. the post—1974 period, however,

the estimated elasticity increases in absolute value from 0.0129 to 0.0212

in equation (6.7). In the serial correlation specification, the estimated

interest elasticity actually declines in absolute value from 0.0048 to

0.0004 in the latter subsample. Thus, the only potential gain in the size

of this estimated elasticity is found for the partial adjustment model in

the post—1974 period.

     Second, the comparison of equations (6.7) and (6.13) in Table 6 sug-

gests that the estimated interest rate elasticity may increase as more

observations are dropped following 1974:Q1. In particular, the estimated

elasticity for the 1975:Q3—l983:Q4 subsample is over 80 percent larger

than that estimated for the entire post—1974 sample. When progressively

later starting dates are used following 1974:Ql, the estimated interest

rate elasticity is in fact maximized with a value of 0.0252 for the sample

period beginning on 1976:Q2. For starting dates after 1976:Q2, the esti-

mated elasticity declines. When the inflation variable is deleted in the

partial adjustment model and this exercise is repeated, the interest rate

elasticity takes a maximtsn value of 0.0324 for the 1975:Q4—1983:Q4 sample

period. Similar procedures applied to the serial correlation specification,
                                       —36—


both with and without the inflation term, failed to achieve any noticeable

changes in the estimated elasticity. In sun, while the inflation term in

some specifications reduces the statistical significance of the estimated

interest—rate elasticity in the post—1974 period, there is no evidence

that this elasticity progressively increased in size since the mid l970s.



6.   IMPLICATIONS FOR MONEY DEMAND IN TIlE l970s AND 1980s

     The empirical results presented in this paper are summarized in this

section. Econometric issues raised earlier are first discussed. The

results are then summarized in tens of their implications for money demand

stability since the early 1970s and the unprecedented decline in Ml velo-

city in 1982 and 1983.

     A. Econometric Issues

         As noted earlier, a number of recent studies ——     including   those

by Laidler (1980), Cooley and LeRoy (1981), Goodfriend (1983), and Gordon

(l984a, 1984b) ——   raise   important econometric issues concerning empirical

money demand equations. This research focused mainly on the implications

of simultaneity bias, measurement errors, and the plausibility of the

partial adjustment model. In addition to these issues, the implications

of the temporal aggregation of financial data were explored here.

     In terms of simultaneity bias, the implications of the Federal Reserve's

monetary control procedures were examined. In this case, the potential

for simultaneity bias •arises if money demand errors are serially correlated,

and the Federal Reserve responds to these errors in an attempt to control

the money stock. Using specific examples, it was found that the neglect of

simultaneity bias leads to biases in estimated coefficients that are poten-

tially large. The magnitude of the biases is highly uncertain, however,
                                       —37—


as it varies greatly depending on the degree of both serial correlation

and monetary control.

     Empirical results concerning the partial adjustment model also were

rather pessimistic. In particular, it is not clear that the partial

adjustment model ——   either   in real or nominal terms ——   should be prefer-
red over   specifications simply accounting for serially correlated resid-

uals. The robustness of the partial adjustment model ——        at   least when

estimated over the 1974—83 period ——    again may be questioned on the basis
of estimation results obtained after differencing the specifications.

     Finally, on a positive note, the presence of serially correlated

residuals in the conventional partial adjustment model evident in the pre—

1974 sample (equations 1.1 through 1.8 in Table 1) appears to be due to

the use of temporally aggregated Ml data, and this problem can be cor-

rected (equation 6.1 in Table 6). Moreover, if money demand equations

do not exhibit autocorrelation, the estimated equations will be less sub-

ject to simultaneity bias. However, the quality of end—of—period data

may be questioned, and the partial adjustment model itself may simply

reflect either serially correlated residuals or measurement errors.

     B. Money Demand Shifts in the l970s and l980s

           The consensus result emerging from the variety of specifications

estimated over the 1959—73 sample period is that the demand for Ml balances

exhibited at least one shift after 1973. Shifts were suggested by both

partial adjustment and serial correlation money demand specifications, using

both temporally aggregated and end—of—quarter financial data. Because of

the econometric issues raised above, however, these results should be viewed

as tentative.
                                   —38—


     For traditional log-levels specifications estimated over the 1959—73

period, static simulation results reported in Table 2 indicated that money

demand shifted as early as 1975:Ql, and perhaps exhibited a further tempor-

ary downward shift in 1980 and 1981. The simulation results additionally

suggested that part of this temporary shift was reversed in 1982 and 1983.

When the conventional specifications were differenced, the persistent level

shift in the mid—1970s appeared as a single negative forecast error fol-

lowed by a series of mean zero errors in Table 4. The results again sug-

gest that money demand shifted downward in 1975:Ql. A further downward

shift was apparent in 1981, which was offset in 1982. The results for 1983

failed to indicate any further upward shifts.

     Using end—of—quarter financial data, simulation results reported in

Table 6 for specifications estimated through 1973 suggest that the money

demand shift increased in size throughout 1974, remained relatively stable

from 1975 through 1978, and then progressively shifted downward again from

1979 through 1981. A partial reversal of this latter shift was apparent

in 1982 and 1983.

     Estimation results of these various models also cast doubt on the sta-

bility of estimated coefficients in money demand equations estimated over

the 1959—73 and 1974—83 periods. Moreover, in the partial adjustment model

estimated with either temporally aggregated or end—of—quarter data (Tables
                                                                              F-
1 and 6), the greatly reduced speed of partial adjustment estimated in the

latter period, despite the recent emphasis on cash management and other

related factors, suggests implausible behavior. When equations using. tem-

porally aggregated data were differenced, the estimated speed of adjustment

instead increased in the post—1974 sample (Table 3), as might be expected.
                                   —39—


In first—difference specifications nsing end—of—quarter data, however, the

estimated coefficient on lagged real money balances was either significantly

negative or not significantly different from zero for both subsamples

(Table 7).

     A number of the specifications modified to explain the behavior of

money demand following 1974 also were examined. As already discussed, the

first—difference specification suggested by Hafer and Hem (1980), among

others, seems, better suited in describing the permanent level shifts

witnessed after 1974. Moreover, when traditional data are used, first—

differencing probably reduces some of the spurious correlation caused by

temporal aggregation and trends.

     Following Hamburger (1977) and B. Friedman (1978), a variable reflect-

ing wealth also was included in the estimated equations. The estimated

coefficient on this variable was, however, typically insignificant in post—

1974 regressions (tables 1, 3, 6, and 10). The coefficient constraints

imposed by Hamburger (1977) also were examined, and the constraint on income

elasticity was rejected in virtually all cases (Table 10). Interest—rate

ratchet variables and time trends were additionally included in some specifications.

Estimated equations including these variables again failed to either restore

stability in estimated coefficients across the pre— and post—1974 periods

or result in estimated coefficients robust across different specifications

(Table 13).

     There are a number of potential sources of these results. Again, simul-

taneity bias and the different monetary policy regimes during the 1974—83

period, especially in comparison to the earlier period, may provide part of

the explanation. A related area involving financial innovation and
                                    —40--

deregulation also may have introduced coefficient instability and apparent

shifts. Variables such as time trends and interest-rate ratchets may be

poor proxies for these factors. Also in a similar context, the definition

of the narrowly defined money stock may be inappropriate. Cagan (1983),

for example, achieved greater stability in estimated money demand equa-

tions by broadening the current definition of Ml.

     C. Implications for the 1982—83 Decline in Ml Velocity

         Several explanations have been advanced for the unprecedented

decline in Ml velocity in 1982 and 1983. Cagan (1983) and Hamburger (1983)

explained most of the decline using empirical money demand equations in

which the rate of return on NOW accounts was introduced in a manner that

increased the interest rate elasticity. The sharp drop in interest rates

beginning in mid 1982 then resulted in a pronounced increase in the demand

for money. Simpson (1984) also suggested that the interest rate elasticity

increased, but that it does not completely explain the 1982—83 experience.

Judd and McElhattan (1983) similarly relied on the interest—rate decline in

explaining the 1982—83 period, but in their model the interest—rate elasti-

city was assumed to remain stable. Tatom (1983) deemphasized the roles of

interest rates and financial deregulation, and instead focused on the cycli-

cal behavior of the economy. In contrast, Gordon (l984b) suggested that a

substantial part of the puzzle is explained by the consequences of finan-

cial deregulation, which added deposits with low turnover to Ml. Similarly,

Hafer (1984) found more historically normal relationships between money and the

economy when interest—bearing checkable deposits were excluded from Ml.

     The simulation results presented for log—levels specifications estimated

through 1973, summarized above, suggested that the demand for money experi-

enced an upward shift in 1982—83 in comparison to 1980—81 (Table 2 and 8).

As mentioned previously, however, these results also can be
                                       —41—


interpreted as a transitory downward shift in 1980 and 1981, with money

demand returning to more normal post—1974 levels following 1981. Simula-

tion results for first—difference specifications estimated through 1973

reflected similar behavior. In particular, a fairly large upward shift

was evident in l982:Q4, but this shift merely offsets a part of the down-

ward shift in 1981.

     Simulation results for money demand equations estimated over the

1974—81 period also suggested an upward shift in 1982—83. Using either

temporally aggregated or end—of—quarter data, however, this shift averages

less than one percent of the actual money stock (Tables 2 and 6). Never-

theless, as reported in the respective tables, the underlying equations

used in the simulations do not conform well to empirical money demand

equations typically reported.

     The role of the rate of return on NOW accounts was examined in Table

13. For the 1974—83 sample period, this variable did not improve the esti-

mation properties of the demand for money. As constructed, however, this

variable is primarily relevant for the last several years of this period.

To consider its impact in the 1982—83 period, the residuals from equation

(13.15) in Table 13 were compared to those of equation (6.7) in Table 6,

which only differs by the addition of the rate of return on NOW accounts

in (13.15). These equations also were estimated both with and without the

inflation variable. With the inflation term included, the largest percent

errors ——   occurring   in l983:Ql—Q2 —— were reduced by less than 0.1 per-

centage points. Without the inflation variable, the largest improvement

was 0.2 percentage points in 1983:Q2. Thus, in these specifications, this

own—yield variable provided only negligible increases in explanatory power.
                                   —42—


Nevertheless, the simulation errors for 1982—83 reported for equations

estimated through 1981 are not large by historical standards, especially

when compared to errors obtained for the mid 1970s.

     The empirical investigation reported here only focused on the current

definition of Ml. As mentioneiL other researchers ——   including   Cagan (1983),

Hafer (1984), and Gordon (1984b) —— have consideted bath broader and narrower

measures of Ml with some success. In particular, it appears that alternative

definitions are capable of resolving at least part of the 1982—83 puzzle.

Future research on the demand for money may therefore benefit by considering

these alternatives, especially given the overall poor performance of empiri-

cal money demand equations since the mid 1970s using the current definition

of Ml.




                                                                                   4
                                        —43—

                                      FOOTNOTES

*
    Associate professor of finance, University of Washington, and research asso-
    ciate, National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for
    the American Enterprise Institute Conference on "Monetary Policy in a Chang-
    ing Financial Environment" and will be published in the November 1985 sup-
    plement of the Journal of Mony, Credit and Banking. This research was sup-
    ported by the National Science Foundation under Grant }lo. SES—8408603. I am
    grateful to Phillip Cagan, Craig S. flakkio, Alan C. Hess, Douglas K. Pearce,
    and Lawrence H. Si.mimers for helpful comments.

1.      Much of this research is summarized in Laidler (1977), Feige and Pearce
        (1977), and Judd and Scadding (1982).

2.      This approach follows a much longer tradition' and is stressed, for
        example, by H. Friedman (1956) and Brainard and Tobin (1968).

3.     B. Friedman (1978) also suggests that the significance of the dividend—
       price ratio in Hamburger's (1977) model is primarily due to its corre-
       lation with wealth since dividends are relatively sluggish over time.
       Hamburger's empirical results also have been critiqued by Hafer and
       Hem (1979). For a rejoinder, see Hamburger (1983). Another promin-
       ent empirical investigation of the role of wealth in money demand is
       provided by Meltzer (1963).

4.     In addition to the empirical equations for total Ml demand reported
       here, other specifications using real consumption expenditures and
       the deflator on consumption expenditures were estimated. Per capita
       specifications also were considered. In all cases, the empirical
       results did not differ significantly from those reported.

5.     All of these data, with the exception of the savings deposit rate, were
       taken from the Citibank database. The savings deposit rate is from the
       MPS model database.

6.     The source for this variable is the Federal Reserve's flow of funds
       accounts. Seasonally adjusted levels were formed using B. Friedman's
       (1977) procedure. Because capital gains account for most of the vari-
       ance in this series, the seasonally adjusted and unadjusted series are
       very similar, and the estimation results were virtually unchanged when
       the unadjusted series was used.

7.     There is in fact evidence that the Federal Reserve's change in operat-
       ing procedures altered the relationship between money and interest
       rates, at least in the context of weekly money announcements. See, for
       example, Roley (l983a) and Roley and Walsh (1985).

8.     Fackler and McMillin claim that in many instances the iterative Cochrane—
       Orcutt procedure converges to a local maximum of the likelihood func-
       tion. To estimate the serial correlation coefficient in this and sub-
       sequent tables, 0.02 Increments of p are considered over the range —1.0
       to 1.0.
                                        —44—



 9.   In dynamic simulations starting in 1974:Q1, the cumulative errors in
      1981:Q4 are —11.77 and —11.24 percent for equations (1.3) and (1.7),
      respectively. In 1983:Q4, the cumulative errors are —8.67 and —7.95
      percent for these same two equations. In simulations starting in
      1982:Q1, the cumulative errors In 1983:Q4 are —7.52 and —6.78 percent
      for equations (1.3) and (1.7), respectively.

10.   In dynamic simulations starting in 1982:Q1, the cumulative errors in
      1983:Q4 are 4.25 and 4.23 percent for equations (1.11') and (1.15'),
      respectively.

11.   As might be expected in the presence of permanent level shifts, how-
      ever, the dynamic simulation errors in terms of levels for equations
      (3.3) and (3.7) are substantially larger. In particular, in simula-
      tions starting in 1974:Ql, the cumulative errors are —13.11 and —12.65
      percent in 198l:Q4, respectively, and -8.44 and -7.18 percent in
      1983:Q4, respectively. In simulations starting in l982:Q4, the ctmiu—
      lative errors in l983:Q4 are 6.76 and 7.45 percent for equations (3.3)
      and (3.7), respectively.

12.   Both equations (3.13) and (3.17) were initially estimated over the
      1974:Ql—l98l:Q4 subsample. Variables were deleted from the specif i—
      cations if their estimated coefficients had signs inconsistent with
      the transactions model (6). As a result, both specifications reduced
      to equation (3.13'). This methodology is followed for all, equations
      used in subsequent simulations.
13.   In a dynamic simulation starting in l982:Ql, the cumulative error in
      l983:Q4 is 12.20 percent for equation (3.13') when transformed into
      levels.
14.   While still using temporally aggregated data, some quarterly studies
      have not used quarterly averaged data. In the ME'S model, for example,
      average Ml during the last month of the quarter and the first month
      of the next quarter is used. Laidler (1980) also follows this procedure.

15.   Biases due to temporal aggregation also can be interpreted in the mea-
      surement error context of Goodfriend (1983).

16.   To form seasonally adjusted levels, seasonally adjusted flows were ctmiu—
      latively subtracted from the reported level for l983:Q4.

17.   The same savings deposit rate as before is used. Movements in this
      series primarily reflect discrete changes in Regulation Q ceilings,
      and only minor differences arise when end—of—quarter data are used.

18.   End—of—quarter Treasury bill yield data also are averaged in these
      equations.
                                     —45-


19.   Formal tests of the partial adjustment model indicate that it cannot
      be rejected at the S percent level of significance. However, this
      test involves the statistical significance of lagged independent vari-
      ables1 some of which have insignificant estimated coefficients on con-
      temporaneous values. Thus, this test is not likely to be powerful
      against the alternative hypothesis. For a further discussion of these
      tests, along with an application to money demand, see Domowitz and
      Hakkio (1984).

20.   As before, variables were deleted if their estimated coefficients had
      theoretically incorrect signs.

21. In dynamic simulations starting in l974:Q1, the cumulative errors in
     198l:Q4 are —13.58 and —15.46 for equations (6.1') and (6.3'),, respec-
     tively. In l983:Q4, the cumulative errors are —11.45 and —11.49 per-
     cent for these same two equations. In simulations starting in 1982:Q1,
     the cumulative errors in 1983:Q4 are —11.45 and —11.49 percent for
     equations (6.1') and (6.3'), respectively.

22. In dynamic simulations starting in 1982:Q1, the cumulative errors in
     l983:Q4 are 1.29 and 4.32 percent for equations (6.7') and (6.9'),
                          -
     respectively.

23.   Other money demand models —— including those presented by Carr and
      Darby (1981) and Judd and Scadding (1981) —— are not considered here
      for further empirical investigation. Laidler (1980) examines the f or—
      mer model in some detail. In addition to his analysis, it should be
      noted that the estimated coefficient on the lagged dependent variable
      is implausibly large in many of their reported regressions. For a
      detailed analysis of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco model,
      see Anderson and Rasche (1982).

24.   Expectations data are formed from fourth—order autoregressions esti-
      mated over the same sample periods as those used to estimate the money
      demand equation.

25. Hamburger's more recent model only differs from his earlier model in
     that Cagan's (1983) own—yield variable is included in the recent model.
     This variable only has the potential for significant effects in the
     latter part of the sample, and it is considered in the fifth and sixth
      sections.
26.   Replacing real GNF with real consumption expenditures causes the
      coefficient on the inflation term to become insignificantly dif-
      ferent from zero. Despite this difference, both the within— and
      post—sample errors remain relatively unaffected. See Roley (1985).
                                    —46—

27.   The model more closely follows the simplified version presented by
      Roley and Troll (1984). The difference between this niodel and that
      presented by Gordon (1984b) relates to the different emphasis on
      the effects of short—run monetary control. In particular, as
      described below in the text, equation (8) describes the Federal
      Reserve's short-run monetary target for a given long—run growth
      target, g.  In contrast, Gordon basically considers. g, as well as
      alternative long—run targets, and not short—run control procedures.

28.   Equation (9) actually relates to the logarithms of required and
      nonborrowed reserves, and a borrowing function specified in terms
      of the logarithm of one plus the ratio of borrowed and nonborrowed
      reserves.




                                                                            I
                                      —47—

                                  REFERENCES

Akerlof, George A. "Irving Fisher on His Head: The Consequences of Constant
     Target-Threshold Monitoring of Money Holdings." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 93(May 1979), 169-87.

Akerlof, George A., and Ross M. Milbourne. ttlrving Fisher on Uis Head II:
     The Consequences of the Timing of Payments for the Demand for Money.
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 95(August 1980), 45-57.

Anderson, Richard G., and Robert H. Rasche. "What Do Money Market Models
     Tell Us about How to Implement Monetary Policy." Journal of Moy,
     Credit and Banking 14(November 1982), 796-828.

Barro, Robert J., and Anthony H. Santomero. "Household Money Holdings and
     the Demand Deposit Rate." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
     4(May 1972), 397-413.

Baumol, William J. "The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory
     Theoretic Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 66(November 1952).,
     545-56.

Bennett, Barbara A. "Shift Adjustments' to the Monetary Aggregates." Federal
     Reserve Bank of San Franèisco, Economic Review (Spring 1982), 6-18.

Brainard, William C., and James Tobin. "Pitfalls in Financial Model Building."
     American Economic Review 58(May 1968), 99-122.

Brayton, Flint, Terry Parr, and Richard Porter. "Alternative Money Demand Speci-
     fications and Recent Growth in Ml." Mimeo, Board of Governors of the
     Federal Reserve System, 1983.

Buiter, Willem H., and Clive A. Armstrong. "A Didactic Note on the Trans-
     actions Demand for Money and Behavior Toward Risk." Journal of Money,
     Credit and Banking 10(November 1978), 529-38.

Cagan, Phillip. "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation." In Studies in the
     Quantity Theory of Money, edited by Milton Friedman, pp. 25-117. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 1956.

_____________    "Monetary Policy and Subduing Inflation." Mimeo, American
     Enterprise Institute, 1983.

Can, Jack, and Michael R. Darby. "The Role of Money Supply Shocks in the
     Short-Run Demand for Money." Journal of Monetary Economics 8 (September
     1981), 183—99.

Chow, Gregory. "On the Long-Run and Short-Run Demand for Money." Journal of
     Political Economl 74(April 1966), 111-31.

Clower, Robert W., and Peter W. Howitt. "The Transactions Theory of the
     Demand for Money: A Reconsideration." Journal of Politic, Economy
     86(June 1978), 449—66.

Cooley, Thomas F., and Stephen F. LeRoy. "Identification and Estimation of
     Money Demand." American Economic Review 71(November 1981), 825-44.
                                      —48—


Domowit:, Ian, and Craig S. Hakkio. "Testing for Serial Correlation and
     Common Factor Dynamics in the Presence of Heteroscedasticity."
     Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1984.

Enzler, Jared, Lewis Johnson, and John Paulus. "Some Problems of Money
     Demand." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1(1975), 261-SO.

Fackler, James S., and W. Douglas McMillin. "Specification and Stability
     of the Goldfeld Money Demand Function." Mimeo, 1984.

Feige, Edgar L.  "Expectations and Adjustments in the Monetary Sector."
     American Economic Review 57(May 1967), 462-73.

Feige, Edgar L., and Douglas K. Pearce. "The Substitutability of Money
     and Near Monies: A Survey of the Time-Series Evidence." Journal of
     Economic Literature 1S(June 1977), 439-69.

Friedman, Bemjamin M. "Financial Flow Variables and the Short-Run Determination
     of Long-Term Interest Rates." Journal of Political Economy 85(August 1977),
     661-89.

____________________ "Crowding Out or Crowding In? The Economic Consequences
     of Financing Government Deficits." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
     3(1978), 593-641.

Friedman, Milton. "The Quantity Theory of Money, A Restatement." In Studies
     in the Quantity Theory of Money, edited by Milton Friedman, pp. 3-21.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956.

Garcia, Gillian, and Simon Pak. "Some Clues in the Case of the Missing Money."
     American Economic Review 69(May 1979), 330-4.

Goldfeld, Stephen M. "The Demand for Money Revisited." Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity 3(1976), 577-638.

                      "The Case of the Missing Money." Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity 3(1976), 683-730.

Goodfriend, Marvin. "Measurement Error and a Reinterpretation of the Conven-
     tional Money Demand Regression." Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
     1983.

Gordon, Robert J. "The 1981-82 Velocity Decline: A Structural Shift in Income
     or Money Demand." Mimec, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1984(a).

________________   "The Short—Run Demand for Money: A Reconsideration."
     Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 16 (November 1984b), 403—34.


Granger, Clive W.J., and Paul Newbold. "Spurious Regressions in Econometrics."
     Journal of Econometrics 2(July 1974), 111-20.

Hafer, R.W. "The Money—GNP Link: Assessing Alternative Transaction Measures."
     Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review 66 (March 1984), 19—27.
                                      —49-.




Hafer, R.W., and Scott E. Hem. "Evidence on the Temporal Stability of the
     Demand for Money Relationship in the United States." Federal Reserve
     Bank of St. Louis, Review 61(December 1979), 3-14.

_____________________________ "The Dynamics and Estimation of Short-Run
     Money Demand." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review 62(March 1980),
     26-35.



____________________________     "The Shift in Money Demand: What Really
     Happened?" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review 64(February
     1982), 11—16 (a).

______________________________  "A Comment on the Stability of the Demand
     for Money: Evidence from the Post-1973 Period." Review of Economics
     and Statistics 64(May 1982), 355-7(b).

Hamburger, Michael J. "Behavior of the Money Stock: Is There a Puzzle?"
     Journal of Monetary Economics 3(July 1977), 265-88.

____________________   "Recent Velocity Behavior, the Demand for Money and
     Monetary Policy." Conference on Monetary Targeting and Velocity,
     Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 1983.

Hatanaka, Michio. "An Efficient Two-Step Estimation for the Dynamic Adjust-
     ment Model with Autoregressive Errors." Journal of Econometrics
     2(September 1974), 199-220.

Hem, Scott E. "Dynamic Forecasting and the Demand for Money." Federal
     Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review 62(June/July 1980), 13-23.

Hetzel, Robert L. "The October 1979 Regime of Monetary Control and the
     Behavior of the Money Supply in 1980." Journal of MoneL Credit and
     Banking l4(May 1982), 234-51.

Judd, John P., and Rose McElhattan. "The Behavior of Money and the Economy
     in 1982-83." Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Economic Review,
     (Summer 1983), 46-51.

Judd, John P., and John L. Scadding. "Liability Management, Bank Loans and
     Deposit 'Market' Disequilibrium." Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
     Economic Review (Summer 1981), 21-43.

                                     "The Sthrch for a Stable Honey Demand
     Function: A Survey of the Post-1973 Literature." Journal of Economic
     Literature 20(September 1982), 993-1023.

Klein, Benjamin. "Competitive Interest Payments on Bank Deposits and the
     Long-Run Demand for Money." American Economic Review 64(December
     1974), 931-49.
                                      —50—




Laidler, David E.W. The Demand for Money: Theories and Evidence, 2nd ed.
     New 'trk: Dun-Donnelley, 1977.

_________________    "The Demand for Money in the United States--Yet Again."
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 12 (1980),
     219—71.

Laumas, G.S. and David F. Spencer. "The Stability of the Demand for Money:
     Evidence from the Post-1973 Period." Reveiw of Economics and Statisics
     62(August 1980), 455-9.


Lieberman, Charles. "The Transactions Demand for Money and Technological
     Change." Review of Economics and Statistics 59(August 1977), 307-17.

LeRoy, Stephen F. "Monetary Control Under Lagged Reserve Accounting."
     Southern Economic Journal 46(October 1979), 460-70.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. "Econometric Policy Evaluations: A Critique."
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1(1976), 19-46.

Meltzer, Allan H. "The Demand for Money: The Evidence from the Time Series."
     Journal of Political Economy 71(June 1963), 219-46.

Plosser, Charles I., and G. William Schwert. "Money, Income, and Sunspots:
     Measuring Economic Relationships and the Effects of Differencing."
     Journal of Monetary Economics 4(November 1978), 637-60.

Plosser, Charles I., G. William Schwert, and ilalbert White. "Differencing as
     a Test of Specification." International Economic Review, 23 (October
     1982), 535—52.


Porter, Richard D., and Edward K. Offenbacher. "Financial Innovations and
     the Measurement of the Money Supply." Conference on Financial
     Innovations, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 1982.

Quick, Perry D., and John Paulus. "Financial Innovations and the Transactions
     Demand for Money." Mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
     Systel, 1977.
                                                                                  .5


Roley, V. Vance. "Symmetry Restrictions in a System of Financial Asset Demands:
     Theoretical and Empirical Results." Review of Economics and Statistics
     65(Febniary 1983), 124-30(a).

    __________   "The! Response of Short-Term. Interest Rates to Weekly Money
    Announcements." Journal of Money,Credit and Banking 1S(August 1983), 344-54 (b).
                                      —51—




    _________    "The Demand for Money by Households: An Evaluation of Its
     Stability." Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review,
     forthcoming, 1985.

Roley, V. Vance, and Rick Troll. "The Impact of Discount Rate Changes on
     Market Interest Rates." Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic
     Review 69(January 1984), 27-39.

Roley, V. Vance and Carl E. Walsh. "Monetary Policy Regimes, Expected
     Inflation, and the Response of Interest Rates to Money Announcements.."
     Ouarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming, 1985.

Santomero, Anthony M., and John H. Seater. "Partial Adjustment in the Demand
     for Money: Theory and Empirics." American Economic Review 71(Septeniber
     1981), S66—78.

Sellon, Gordon H., Jr. "The Instruments of Monetary Policy." Federal Reserve
     Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review 69(May 1984), 3-20.

Simpson, Thomas D. "Changes in the Financial System: Implications for
     Rrnetary Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activifl 1(1984),
     249-65.

Simpson, Thomas D., and Richard D. Porter. "Some Issues Involving the Definition
     and Interpretation of the Monetary Aggregates." Federal Reserve Bank
     of Boston Conference Series, 23(October 1980), 161-234.


Sims, Christopher A. "Policy Analysis with Econometric Models." Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity 1(1982), 107-52.

Tatom, John A. "Was the 1982 Velocity Dec]ine Unusual?" Federal Reserve
     Bank of St. Louis, Review (August/September 1983), 5-15.

Tinsley, Peter A., Bonnie Garrett, and Monica E. Friar. "An Expose of
     Disguised Deposits." Journal of Econometrics 15(January 1981), 117-37.

Tobin, James. "The Interest Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash."
     Review of Economics and Statistics 38(August 1956), 241-7.

___________    "Liqiiidity
                         Preference as Behavior toward Risk." Review of
    Economic Studies 25(February 1958), 65-86.

Walsh, Carl E. "The Effects of Alternative Operating Procedures on Economic
     and Financial Relationships." In Monetary Policy Issues in the 1980s,
     Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1982.

    ________   "Interest Rate Volatility and Monetary Policy." Journal of
    Money, Credit and Banking 16(May 1984), 133-50.
                                     —52—




Wenninger, John, and Charles M. Sivesand. "Defining Money for a Changing
     Financial System." Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly Review
     4(Spring 1979), 1-8.

Wenninger, John, Lawrence Radecki, and Elizabeth Hammond. "Recent Instability
     in the Demand for Money.1' Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly
     Review 6(Summer 1981), 1-9.

Working, Holbrook. "Note on the Correlation of First Differences of Averages
     in a Random Chain." Econometrica 28(October 1960), 916-18.

Zeliner, Arnold, and Claude Montmarquette. "A Study of Some Aspects of
     Temporal Aggregation Problems in Econometric Analysis." Review of
     Economics and Statistics 53(November 1971), 335-42.
                                                                     TABLE 1
                                   ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR CONVENTIONAL LEVELS SPECIFICATIONS
                    *        ÷             +             *                                                       *
                        b0        bi.rcp       b2.rsS         b3.rtb      +
                                                                              b4•Yt
                                                                                       *
                                                                                           b5w
                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                      b6m1           by            ÷
                                                                                                                                       e
Sample;                                    Coefficient Estimates
                                                                                                                      Summary Statistics+
59:Q3—
             b                                                                                                         R
73'Q4       _____            b1     _______ _______             b4            b5                                             SEE       OW
                                                                       —                   b6         b7

 (1.1) —.6423' -.0124' —.0142                                 .1303' .0231' .6780' .4842' .24"                        .99    .0037 1.70
        (.1615) (.0035) (.0100)                              (.0349) (.0057) (.0916) (.1929) (.13)

(1.2)     —.8550' - .0166'—.0187                              .1738'                  .6503* .5451' .36' .99                .0041 1.61
          (.1898) (.0043) (.0127)                            (.0411)                  (.1090)    (.2084) (.12)

(1.3) -.7082' —.0115' —.0157                      ——
                                                              .1433*      .0225' .6525' (=b6)               .26'      .99   .0037 1.71
          (.1540) (.0035) (.0101)                            (.0337)   (.0057) (.0906)                     (.13)
(1.4) -.8993' -.0161' -.0194                                   1829'       ——         .6292*      (=b6         40'    .99   .0041 1.64
          (.1788) (.0042) (.0127)                            (.0390)                  (.1056)              (.12)

(1.5) _.5770*                       -.0084 -.0102' .1166' .0261' .6903'                           4995* .26'          .99   .0038 1.74
          (.1679)                   (.0104) (.0035) (.0366) (.0057) (.0976) (.1978) (.13)

(1.6) —.8138'                       —.0127 _.0123* .1662'                             .6432' .5631'         .42'      .98   .0044 1.58
          (.2035)                   (.0139)    (.0046) (.0442)                     (.1192)       (.2177) (.12)

(1.7) .6495'                        -.0104 -.0092' .1312'                  0255' .6600' (=h6}               .28' .99        .0038 1.75
          (.1575)                   (.0104) (.0034) (.0347) (.0058) (.0957)                                (1.3)
(1.8) -.8407'             --        - .0133    -.0119' .1717'                         .6313'     (=b        .42' .98        .0044 1.58
                                                                                                       6
          (.1684)                   (.0137) (.0044) (.0413)                        (.1138)                 (.12)
74:Q1-


(1.9)     — .1698       - .0047    - .1179                 .0585          .0189       .9127' 1.125'            --    .89    .0086 2.22
          (.1992) (.0073) (.1311)                         (.0359)      (.0150) (.0726) (.3232)
(1.10) -.2671 -.0076 —.0314                                .0548                     9493' 1.202'              --    .89    .0087 2.15
        (.1853) (.0070) (.1127)                           (.0361)                  (.0671) (.3202)
(1.11) —.2138 —.0076 — .0863                     ——          .0571      .0199         .9175' (=h 6          --       .89    .0085 2.30
          (.1861) (.0058) (.1209)                         (.0355) (.0148) (.0716)
(1.12) _.3260**_.0113* .0120                               .0528                      .9574' ('b 6                   .89    .0086 2.24
          (.1683) (.0051) (.0974)                         (.0358)                  (.0659)
(1.13) —.1839             -—       -.1210   —.0052   .0614" .0201     .9082' 1.116'                         --       .89    .0086 2.24
          (.2087)                   (.1267) (.0078) (.0363) (.0145) (.0714) (.3260)

(1.14) -.2760                      -.0386 —.0073     .0580                          .9452' 1.237'           ——       .89    .0087 2.15
       (.2006)                      (.1136) (.0077) (.0367)                        (.0671) (.3184)

(1.15) —.2328                      -.0932 -.0082             .0616" .0219             .9101' (—b5)          --       .89    .0085 2.33
       (.1928)                      (.1182)    (.0062) (.0360)         (.0141) (.0707)
(1.16) —.3591'            --         .0125     -.0119' .0579              ——          . 9526'    (=b6       --       .89    .0087 2,26
       (.1784)                      (.0986) (.0058) (.0366)                        (.0665)

        * Significantdt the 5 percent level.
    **
        a
          Significant at the 110 percent level.
       Numbers in parentheses are standard errors of estimated coefficients. n is the Flildreth-Lu
     2 first-order serial correlation cofficient.
   PR is multiple correlation coefficient corrected for degrees of freedom, SEE is the standard
       error of estimate, and OW is the Ourbin-Watson statistic. When an equation is corrected
       for serial correlation, summary statistics correspond to the transformed equation.

     =   natural
               logarithm of Ml, quarterly average, divided by the GM? deflator.
rcP
     *   natural
               logarithm of the 6—month coercial paper rate, quarterly average.
rtb =
     *   natural
               logarithm of the 3-month Treasury bill yield, quarterly average.
rsd *    natural
               logarithm of the savings deposit rate, quarterly average (liPS model).
  yt =
         natural
               logarithm of real ON?, $l972b.
  wt
         natural
               logarithm of the total value of equities (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
       System, Flow of Funds Accounts) divided by the GM? deflator.
     = natural logarithm of the GM? deflator, 1972 = 100.
  Pt =
       random error term.
                                                    TABLE 2
      POST-S&MPLE STATIC SIMULATION RESULTS FOR CONVENTIONAL LEVELS SFEC!FICATIONS


                 Equation (1.3)          Equation (1.7) Equation (1.11') Equation (1.15')

                          Error                  Error                      Error                     Error

   Period         51972b           I     $1972b           I         51972b          1      $1972b               1

                  0.89            0.37    1.11           0.46         ——            ——          ——              ——
   74:Q1
                                                                      ——            ——          ——              ——
      Q2         —0.22       —0.09       —0.45          —0.19
      Q3          0.88            0.37    0.76           0.33         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q4         —0.72       —0.31       —0.48          —0.21         ——            ——          ——              ——

    75:Q1        —3.56       —1.57       —3.21          —1.41         ——            ——          ——             ——

                 —2.59        —1.14 —2.14               —0.94         ——            ——          ——
      Q2
                 —1.77       —0.78       —1.18          —0.52         ——            ——          ——             ——
      Q3
      Q4         —5.11       —2.27       —4.62          —2.05         ——            ——          ——              ——


    76:Q1         —4.87      —2.15       —4.22          —1.87         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q2          —3.87      —1.70       —3.26          —1.43         ——            ——         ——               ——


      Q3          —5.16      —2.27       —4.53          —1.99         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q4          —3.98      —1.75       —3.24          —1.42         ——            ——          ——              ——

    77:Q1         —3.17      —1.38       —2.29          —0.99         ——            ——          ——              ——

                  —4.77      —2.06       —4.06          —1.76         ——            ——          ——              ——
      Q2
                                                        —1.50         ——            ——          ——              ——
      Q3          —4.31      —1.86       —3.47
      Q4          —3.03      —1.30       —2.32          —1.00         ——            ——          ——              ——

    78:Q1         —2.77      —1.18       —2.00          —0.85         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q2          —3.94      —1.69       —3.27          —1.40         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q3          —4.27      —1.83       —3.62          —1.55         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q4          —4.36      —1.88       —3.79          —1.63         ——            ——          ——              ——


    79:Q1         —5.60      —2.43       —4.88          —2.12         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q2          —3.69      —1.60       —2.91          —1.26         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q3          —3.69      —1.59       —3.16          —1.36         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q4          —6.18      —2.68       —5.73          —2.49         ——            ——          ——              ——

   80:Ql         —4.30       —1.87 —3.66                —1.60         ——            ——          ——             ——

      Q2         —12.27      —5.55 —11.77               —5.33         ——            —           ——              ——

      Q3          —2.24       —0.99      —1.40          —0.62         ——            ——          ——             ——

      Q4          —5,84       —2.60      —5.47          —2.43         ——            ——          ——              ——

    81:Q1         —9.28       —4.19      —8.52          —3.89         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q2          —6.37      —2.86       —5.73          —2.57         ——            ——          ——              ——

      Q3          —9.21      —4.19       —8.61          —3.92         ——            ——          ——             ——

      Q4          —9.11      —4.19       —8.43          —3.88         ——            ——          ——              ——

    82:Q1         —4.76      —2.16       —4.03          —1.83        2.48       1.12        2.47               1.12
       Q2         —9.28      —4.24       —8.66          —3.96       —1.49      —0.68       —1.46              —0.67
       Q3         —7.33      —3.33       —6.90          —3.13       0.18        0.08           0.08            0.04
       Q4        —3.48       —1.53       —2.73          —1.20        4.72       2.09           4.71            2.08
    83:Q1        —4.91        —2.13 —4.18               —1.81        3.50       1.52           3.58            1.55
       Q2        —4.90        —2.08      —4.24          —1.80        2.75       1.17           2.83            1.20
       Q3        —4.95        —2.07      —4.31          —1.80        1.76       0.74        1.86               0.78
       Q4        —6.94       —2.90       —5.26          —2.61       —0.7       —0.33       —0.67              —0.22

   ME (74—81)     —4.33      —1.91       —3.77          —1.67         ——            ——          ——              ——


 R}ISE (74—81)     5.16           2.30    4.65           2.08         ——            ——          ——              ——




   NE 82—83) = —5.82         —2.56       —5.16          —2.27        1.64       0.71           1.67            0.73
 RMSE (82—83)     6.08        2.70        5.47           2.44        2.61       1.19           2.62            1.20

   Notes: Equations (1.11') and (1.15') are estimated from 19742Q1 through 1981:Q4.
           The estimated equations are:

            —0.1486 —           —          +          +                                           +
(l.ll')m              O.OO39.rcp o.lBSl.rsd O.O7l2y O.Ol42.w
            (0.2437) (0.0063)     (0.1560)   (0.0354)   (0.0157)                                      (0.1072)

(1.15')m    —0.1392 — 0.0034•rtb         —   0.1970rsd        +   0.0730y      + 0.0156'w         + O.9O13.(m_i+Pl—P)
            (0.2571) (0.0070)                (0.1556)             (0.0355)          (0.0153)          (0.1051)

   Error   static simulation error and percentage error in tens of real Ml balances (51972b).
   ME (74—81) — static simulation mean error from 1974:Ql through 1981:Q4.
   RNSE (74—81) = static simulation root—mean—square error from 1974:Q1 through 1921:Q4.
   ME (82—83) = static sinuletion mean error from 1982:Q1 through 1983:Q4.
   RNSE (82—83) = static simulation root—mean—square error from 1982:Ql through 1983:Q4.
                                                                  TABLE 3
                             ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR CONVENTIONAL FIRST DIFFERENCES SPECIFICATIONS
                =        +              +              +              +           +
                    b0       b1.txrcp       b2lsrsd        b3.Irtb        b4Ly'                + b6•&   +
                                                                                                            b7•(pi_p)       +

Sample:______________________________________________________________
                                                                                                 b7                   SEE       DW
______                                                                            _______
(3+1) —.00002 _.0121**_.0073                      --         .1401** .0216* .5623* 4949*                    .44       .0049 2.21
            (.00104)(.0065) (.0234)                         (.0844) (.0085) (.1176) (.1954)

(3.2)        .00002 _.0150* —.0191                -—         .1648**.              .5704*   4995*           +38       .0051 2.05
            (.OO1O9)(.0067) (.0241)                         (.0882)               (.1237) (.2055)

(3.3) —.00005 _.0l22* -.0060                      --         .146I   .0217*   5499k (=b 6)                  .45       .0048 2.20
            (.0O102)(.0064) (.0229)                         (.0819) (.0084) (.1110)

(3.4) —.00001 _.015O* -.0177                      --         .1711*       —-          ,5574*   (=b )        .39       .0051 2.04
                                                                                                  6
            (.001O8)(.0066) (.0236)                         (.0856)               (.1168)

(3.5) —.00005                 —-    -.0086  -.0070   .1383   .0236* .5504* .4576*                           .41       .0050 2.17
            (.00106)                (.0239) (.0060) (.0861) (.0085) (.1222) (.1976)

(3.6) —.00001                       —.0223 -.0083            .1652** --            .5528* .4509*            .34       .0053 1.93
            (.00112)                (.0248) (.0063) (.0909)                       (.1298) (.2098)

(3.7) -.00009                       -.0069 -.0068            .1463** .0237* .5318* (=b6)                    .42       .0049 2.16
            (.00105)                (.0235) (.0059) (.0837) (.0085) (.1144)

(3.8)       -   .00005              -.0206 -.0081     .1740*              --       .5323*      (=b )        .35       .0053 1.92
                                                                                                  6               -

            (.00111)                (.0244) (.0063) (.0883)                       (.1216)
74: Qi—
83:Q4

(3.9) -.0022 -.0023                     .0144     --         .3129** .0131   .3325**1.156*                  .27       .0106 2.15
            (.0020) (.0164) (.2575)                         (.1719) (.0231) (.1800) (.3853)

(3.10) —.0023 -.0077                    .0328     ——         .3252**      ——          3573* 1.215k          .28       .0105 2.14
            (.0020) (.0133) (.2529)                         (.1688)               (.1728) (.3673)

(3.11) -.0019 —.0050                    .0311     -—         .2986   .0229   •3337** (=b 6)                 .16       .0114 2.47
            (.0022) (.0175) (.2748)                         (.1833) (.0243) (.1922)

(3,12) —.0020 —.0149          .0654                          .3114** -—           .3838*       (=b6)
                                                                                                            .17       .0114 2.45
            (.00.22) (.0139) (.2719)                        (.1817)               (.1858)

(3.13) -.0020                 -—    —.0146   .0104   .2680   .0213    .29661.126                            .27       .0106 2.03
       (.0020)                      (.2532) (.0159) (.1693) (.0211) (.1780) (.3845)

(3.14) -.0020                 -—     .0045   .0030   .2792** ——                    .3345**1.243*            .27       .0106 2.01
            (.0020)                 (.2526) (.0142) (.1690)                       (.1740) (.3665)

(3.15) —.0017                 —-    —.0057   .0100    .2367   .0332   .2957                                 .17       .0113 2.35
                                                                                               (rb6)
            (.0021)                 (.2709) (.0171) (.1807) (.0220) (.1905)

(3.16) —.0016                 --     .0273 —.0022     .2501               --      .3580**      (=b6)
                                                                                                            .14       .0115 2.33
       (.0022)                      (.2750) (.0153) (.1837)                       (.1894)

            Note: See the notes in Table 1.
        =   random error term.
                                    TABLE 4
           POST—SAMPLE STATIC SIMULATION RESULTS FOR CONVENTIONAL
                      FIRST DIFFERENCES SPECIFICATIONS

                       Equation (3.3)           Equation (3.7)        Equation (3.13')
                               Error                   Error                  Error
Period                 $1972b      _____       $1972b      _____      $l972b      _____
                        0.49         0.20      0.73            0.30     ——            ——
74:Q1
                       —1.15        —0.48     —1.68        —0.70        ——            ——
   Q2
                                     0.18      0.24            0.10     ——            ——
   03                   0.42
                       —1.86        —0.80     —1.45        —0.63        ——            ——
   Q4
75:Q1                  —3.52        —1.55     —3.13        —1.38        ——            ——

   Q2                   0.00         0.00      0.10         0.44        ——            ——

                        0.75         0.33      0.72         0.32        ——            ——
   Q3
                       —3.11        —1.38     —3.08        —1.37        ——            ——
   Q4
                       —0.58        —0.26     —0.44        —0.20        ——            ——
76:Q1
                        0.96         0.42      0.91         0.40        ——            ——
   Q2
                        0.95        —0.42     —0.92        —0.40        ——            ——
   Q3
   Q4                   0.76         0.33      0.88         0.38        ——            ——


77:Q1                   1.18         0.51      1.32         0.57        ——            ——

                       —1.10        —0.48     —1.25        —0.54        ——            ——
   Q2
                        0.19         0.08      0.13         0.06        ——            ——
   Q3
                        1.36         0.58       1.17        0.50        ——            ——
   Q4
                        0.78         0.33      O82          0.35        ——            ——
78:Q1
                       —1.14        —0.49     —1.33        —0.57        ——            ——
   Q2
   Q3                  —0.54        —0.23     —0.70        —0.30        ——            ——

                       —0.30        —0.13     —0.60        —0.26        ——            ——
   Q4
                       —1.39        —0.60     —1.34        —0.58        ——            ——
79:Q1
                        1.40         0.60      1.43            0.62     ——            ——
   Q2
                        0.42         0.18      0.25            0.11     ——            ——
   Q3
                       —2.17        —0.94     —2.40        —1.04        ——            ——
   Q4
                        0.88         0.38      0.81         0.35        ——            ——
80:Q1
                       —7.87        —3.56     —7.68        —3.47        ——            ——
   Q2
                                                                        ——            ——
   03                   7.07         3.14      7.12         3.16
                       —1.13        —0.50     —1.62        —0.72        ——            ——
   Q4
                                    —1.72     —3.73        —1.68        ——            ——
81;Q1                  —3.82
                        1.80         0.81      1.70         0.76        ——            ——
   Q2
                       —2.45        —1.12     —2.54        —1.16        ——            ——
   Q3
                       —0.93        —0.43     —0.77        —0.35        ——            ——
   Q4
82:Q1                   4.16         1.88      4.18         1.89       2.92       1.33
   Q2                  —3.12        —1.43     —3.05        —1.40      —1.55      —0.71
   Q3                   0.97         0.44      0.90         0.41       0.83       0.38
   Q4                   4.33         1.91      4.78         2.11       6.74       2.98
83:Q1                   0.36         0.15      0.62         0.27       4.09       [.78
   Q2                   0.62         0.26      0.64         0.27       1.16       0.49
   Q3                   0.53         0.22      0.48         0.20       1.43       0.60
   Q4                  —1.61        —0.67     —1.52        —0.63      —0.73      —0.31

ME (74—81)             —0.49       —0.22      —0.51        —0.23
EMSE (74—81)            2.40        1.09       2.39         1.08
ME (82—83)              0.78           0.35    0.88            0.39    1.86       0.82
RMSE (82—83)            2.50           1.19    2.59            1.23    3.12       1.44
Notes: See the notes in Tables 1 and 2. Equation (3.13') is estimated from l974:Q1
        through 1981:Q4. The estimated equation is:
        (3.13') Am = —0.0061 + O.4968zXy + O.7722A(p 1 — t
                      (0.0016) (0.1209)       (0.2818)
                                TABLE 5
             CORRELATIONS BETWEEN ALTERNATIVE Ml DATA

Variable           Correlation Matrices:        1959:Q3 — 1983:Q4

H                   1. 0000
AI4FF               0.9998 1.0000
MFF                 0.9997 0.9999 1.0000

AM                  1.0000
AAMFF              0.8609 1.0000
AMF F              0.6736 0.7985 1.0000


                   Correlation Matrices:        1975:QZ — l983:Q4

K                  1.0000
AMFF               0.9992     1.0000
HFF                0.9986     0.9994   1.0000
MW                 0.9994     0.9989   0.9992    1.0000

AM                 1.0000
&AMFF              0.7215     1.0000
AHFF               0.4677     0.6880   1.0000
AMW                0.6227     0.6203   0.8377   1.0000


M = Ml, quarterly average.
MFF = Ml, end of quarter (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
       Flow of Funds Accounts)
AI4FF = (MFF + HFF
MW = Ml, last week i)12.
                    in quarter.
                                                                      TABLE 6
                      ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR LEVELS SPECIFICATIONS USING END OF QUARTER
                                                                AND AVERAGED DATA
                         +                 +                                        +
                  = b0       b2rscJ                b3rtj,   +
                                                                 b4.y    +
                                                                             bs.w        b€.m1   4
                                                                                                     b7(p
Sample:                                   Coefficient           Estimates                                       Summary Statistics
59:Q3—
73:Q4
        LHS
                      I,           b2               b3           b4          b5          b6      b7      p             SEE     OW

(6.1)      mff -1.104 .O42O' .0022                           .2473' .0413' .2729' .0718                  -_     .99    .0064 1.93
                  (.2270)     (.0148) (.0054)               (.0502) (.0092) (.1377) (.3382)

(6.2)      mff l.340' - .0462'                     .0024     .3009'      .0458'      .1143 -.0507    .12        .99    .0062 1.96
                  (.2306) (.0152) (.0057)                   (.0506)     (.0095)     (.1378) (.3223) (.13)

(6.3)      inff —1.507'       -.0528'  .0046                .3396'       .0479*         --    -.0945   .20      .98    .0062 2.89
                  (.1181)     (.0130) (.0054)               (.0209)     (.008 9)              (.3120) (.13)

(6.4) ainff       .6359'  _.02328* .0021   .1383' .0295' .6015* .6761'                                   --     .99    .0042 1.33
                  (.1685) (.0107) (.0037) (.0385) (.0056) (.1097) (.2278)

(6.5) amff        _.8702*     -.02852' .0046                 .1933'    0301'  .4365* .5916'    39*              .99    .0038 1.54
                  (.1729)     (.0199) (.0041)               (.0 388) (.0063) (.1085) (.1924) (.12)

(6.6) amff       -1.460'      .0491' .0123*                  .3344'      .0348'         -—     .3717"   .52' .98       .0042 1.34
                  (.1088)     (.0137) (.0046)               (.0192)     (.0073)               (.1963) (.11)
74:Q1—
83: Q4


(6.7) mU -.1587 -. 1873                        -.0129        .0913" .0226           .7645* .7028" --            .80    .0112 2.17
                  (.2795)     (.1569)          (.00 96)     (.0476) (.0189)         (.0910) (.4064)

                  —.2386      —.1215           - .0145       .0826" .0181           .8195* .6623        -.18 .83       .0113 1.97
(6.8)      mff
                  (.2714)     (.1475)          (.0102)      (.0428) (.0184)         (.0839) (.4055) (.16)

(6.9)      mff -2.014"        -   .0664        — .0048       .4027'      .0374"               1.138'   .92' .33        .0111 1.81
                 (1.139)      (.2692)          (.0111) (.1521)          (.0206)               (.3752) (.06)

(6.10) amff       -.0797      -.1295           -   .0005     .0497       .013 1      .9134* 1.243'       —-     .91    .0073 1.29
                  (.1839)     (.1024)          (.0062) (.0312)          (.0124)     (.0637) (.2726)

(6.11) amff       -.2561          .0472             0064     .0706       .0183      .5754' 1.341*       .90' .60       .0068 1.54
                  (.7132)     (.1627)          (.0068)      (.1058)     (.0127) (.1331) (.2471) (.07)

(6.12) amff —1.788'               .0464            .0067     .3464'      .0199                   9577' .92' .41        .0083 0.94
                  (.8517)     (.2013)          (.008 3)     (.1138)     (.0154)               (.2807) (.06)
75:Q3-
83:Q4

(6.13) mff        -.6917"-.1412 -. 0237'                     .1599' .0145            .7603* .5744        —-     .80    .0109 2.16
                  (.3944) (.1760) (.0119)                   (.0630) (.0237) (.1022)           (.4323)

(6.14]     mff    -.7910 - .0946               -   .0262'    .1604' .0111            .7957'    .5104 -.16       .84    .0110 1.95
                  (.4021)     (.1653) (.0 120)              (.0669) (.0216)         (.0982) (.4258) (.17)

(6.15)     mff -1.972    -.0638 -.0032   .3889" .0586"                                  --    1.010'     .92' .18      .0116 1.78
                (1.659) (.2881) (.0129) (.2203) (.0341)                                       (.4412) (.07)

(6.16) sew        -.6693' -.1311               -.0215'       .1457' .0220            .7951' ,7427*       --     .78     0074 2.24
                  (.3049) (.1396)              (.0093)      (.0539) (.0184)         (.0847) (.3328)

(6.17) mw         -.8879' -.0951 - .0271' .1696' .0191     .8063* .6366* - .22                                  .93    .0083 1.89
                  (.3026) (.1243) (.0091) (.0544) (.0158) (.0775) (.3130) (.17)

(6.18) sew       —1.250       -.2538               .0027     .3216"      .0732'         —-     .6693"    .90' .20      .0102 1.45
                 (1.420)      (.2501)          (.0114) (.1913) (.0301)                        (.3899)   (.08)
Notes: See the notes in Table 1.

LHS =     dependent variable In the regression.
mff =     natural logarithm of end of quarter Ml (Roard of Governor of the Federal Reserve Ssytem,
          Flow of Funds Accounts) divided by the GNP deflator.
sniff    = (mff + mff
mw       = natural logarithm of last week in the quarter MI divided by the GNP deflator.
                                                          TABLE 7

                  ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR FIRST DIFFERENCES SPECIFICATIONS USING END OF QUARTER
                                                    AND AVERAGED DATA
                      =        +             + b3.t1rtb +   b4AYt ÷ bsAwt + b6Am + b7 A(p          +
                          b0       b2.Arsd
Sample:                                 Coefficient Estimates                         Summary Statistics
59:Q4—                                                                                —2
73Q4      LHS
                     b0            b2   ___ ___              b5     ___       b7       R     SEE       DIV



(7.1)     Ainff     .0008 _.0681** .0168** .2946* .0362* —. 2391**_.2156              .21    .0077 1.84
                   (.0017) (.0376) (.0086) (.1348) (.0141) (.1352) (.2981)

(7.2) aamff         .0004 _.O371** .0106* .1635* .0247* .3501* .5250*                 .50    .0045 1.56
                   (.0010) (.0220) (.0051) (.0801) (.0084) (.1143) (.1816)
73 :Qi—
83:Q4

(7.3)     Miff _.0042**_.0329 -.0041              •4374* .0468* -.0208 1.122*         .32    .0118 1.69
                   (.0022) (.2827) (.0117) (.1711) (.0210) (.1458) (.3845)

(7.4) tamff       -.0016       .0950     .0064    .1076     .0227** .5900* 1.356*     .63    .0069 1.60
                   (.0013)     (.1663) (.0067) (.1109) (.0124) (.1220) (.2409)
75: Q3—
83:Q4

(7.5)     Miff -.0024          —.0447 -.0003      .3122     .0666* -.0076 1.012*      .16    .0121 1.84
                   (.0027)     (.2938) (.0134) (.2098) (.0325) (.1653) (.4428)

(7.6)     Saw     -.0006 -.2148          .0017    .1994     .0653* .1977    .6856**   .18    .0103 2.15
                   (.0023)     (.2488) (.0113) (.1792) (.0280) (.1722) (.3820)
Note: See    the notes in Table 1, 2, and 6.
                                                          TABLE 8
                 POST—SANFLE STATIC SiMULATION RESULTS FOR LEVELS SPECIFICATIONS
                                               USING END OF QUARTER DATA


                      Equation (6.1') Equation (6.3') Equation (6.7') qtion (5•9t)
                                Error                  Error                        Error                      Error
    Period            $1972b             Z     $1972b           2           $1972b           2         $1972b           2
                                                                              ——                         ——
    74:Q1                —2.9           —1.1    —3.0           —1.2                         ——                         ——

                                                                                                         ——
         Q2              —4.4           —1.8    —5.0           —2.0           ——            ——                         ——

                         —4.0           —1.6    —4.6           —1.9           ——            ——           ——            ——
         Q3
                                                                                                         ——
         Q4              —5.6           —2.3    —7.3           —3.0           ——            ——                         ——


    75:Q1                —9.6           —4.0 —11.4             —4.8           ——        ——               ——            ——

                         —3.7           —1.5    —6.5           —2.7           ——            ——           ——            ——
         Q2
                                        —3.9 —11.4             —4.7           ——            ——                         ——
         Q3              -9.4
         Q4           —12.0             —5.0 —14.6             —6.2           ——            ——           ——            ——

                      —11.1             —4.6   —14.6           —6.1           ——            ——           ——            ——
    76:Q1
                                                                                                         ——            ——
         Q2           —11.0             —4.5   —13.7           —5.7           ——            ——


         Q3           —13.8             —5.8   —16.5           —6.9           ——            ——           ——            ——


         Q4           —12.3             —5.1   —15.3           —6.4           ——            ——           ——            ——


    77:Q1              —9.9             —4.0   —13.1           —5.4           ——            ——           ——            ——
                                                                                                                       ——
         Q2           —12.9             —5.3   —16.2           —6.6           ——            ——           ——


         Q3           —11.3             —4.6 —14.6             —6.0           ——        ——               ——            ——

         Q4           —11.4             —4.6 —14.4             —5.9           ——            ——           ——            ——


    78:Q1             —10.9             —4.4   —14.0           —5.7           ——            ——           ——            ——


         Q2           —12,8             —5.2   —16.7           —6.8           —             ——           ——            ——


         Q3           —14.4             —5.8   —18,0           —7.3           ——            ——           ——            ——


         Q4           —15.0             —6.1   —18.7           —7.6           ——            ——           ——            ——


    79tQ1             —17.5             —7.2   —21.3           —8.8           ——            ——           ——            ——

         Q2           —15.3             —6.3   —19.2        —7.8              ——            ——           ——            ——

         Q3           —15.0             —6.1   —19.0        —7.7              ——            ——           ——            ——


         Q4           —16.6             —6.8   —20.2        —8.2              ——        .——              ——            ——


    80:Q1             —18.4             —7.6 —22.2          —9.1              ——        ——               ——            ——

         Q2           —21.1             —8.8 —24.7         —10.3              ——            ——           ——            ——

         Q3           —18.2             —7.5 —22.6          —9.3              ——            ——           ——            ——

         Q4           —28.6            —12.3   —32.8       —14.0              ——            —--          ——            ——


    81:Q1             —24.0            —10.2   —29.4       —12.4              ——            ——           ——            ——


         Q2           —26.4            —11.3   —31.1       —13.3              ——            ——           ——            ——

                                                                                                         ——            ——
         Q3           —30.7            —13.4   —35.6       —15.5              ——            ——


         Q4           —27.2            —11.8   —32.5       —14.1              ——            ——           ——            ——

    82:Q].            —24.7            —10.7   —29.5       —12.7             —0.7      —0.3              1,3           0.6
         Q2           —26.1            —11.3   —3L.2       —13.6             —2.2      —1.0              0.3           0.1
         Q3           —23.7            —10.2 —29.2         —12.5             —0.3      —0.1              1.1           0.5
         Q4           —22.1            —9.3 —27.2          —11.5              1.3           0.5          4.6           1.9
    83:Q1             —17.3            —7.1 —22.0           —9.0              6.2           2.5          8.4           3.5
         Q2           —15.8             —6.3   —20.4        —8.1              5.3           2.1          2.3           0.9
         Q3           —20.8             —8.4   —24.6        —9.9             —1.8      —0.7             —2.7        —1.1
         Q4           —21.6             —8.7   —25.6       —10.3             —1.3      —0.5             —0.8        —0.3

NE (74—81)            —14.3             —6.0   —17.5           —7.3
RNSE (74—81) =           16.0            6.7    19.3            8.1

ME (82—83)      —     —21.5             —9.0   —26.2       —11.0              0.8           0.0          1.8           0.8
RMSE (82—83) —           21.8            9.2    26.5           11.1           3.1           1.0          3.7           1.6
                                                                                                                             r
Notes: See the notes in Tables 2 and 6. Restricted versions of equations (6.1) and (6.3)
        are estimated from 1959:Q3 through 1973:Q3. Restricted versions of equations
        (6.7) and (6.9) are estimated from 1974:Q1 through 1981:Q4. The estimated aqua—
          ticiris ate:
                                —                         +         +
(6.1') mff = —1.0746                0,0405'rsd1 + O.24O2•y O.O4O8•w                          0.2970.mffi
                    (0.2124) (0.0139)                (0.0460)             (0.0083)          (0.1111)

                                                     O.3S2l.y + Q.Q466'c               +
(6.3') mff = —1.5849            —                +
                                    0.Q542.rsd
                    (0.0351)        (0.0128)         (0.0157)  (0.0087)                     (0.13)

(6.7') mff1
                 —0.1091 —          0.2228-red — O.0081.rtb + O.O949.y +
                    (0.3523)        (0.1839)         (0.0112)               (0.0481)              (0.0224)
                 + 0.7704 mE! —l + 0.8524
                     (0.1177)             (0.4897)
                                                       (P1l)
(6.9')   melt
                 —3.2629 —          0.0092'rtd + 0.53l7'y             +
                                                                          OO24Ow
                                                                                       + l.2876'(p
                                                                                                               1t
                 (1,3086) (0.0115)                   (0.1749)             (0.0200)          (0.3720)
                                                                                                      TARLE 9
                                                                                      EXPECTATIONS AND MONEY DEMAND


                                              mff   =         + b2.rsd      + b3.rtb          -.         +     bjw + b6.mff                 + b7.(p               t
                                                                                            Coefficient Estimates                                                                                 iu_ftatistcs
                                                                                                                                                                                            ii      SEE           On
              !ffff'I 2L_..                  b2                       1)4             h5                                           h8                    b10          1)1!


(9.1)         59:94—      -1.212'                       .0004        .2701*           .0439*        .2124       -.0715             ——            --      --           ——          --        '19     11062     1   .92
              73:94        (.2(29)       (.0146) (.0054)           (.0535) (.0108) (.1376) (.8181)

    '3,2)     74:91—       -.1511            .1851 —.0140            .0873** .0234                  .7964' —1.227"                                                    —-          -—       .80     .0112 2.29
              83:93          , Th5b)     (. 1606) (.0097)          ( . 0484) (.11190)              (.0963) (.6849)


                                                    1nQ1Fr)_p1 =                  +   h2fsd + b3.rtb + b4•y1 +                                                                             + e
                                                                                                                                                 + b(.(ln(MFFt l)-P) + b7.(p7-p41)


    '3.3)      59:94—     -1.038'                 .0024              .2392'  .0472'   .23834* .1969                                --            ——      --            -—        ——        .99     .0062 1.96
               73:94       (.1989)       (.0138) (.0054)            (.0152) (.0094) (.1370) (.2498)

    9.41       74:91—
               83:93
                           -.2235
                           I .
                                         —.1820 —.0116
                                 2(i62) (.1473)     (.0086)
                                                                     .0971'
                                                                    (.0158)
                                                                                      .0195
                                                                                  (.11187)
                                                                                                    .7866*      1.029*
                                                                                                   (.0931) (.2802)
                                                                                                                                   ——            ——      —-           ——          -        .811     III III   2.16



I
            )—p = l b,rsd + h3rtb                               h4 •y +     hrW   -
                                                                                        +
                                                                                            y (1n(MFF            )p) +       11.
                                                                                                                                                 ) + b8rtd       b10y +       b11•w + h17•p + e


19.5)          59:94—      1.1 78'       -   .0366* - .0000          .2640'           .0479'        .2040       — .8283  m1005    .0001    .2673*  .0349* —.1099                           .99     .0062 1.91
               73Q4        I .   294W)   (   .14158) (.00(0)         .0589)       (.1)111)         ( . 1508)     (.9417) (.0331) (.0057) (.1230) (.0135) (.3568)

(1.1.1         74:91—      -.61 330+ .0204 —.0214                    .0993*           .0037         .8666*          .6961          .0997     -.0180      .4613*       .0256 -1.730'        .83     .11103     2.09
               83:93       1.33221 (.1781) (.0143)                  (.041,5)      (.0212)          (.1005) (.7352) (.2838) (.0121) (.1933) (.0229) (.1451)

                                                        ln(MFFt)_P+i = h0 + b6.l1n(Mrr p-p)                               + b8-rsd      +   hrth +               + h1w' + b12'p Ct

(9,7)          59:94—        .0014            --         --           --               --          1.001*            --       -.0616         -.0006      .2362        .0241     -.3265     .98     .0082 2.32
               73:94       (.0176)                                                                 (.0204)                    (.0418) (.0038) (.1443) (.0148) (.4059)

19.8)          74:91—        .109l'           ——         --           --               -—           .8729'           --            .0383     -   .0054   .4846'       .0382* _l,81S*       .82     .0105 1.85
               83:q3       (.0597)                                                                 (.0689)                    (.2580) (.0105) (.1618) (.0190)                 (.3780)

Notes:       See the notes in Tables 1 and 6.                   'I'he superscript "c' denotes the expectation formed from an autoregression estimated                                    over the indicated
             s;iihIlIe   period. Thesuperscript 'u' denul es the unanticipated               component, or residual, from the autoregression.
MEL =       inn,,   II end ut quarter Ml
                                                                         TABLE 10
                                        ESTIMATION RESULTS FOR HAMBURGER'S SPECIFICATION

                      = b0        b1.rd +   b2.rsd
                                                        +
                                                             brl          ÷
                                                                               b4.(m1                +bs.(p            ÷b5y +     e1
S amp 1e:


 LHS                         b0                   b2          b3                b4       b3    b5    p                SEE OW

(10.1)           m     -.0252 .0308 .0004 -.0173         .9325*                               -—     •34*      99 .0044 1.67
                       (.0276) (.0107) (.0135) (.0117) (.0335)                                      (.12)

(10.2)           m     1.303k - .0488*      -   .0137        .0058            575* .0197                34*    •99   .0039 1.71
                       (.3340) (.0104) (.0125) (.0979) (.0979) (.1977)(,0683)                       (.14)

(10.3)      rnff      - •Q747* - .006S —.0190            .8762*                         --    --     -—        .99   .0077 2.31
                       (.0352) (.0146) (.0176) (.0150) (.0455)

(10.4)      rnff       1.456*                           •4555* .3237                                           .99   .0068 1.78
                       (.4099) (.0145) (.0160) (.0162) (.1212) (.3658)(.0828)
74:Q1—
83:Q4

(10.5)           in   -.1545 -.0165 -.0769               .9243*                               --     --        .99   .0083 2.30
                       (.1407) (.0123) (.1238) (.0145) (.0384)

(10.6)           in     .1518 —.0125    .0557           .8624* -.2249 —.0485                        --         .99   .0084 2.19
                       (.3786) (.0136) (.1313) (.0158) (.0716) (.2698)(.0652)

(10.7)      inff       -.1890   .0015    .0881           .9050*                        -—     —-    —-         .98   .0112 2.47
                       (.1871) (.0166) (.1624) (.0195) (.0512)

(10.8)      mff       1.027* -.0002     .1485           .7005* —.0702 -.2257                                   .99   .0103 2.43
                       (.4565) (.0169) (.1588) (.0197) (.0873) (.3324)(.0799)

            =
                      + b1Ard1      +
                                        b2Artd1
                                                   +
                                                        b3*Arl
                                                                     +
                                                                         b4(mj + (111))                 +
                                                                                                            bs.d(p       + bs.Ay
59:Q3-                                                                                                                      + Vt
73: Q4
(10.9)          Em                              .0096-.0212                •7554*             —-    —-         .66   .0050 2.18
                       (.0009) (.0133)       (.0234) (.0172)              (.0757)
(10.10) Ash             .0003                 .0004 -.0036                 .4741* -.0271             --        .72   .0045 1.94
                       (.0010) (.0125)       (.0219) (.0164)              (.1088) (.1842)(.1145)

(10.11) Amff                   —.0324 —.0404 —.0668k                          .2673*   --           -          .17   .0091 2.65
                       (.0016) (.0241) (.0429) (.0317)                   (.1138)
(10.12) Anff            .0013 -.0634                        -,0164 - .1387   .0061 - .8611*                    .46   .0074 2.07
                       (.0016) (.0207)       (.0207)        (.0275) (.1290) (.3079)(.1606)
74:Ql-.
83:Q4 —

(10.13) Em            —.0019 —.0375             .0008       —.0340            ,5534*   --     —-     --        .28   .0116 2.52
                       (.0021) (.0249)       (.2739)        (.0338)      (.1599)
(10.14) &n            —.0016           .0158  -.0162   .3129**_.7520*_.4086*                                   .45   .0101 2.18
                      (.0019) (.0231) (.2400) (.0305) (.1650) (.3231)(.1720)

(10.15) Emff          -.0033 -.0152         -.0967 -.1172k                    .2511*   -—     --    —-         .26   .0134 2.49
                       (.0024) (.0286)      (.3174) (.0381)               (.1312)
(10.16) Amff           -.0032 —.0184        —.0163          -.0918' -.0459 -I.2S6 -.4879'                      .50   .0110 1.90
                       (.0021) (.0253)       (.2629)        (.0331) (.1309) (.3682)(.1828)

Notes: See the notes in Table 1 and 6.

rd =   natural        logarithm of Standard             Poor's divident-price ratio, quarterly average.

rl =   natural        logarithm of the 20-year constant maturity Treasury bond yield, quarterly average.
                                                               TABLE ii
                                DEMAND FOR MONEY BY HOUSEHOLDS AND BUSINESSES

                       ÷             +             +             +                    +
                            b2.rsd       b3.rtb        b4.Yt         b5.w + b6.m           b7.(pti_p)   + b8.t + et
                                                                                                                         Summary
amp1e.                                    Coefficient Estimates                      ______                         Statistics
59:Q3—                                                                                                            —2
                                                                                                         p        R      SEE         DW
fl_4 ___              b0        B2         b3           14            b5   ____       b7         b8

(11.1)      nih _2.548* _.1221* —.0197      .4149* —.0070    .5510* .0541                        --     ——         •97    .0162 1 8
                   (.7350) (.0498) (.0120) (.1220) (.0209) (.1283)(.8479)

(11.2)            _5•j3Q* _.2271* —.0218               .8298* -.0160          —-   -.3245        -—      .46*      .91 .0167 1.8
                   (.4014)   (.0492) (.0173) (.0709) (.0279)                       (.7860)              (.12)
(11.3)      nib -1.025          --       —.0033        .1470          -—    .8131* .4546      -.0017         —-    .78    .0198 1.9
                   (.9551)               (.0180) (.1481)                   (.O974)(1.016) (.0014)
(11.4)      nib -1.123          —-        .0177   .1190               ——      -- —.7981       -.0040     .82* .07 .0194 1.9
                  (2.087)                (.0215) (.3191)                           (.7896) (.0032) (.08)
74:Q1—
83:Q4

(11.5)      nih   _•9433* -.2923 -.0135                .2123* .0108
                                                             •7579* 1.390*                       -—     —-         .80    .0175 2.1
                   (.4551) (.2181) (.0148) (.0888) (.0282) (.1004) (.6331)

(11.6)      nih _2.721* -.2646 -.0000                  •479* .0328            --   1.563*        --      .82*      .24 .0182 1.7
                  (1.361)    (.4155) (.0188) (.2039) (.0358)                       (.6363)              (.09)

(11.7)      nib   -.8275       —          .0214   .1089               —-    .5292* .6800 _.0037*                   .90 .0213 1.6
                  (.9241)                (.0181) (.1369)                   (.1533)(.8898) (.0015)

(11.8)      nib -2.680          --        .0234        .3758          --      -— 1.687*       _.0087* .68* .54 .0192                2.0
                  (1.683)                (.0192) (.2507)                           (.6720)    (.0018) (.12)


59:Q3:                       b0 ÷    b2.rsd       + b3.&tbt + b4.AY + b5.Aw + botl + b7A(Pt                         fPt) +     Vt
73:Q4

(11.9)     Aznh     .0032 —.0597          .0200        .2678         .0104 —.1128 .1570          -—           -- - .06   .0182 1.9
                   (.0039)   (.0872) (.0189) (.3013) (.0325) (.1527) (.7094)
                                --        .0075                       —-   —.1321—1.205          --     —-        —.01    .0202 1.9
(11.10) mb -.0061                                      .2264
                   (.0041)               (.0196) (.3268)                   (.1404) (.7895)
74:QI—
83:Q4

(11.11) Amh        -.0016 -.1365          .0056        .4761** .0433 —.0119 1.538*               ——          ——- .15      .0193 1.7
                   (.0036)   (.4639) (.0191) (.2755) (.0346) (.1569) (.6390)
(11.12) Ahab       _.0113*      —-        .0151        .6212*         --   -.2179 1.841*                     ——    .21    .0202 1.8
                   (.0038)               (.0196) (.3009)                   (.1640) (.6313)
Notes: See the      notes in Tables 1 and 6.

nih =   natural logarithm of end of quarter household Ml balances (Board of Governors of the Federal
        Reserve System, Flow of Funds Accounts) divided by the GNP deflator.
nib =   natural logarithm of end of quarter nonfinancial corporate business Ml balances (Board of
        Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Flow of Funds Accounts) divided by the GNP deflator.
 t =    linear time trend equal to unity in 1959: Q4, and incremented by one in each subsequent
        quarter
                                                                     TABLE 12
                           POST-SAMPLE STATIC STMTlTATTfl' RtSUUr'. FflP HOUSEHOFftc                           ANT)    BUSINFSES

                (11.1')      4(11.3')          (11.2') 4(11.4')                       (11.5') & (11.7')                (11.6') 4(11-C')
                          Errors                      Errors                               Errors                           Errors
                 $1972b            _____        $1972b                1                 $1972b           1               $1972b               1
  Period        mit         nib      niff      mh    mb              tiff             tilt   mb         tiff            mh    nb             tiff


   74:Q1         1.9 -1.7  0.1                 3.0 -1,5  0.6                          -—     --         --                           -—      --
      Q2        -2.6 -1.9 —1.8                -2.2 -1,8 -1.6                          -—     --         --              --           --      --
      Q3        -3.0 —0.2 1.3                 —2.3 —0.1 —0.9                          --     --         --              --           -—      --
      Q4     -0.2 -2.7 —1.2                    0.0 —2.6 •-0.7                         --     —-         —-              --           --      --
   75:QL     —3.2 —0.8 —1.7                   -1.7 —0.7 —1.0                          --     --         --              --           -—      --
      Q2         1.9        3.0      2.0       1.7         2.7      1.8               -—     —-         —-              -—           -—      --
      Q3        -3.3 -1.6 —2.1                -4.0 -2.0 2.5                           --     —-         —-              -—           --      --
      Q4     —5.5 —1.1 —2.8                   -5.7 —1.3 —3.0                          —-     —-         —-              -—           --      —-

   76:Q1     —2.0  0.3 —0.7                   —2.8  0.0 —1.2                          --     --         ——              -—           --      ——

      Q2     —1.3 -0,5 —0.7                   -1.0 —0.7 —0.7                          —-     -—         --              --           --
      Q3     —5.5 -1.6 —2.9                   -5.1 -1.7 —2.9                          —-     -—         --              -—           --      —-
      Q4     —3.9 —0.5 —1.8                   -3.7 —0.7 —1.8                          —-     --         -—              -—           --      --
   77:Q1     —1.8 —2.1 —1.6                   —2.0 -2.3 —1.8                          --                -—              -—           --      --
      Q2     —5.1 —0.8 —2.4                   -4.9 —0.9 —2.4                          —-     --         -—              -—           -—      --
      Q3     —3.3 —1.5 —1.9                   —3.3 -1.6 —2.0                          —-     —-         -—              -—           -—      --
      Q4     -4.7 0.0 —1.9                    —3.9  0.0 —1.6                          —-     --         --              --           -—      -—

   78:Q1     —1.0 -2.7 —1.5                   —0.7 -2,8 —1.4                          --     —-         —-              -—           -—      -—

      Q2     —4.8 —0.7 —2.2                   —5.4 -0.8 —2.5                          —-     --         —-              --           -—      -—

      Q3        -6.6        0.4 —2.5          —6.4  0.5 —2.4                          —-     —-         —-              --           -—      -—

      Q4        -4.8 -2.1 —2.8                —5.2 —2.1 —3.0                          —-     —-         —-              --           --      --
   79:Q1        -6.1 —0.9 —2.9                —6.0 -0.8 —2.8                          -—     —-         --              --           --      --
      Q2        -3.7 -1.6 —2.2                —3.3 —1.6 -2.0                          -—     --         —-              --           --      --
      Q3        -3.3 -1.5 —1.9                -3.0 -1.5 —1.9                          --     --         —-              --           --      --
      Q4        -4.5        0.1 —1.8          -4.4         0.1 —1.8                   -—     --         —-              --           --      —-

   80:Q1        -5.6 -2.0 —3.1                -6.1 -2.1 —3.4                          --     -—         --              -—           --      —-
                -8.8 -1.4 —4,3                -7.7 -1.3 —3.8                          -—    --   —-                     -—           -—      --
      Q2
                                                                                            --   --                                          --
      Q3
      Q4
   81:Q1
                -3.4
             —12.7
                -7.5
                            1.1 —0.9
                            0.2 —5.4
                            0.6 —2.9
                                              -3.4
                                             -9.9 0.2 —4.1
                                                           0.9 —1.0
                                             -13.7 -0.1 —5.9
                                                                                      -—
                                                                                      -—
                                                                                      -—
                                                                                            --
                                                                                            --   —-
                                                                                                        -      -
                                                                                                                        -—
                                                                                                                        -—
                                                                                                                        —-    --   -—
                                                                                                                                     -—
                                                                                                                                     -—      -—



      Q2        -9.7 -0.5 —4.4               —10.6 -0.8 —4.9                          -—    --   --                     —-    --   --
      g3     —11.9 -2.7 —6.3                 -13.5 -3.0 —7.2                          -- -- --                          —-    --   --
      Q4        -7.3 -3.0 —4.5                -7.7 -3.2 —4,7                          -- -- --                          —-    --   -—

   82:1         -6.0 -1.1 —3.1                -5.8 -1.2 —3.0                          0.1 -1.8 —0.7                    -0.5 -1.7 —0.9
      Q2        -9.1 -1.5 —4.6               —10.0 -1.9. —5.2                      —2.4 —2.1 -2.0                      -2.0 -1.3 -1.4
      Q3        -8.3 -1.3 —4.1                -8.8 -1.6 —4.5                       —1.3 —2.3 —1.6                      -1.6 -1.8 —1.4
      Q4        -4.6 -1.4 —2.5                -4.3 -1.8 —2.6                          2.1 -2.6 -0.2                     3.3 —1.7             0.7
   83:Q1        —0.2 -1.2 —0.5                -0.4 -1.6 —0.8                          6.7 —2,4          1.8             7.3 -1.2 2.5
      Q2         0,0 -0.6 —0.2                -1.0 -1.1 -0.8                          5.1 —2.0 1.3                      3.4 -1.4 0.8
      Q3        —6,8 —0.5 —2.9                -7.2 —0.9 —3.3                          -1.9 —1.5 —1.4                   -2.1 —0.8 —1.2
      Q4        -7.3 -1.2 —3.4                -7.5 -1.6 —3,7                          -1.6 -1.9 —1.4                   -1.0 -1.3 —0.9
ME(74-81)= —4.S -0.9 —2.3                     -4.5 —1.1 —2.3
RMSE(74-81)= 5.6 1.6 2.8                       5.9 1.6 2.9
ME(82-83)= -5.3 -1.1 —2.7                     -5.6 -1.5 —3.0                          0.8 -2.1 0.0                      0.9 -1.4 —0.2
RMSE(82-83) 6.2             1.2      3.1       6,5             1.5 3,4                3.3 2.1 0.9                       3.3          1.4     1.4
  Notes:     See the notes in Tables 2 and 11. Restricted versions of equations (11.1), (11.2).
             (11.3) and (11.4) are estimated from 1959:Q3 through 1973:Q4. Restricted versions
             of equations (11.5), (11.6), (11.7), and (11.8) are estimated from 1974:Q1 through
             1981:Q4. The estimated equstions are:
   (11.1') nih =          -2.4842 - 0.1203'rsd             -0.0196'rtb + 0.4027.y + 0.S549.mhi                                                      r
                          (0.6960) (0.0486)                (0.0110)     (0.1143)   (0.1247)
   (11.2') nih =          -4.9988    -   0.2113'rsd        —    0,0169.rtb        +                 +
                                                                                       0020'•>'          O.SO•e1
                           (0.3614) (0.0510)                   (0.0171)               (0.0615)          (0.11)

   (11.3')   nib = -0.8492 + 0.1187'>'                +
                                                           0.7962.mb
                                                                              -       0.0016.t
                           (0.7621) (0.1158)              (0.0862)                (0.0012)

   (11.4' nib     =       -1.6387 + 0,1993'>'     —       0.0042't    +
                                                                            O.S2aetl
                          (2.032) (0.3103)            (0.0032)            (0.08)

                                                                                                                                 +
   (11.5') nih =          -0.8784    -   0.3954.rsd        -    0,0066.rtb        +    0.2279>'     +   0.7481        nih
                                                                                                                             1       1.5022.(p-P)
                                                                                                                                     (0.6521)
                           (0.4251) (0.2261)                   (0.0151)               (0.0850)          (0.1155)

                                                                                                                                      +
   (11.6') nih        =    -2.8474   -   0.2228'rsd        -    0.OO96rtb         +    0.4995->'    +
                                                                                                         l.8227(p - 1-2
                           (1.5229) (0.4014)                   (0.0207)               (0.2234)          (0.6293)                          (0.10)
                                                  TABLE 12

                                                  (cant.)

(11.7') m1 = -O.178S + O.3961inb   + O.8&39(p
                                                            1-p )   - O.0023t
             (0.0616) (0.1725) t-1 (0.7487)                          (0.0008)

(11.8') mb = -1.1863 +   Ol364•y   +                           — 0.0049t    +
             (1.9130) (0.2897)         (0.8256)
                                                                                O.SS.e — 1
                                                                (0.0026)        (0.15)
                                                                          TABLE 13
               MONEY DEMAND SPECIFICATIONS WITH TThE TRENDS, RATCHET VARIABLES, AND OWN YIELDS

                          =
                               b0 + b'rsd1
                                                  +
                                                      b3.rtb      +
                                                                       b4.x
                                                                               +           + b6.m1      +
                                                                                                            b7'(p rt1          +
                                                                                                                                   bs't    e
Sample:                                                   Coefficient      Estimates                                           Swnmary Statistics

                     b0                                      b4                      b6                                                    SEE     OW
____                                 b2          b3                       b5                      b7         b8

(13.1) mff_l.085* -.0421                        .0024       .2445' .0416k .2119** .0729                      .00003       --   .99         .0065 1.93
                    (.4113)      (.0149)       (.0065)     (.07 25)     (.0104)    (.1402) (.3422)          (.0005)

(13.2)    miff -1.   479*       - .0527'        .0048        3353*       .0482'      --       -.0933         .00004 .20        .98         .0062   1.89
                    (.4239)      (.0132)       (.0063)     (.0672) (.0098)                    (.3156)       (.0006) (.13)
74:Q1—
83:Q4
(13.3)    mff -.2176 -.1737 —.0131           .0975    .0228   .7627' .7122".0001                                          --   .79         .0114 2.16
                    (.7188) (.2207) (.0101) (.084 8) (.0193) (.0945) (.4259) (.0009)

(13.4) mff—2.073" -.0560 - .0062                            •4385*  .0397"                    1.156' 0.0023 .86' .30                       .0112 1.73
                   (1.205) (.2821) (.0115)                 (.1671) (.0220)                    (.3869) (.0017) (.08)
           =
               b0    + b2.rtd             b3'rtb t                    + b5.w 4-               +
                                                                                                  b7E(pti_p)
                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                          b8RSP
                                                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                                                       e
59: Q3—
73:
(13.5)     nb -.0818                 -—         .0022       .0052         -—        .8147'        .3206 - .0050           --   .78         .0198 1.95
                    (.2815)                    (.0164) (.0480)                     (.0970)(1.027) (.0036)

(13.6)     mb 1.003                  --         .0207      —.2026         —-         ——       - .7846       —.0082 .82' .05                .0196 1.93
                    (.8476)                    (.02 17)    (.1316)                            (.7981)       (.0128) (.08)

(13.7) mff-1.166'               —.0443' .0010               .2578' .0377' .2824' .0465 -.0010                             --   .99         .0064 2.93
                    (.2456)      (.0152) (.0058)           (.0528) (.0106) (.1391) (.3420) (.00 14)

(13.8) mff_1.624*           .0S67' .0031     .3606' .0431'                           —-       —.1248        -.0016 .22" .98                .0061 1.92
                    (.1736) (.0141) (.0057) (.0309) (.0102)                                   (.3126)       (.0017) (.131
74:Q1—
83:Q4
(13.9)     sib 1.099"                           .0362 -.1853" -—                    .6076' .5227 .O066'                   -—   .91         .0207 1.88
              (.6365)                          (.0199)     (.0972)                 (.1194) (.7141) (.0023)

(13.10) icb-3.644                    —-         .0147       .3764                             1.822' -.0060 ,98' .18                       .0205 2.22
                   (2.319)                     (.0202)     (.3065)                            (.6510) (.0065) (.03)

(13.11) jeff        -.2964       -.0292 —.0108              .0785        .0253    7493* ,7488",0018                       -—   .80         .0112 2,16
                    (.3070)         (.2150) (.0098)        (.0490)      (.0190) (.0918) (.4077) (.0017)

(13.12) mff_1,657** - .0457 - .0023    .3633k .0 278                                 —-       1.121'        —.0057' .86* .39               .0109 1.83
            (.966 1) (.2656) (.0111) (.1344) (.0210)                                          (.3742) (.0029) (.08)


 74:Q1- ro
 83:Q4         t      b
                          0
                              + b
                                 2
                                     rsdm
                                            t +b 3•rtbm
                                                      t
                                                                  +b
                                                                   4 yt +b5 .t        +b6 •t—1 +b7
                                                                                                                                       t

(13.13) nih -.9210"                   .0244 -.0202    .1414* -.0009   .8045* 1.307"                           --                   .79      .0179 2.2
                     (.5059)         (.0337) (.0135) (.0705) (.0279) (.0952) (.6863)

(13.14) ink —3.531'                   .0747 —.0039    .5194*  .0300                   —-          1.669*     .82'                  .24      .0182 1.76
                    (1.668)          (.1013) (.0174) (.2214) (.0352)                              (.6532)    (.09)

(23.15) miff        —.3028            .0321 —.0170'   .0587               .0145      .8223t        .7201       —-                  .79      .0114 2.31
                     (.2952)         (.0397) (.0086) (.0383)             (.0177)    (.0755)       (.4387)

(13.16) mff -2.3O9'                   .0511     -.0057       .4182'  .0368''                      1.169'     .92'                  .34      .0111 1.S
                     1.225)          (.1241)    (.0106)     (.15881 (.0205)                       (.3827)    (.06)



 Notes:    See the notes in Tables 1, 6 and 11.
 asp   — peak yield on 5-yen constart maturity Treasury securities, in percent.
 rsdm — ln(RSD —
                 —
 rtbts — ln(P.Th
          — proportionof other checkable deposits in either aggregate Ml or household Ml balances,
           multiplied by 5.25 percent.
                                    TABLE 14

         BIAS OF THE ESTIMATED INTEREST ELASTICITY (in percent)


                                                                           .
                            Policy Parameter, A
  p     0.00     0.01      0.05       0.10      0.30     0.60       1.00


0.00    0+00       0.00      0.00       000       0.00      0.00    (**)

0.25    0.00       0.54      2.81       5.97     24L11    127.27   -100.00

0.50    0.00       1.36      7.34      16.38     94.44   -350.00   -100.00

0.75    0.00       3.57     21.83      56.72   -501.64   -138.46   -100.00

0.90    0.00      10.52     94.61      (*)     -140.80   -111.18   -100.00

0.95    0.00      24.36     (*)      -184.37   -116.40   -105.14   -100.00

1.00    (**)    -100.00   -100.00    -100.00   -100.00   -100.00   -100.00


*Denominator equals zero in equation (15).

**soth numerator and denominator equal zero in equation (15).
