NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STRESSED NOT FROZEN:
THE FED FUNDS MARKET IN THE FINANCIAL CRISIS
Gara Afonso
Anna Kovner
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper 15806
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15806

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

We thank Andrew Howland for outstanding research assistance. We are grateful to Mark Flannery,
James McAndrews and to seminar participants at the Finance Workshop at the Chicago Booth School
of Business, at the Capital Markets Workshop at LSE, at NYU and at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Gara Afonso, Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Stressed not Frozen: The Fed Funds Market in the Financial Crisis
Gara Afonso, Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 15806
March 2010
JEL No. G01,G2,G21,G24,G38
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of the financial crisis of 2008 on the federal funds market, specifically
the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. Rather than a complete collapse of lending in the presence of
a market wide shock, we see that banks become more restrictive in which counterparties they lend
to. After Lehman Brothers, we find that amounts and spreads become more sensitive to borrower bank
characteristics. While the market does not contract dramatically, lending rates increase. Further, the
market does not seem to expand to meet the increased demand predicted by the drop in other bank
funding markets. We examine discount window borrowing as a proxy for unmet fed funds demand
and find that the fed funds market is not indiscriminate. As expected, borrowers who access the discount
window have lower ROA. When looking at the lender side we do not find that the characteristics of
the lending bank importantly affect the amount of interbank loans a bank makes. In particular, we
do not find that worse performing banks start hoarding liquidity and indiscriminately reduce their lending.

Gara Afonso
Federal Reserve Bank of NY
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
Gara.Afonso@ny.frb.org
Anna Kovner
Financial Intermediation Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
Anna.Kovner@ny.frb.org

Antoinette Schoar
Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive, E52-455
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu

I.

Introduction
The interbank market is the most immediate source of bank liquidity and thus an important
indicator of the functioning of the banking market overall. Problems in the efficiency of
interbank markets can lead to insufficient bank liquidity and thus to inadequate allocation of
capital and risk sharing between banks. At the extreme, a failure in interbank markets could even
trigger bank runs. In addition, the overnight interbank market, known as the fed funds market in
the US, is one of the main mechanisms by which monetary policy is implemented, and thus an
important market, especially when the market rate can differ from the target. It is therefore of
particular interest to understand whether the interbank market mitigates or amplifies shocks to
individual banks or the banking sector overall.
In this paper we study how the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy and the ensuing government
interventions affected the functioning of the overnight fed funds market. Apart from contributing
to a better understanding of the 2008 financial crisis, this period serves as a useful experiment to
observe how the fed fund market reacts to market wide shocks to the stability of the banking
industry. While the direct losses of large banks from the Lehman’s bankruptcy were not big
enough to trigger a bankruptcy, large banks’ access to fed funds loans is the most affected.
Unlike the Bear Stearns’ failure, which did not result in meaningful disruptions in the interbank
market, we see significant changes in spreads and access to credit after Lehman. Thus we
interpret the Lehman’s bankruptcy as an implicit shock to the market’s belief that large banks
would not be allowed to fail. There is an ongoing debate in the theoretical literature as well as in
policy circles about the extent to which interbank markets are prone to contagion: Do shocks to
one part of the banking sector lead to a freeze of the overall market? A number of recent theory
papers model contagion risk from information asymmetry. In these models lenders in the
2

interbank market are unable to assess bank specific risks or the probability of liquidity shortages
which then can lead to market unraveling when negative shocks hit banks. See for example,
Freixas (1999) and Flannery (1996) or more recently Heider, Hoerova and Holthausen (2009)
and Acharya, Gale and Yorulmazer (2009). On the other side of the debate are scholars such as
Furfine (2001) or Flannery and Sorescu (1996) who assume that participants in the interbank
market have sufficient knowledge to differentiate between banks with good and bad credit and
are able to provide liquidity to good banks. However, to date, there has been no empirical
analysis of the overnight fed funds market during the 2008 crisis.
We use transaction level data of participants in the fed funds market to investigate the provision
of credit in this market after the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy. We find a much more nuanced
picture: Under “normal” or pre-crisis conditions the fed funds market functions via rationing of
riskier borrowers rather than prices, e.g. adjustments of spreads.1 After Lehman we see a
different picture emerge: In the days immediately after the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy the
market seems to become sensitive to bank specific characteristics, not only in the amounts lent to
borrowers but even in the cost of overnight funds. We see sharp differences between large and
small banks in their access to credit: Large banks (especially those with high percentages of nonperforming loans) show drastically reduced daily borrowing amounts after Lehman and borrow
from fewer counterparties. In fact, the interest rate spread at which large banks borrow in the fed
funds market after Lehman falls below pre-crisis levels after September 16th, 2008. We interpret
this initial response as an effect of credit rationing. In contrast, smaller banks were able to
increase the amount borrowed from the interbank markets and even managed to add lending
1

For example, in the aftermath of the Bear Stearns’ near-bankruptcy we do not observe that interest rates spreads
become more sensitive to the underlying bank characteristics, e.g. performance and size. However, generally, we do
see that bank characteristics predict borrowing amounts and the number of banks willing to lend to a borrower.
(Unreported analysis).

3

counterparties during the crisis; but to do so they faced higher interest rate spreads. Different
from the predictions of many theoretical models of interbank lending, when faced with a market
wide shock, we do not observe a complete cessation of lending but instead we see increased
differentiation between borrowers of high versus low type.
When looking at the exact timing of changes in the interbank market, we see that in the two days
after Lehman’s bankruptcy large banks show a steep decline in the amount of funds they borrow
while small banks do not see any significant decline and were even able to increase their
borrowing. The sharp drop in loan volumes is mainly driven by the poorly performing banks
(measured as banks with historically high levels of nonperforming loans (NPL) as a percentage
of loans). This result is especially strong for the larger banks and suggests that directly after the
crisis lenders in the fed funds market became more sensitive to credit risk, especially for larger
borrowers. We find that this drop in loan volumes is associated with a sharp increase in interest
rates and a loss in the number of counterparties large (and poorly performing) banks borrow
from. However, beginning on Wednesday, September 16th, once the AIG bailout is announced
(and later the CPP) the trend reverses especially for the large banks. After the AIG bailout is
announced, spreads for the largest banks fall steeply, falling below the rate in the week before
Lehman. We interpret the return to pre-crisis spreads as the effect of the government’s support
for systematically important banks, because the same is not true for small banks: these banks
continue to face higher spreads till well after the announcement of the CPP.
In contrast, we do not find a relationship between lender characteristics and amounts lent
immediately after Lehman’s failure. Banks that might be expected to hoard liquidity (such as
worse performing banks or banks that had been more dependent on repo financing) did not lend
less in the interbank market after the crisis compared to their pre-crisis lending. This suggests
4

either that these banks did not need to hoard liquidity, or that they did not want to reveal
weakness to this market by appearing to hoard liquidity. The fact that larger, worse performing
banks disproportionately increased their number of counterparties could suggest that they feel
more pressure to signal to the market that they are stable. Of course, this interpretation is only
suggestive; and alternative interpretation could be that worse performing lenders differentially
seek to diversify credit risk. However, independently of the interpretation of the banks’ lending
behavior, the results suggest that liquidity hoarding was a less important factor in the difficulty
many banks had in accessing the fed fund market than the fear of counterparty risk.
It is difficult to definitively determine whether the fed funds market was able to efficiently
provide banks with liquidity through the crisis, since we do not observe the full distribution of
latent demand and supply. After the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy, it is likely that decreases in
banks’ other funding sources increased demand for overnight funds. We attempt to measure the
extent of unmet demand in two ways. First, we look at the use of the Federal Reserve’s discount
window during the crisis. Because of the high interest rate and potential for stigma, banks
usually access the discount window only if they face severe unmet liquidity needs. Thus use of
the discount window gives a lower bound for the unmet liquidity needs in the fed funds market.
We find that even in the days after the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy only very poorly
performing banks, those with low ROA, access the discount window. It seems reasonable to
assume that these are banks which were rationed by private banks lending in the fed funds
market. While again it is difficult to assess whether this means that interbank markets operated
efficiently after the crisis, it is, however, reassuring that we do not observe that well performing
banks are forced to turn to the discount window. This would have been a very alarming
indication of dysfunction in the fed funds market.
5

Second, we estimate the pre-crisis relationship between fed funds borrowing, bank
characteristics and the price of other overnight funding such as overnight repo and deposit rates.
We then use these relationships to predict post-crisis demand. While the amount borrowed in the
fed funds market does not fall sharply, predicted demand for the fed funds market far exceeds
actual borrowing. The gap is not related to banks’ risk characteristics. Thus, while the overnight
market did not collapse, it did not increase at a time when there was likely to have been
increased demand for overnight funding.

II.

Related Literature
This research is related to a wider theory literature on interbank markets and bank liquidity.
Theories of interbank markets generally postulate that these markets should fulfill two separate
functions: liquidity insurance between banks and peer monitoring. However, the channels for
financial contagion and the reasons why markets may freeze differ across studies.
Freixas (1999), Flannery (1996) and Heider, Hoerova and Holthausen (2009) present models of
the interbank market with asymmetric information about counterparty risk which can lead to a
collapse of the overall market if the fraction of risky borrowers in the market becomes too high
and lenders do not have the ability to separate good from bad counterparties. In Bruche and
Suarez (2010)’s general equilibrium model, counterparty risk in an economy with retail deposit
insurance may lead to a freeze in interbank money markets. The authors show that the risk of
bank failure creates an asymmetric allocation of capital between banks with access to abundant
insured deposits (cheap funding) and those with no access that then need to pay higher spreads in

6

money markets. This asymmetry distorts the aggregate allocation of credit and can lead to a
drying-up of interbank money markets.
Allen, Carletti and Gale (2009) propose a model of interbank market freeze where there is no
asymmetric information or counterparty risk. If there is uncertainty about aggregate liquidity
demand, banks hoard liquidity in anticipation of high aggregate demand for liquidity to deal with
their idiosyncratic liquidity needs and to take advantage of high volatility in asset prices.
Hoarding liquidity also plays a key role in Diamond and Rajan (2009). The authors argue that an
overhang of illiquid securities might reduce their price sufficiently such that banks have no
interest in selling them. Markets then freeze as investors hoard liquidity expecting high returns
when banks in need of cash are forced to sell at fire sale prices.
Several other relevant papers predict market freezes, although do not explicitly model the
interbank market. Bolton, Santos and Scheinkman (2009) presents a model of liquidity demand
arising from the maturity mismatch between asset payoffs and desired redemptions, where
adverse selection ultimately leads to a market freeze. Adverse selection is also the driving factor
of a total break-down of trade in Morris and Shin (2009). The authors show that the market for
toxic assets freezes when there is a failure of market confidence. Acharya, Gale and Yorulmazer
(2009) focuses on freezes in the market for repurchase agreements (repo) or asset-backed
commercial paper. They conclude that, when debt needs to be rolled over frequently, shifts in the
information structure of the true value of the underlying assets can cause lending to dry up
leading to a market freeze.
Our paper is closely related to other empirical studies of the impact of financial crises on
interbank markets. The key advantage of our paper relative to the existing literature is that we

7

have transaction level data on all trades in the fed funds market. Therefore we are able to look
carefully at the decisions at the lender and borrower levels. In the UK, Acharya and Merrouche
(2009) examine the behavior of settlement banks and show that precautionary hoarding by some
banks raised lending rates for all settlement banks. Wetherilt, Zimmerman and Soramäki (2009)
find a reduction in the number of bilateral relationships in the sterling unsecured overnight
market compared to pre-crisis levels. They also show that in the short term when core banks
appear risky, correspondents prefer to diversify away from the core. Halsall, Jackson and
Merrouche (2008) analyze the relationship between rate volatility and the level of participation
in the unsecured overnight interbank market in the UK and document trading shifts later in the
day during the sub-prime turmoil.
In continental Europe, the interbank market as a potential channel of contagion is examined in
Memmel and Stein (2008), who finds that the risk of interbank contagion is very low using
German data. Using data from e-MID, an electronic interbank market born as an initiative of the
Bank of Italy, Brunetti, di Filippo and Harris (2009) examines the effects of central bank
intervention in this market during the subprime crisis.
Before the 2008, crisis Furfine (2002) uses similar data to study the performance of the US
interbank market during the autumn of 1998 and finds that risk premiums on overnight lending
were largely unaffected and lending volumes in the federal funds market increased during a
period that included Russia's default on its sovereign bonds and the collapse of Long-Term
Capital Management. Cocco, Gomes and Martins (2009), highlights the role of bank
relationships in the process of liquidity provision in interbank markets. Using data from the
Portuguese interbank market between January 1997 and August 2001, they find that banks with a
larger reserve imbalance, small banks and banks with more nonperforming loans rely more on
8

relationships and that relationships are established between banks with less correlated liquidity
shocks.

III.

The Federal Funds Market

Federal Funds, or fed funds, are uncollateralized loans of reserve balances at Federal Reserve
banks. Banks and other depository institutions keep reserves at the Federal Reserve banks to
meet reserve requirements and to clear financial transactions. The fed funds market allows
institutions with excess reserve balances to lend to those with reserve deficiencies. These loans
are accounted for as deposit liabilities exempt from the reserve requirements under the Federal
Reserve’s Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions2). On daily basis,
financial institutions purchase and sell reserve balances, mostly overnight (although longer
maturity loans are also traded), at a rate known as the federal funds rate.
The fed funds market is an over-the-counter market where institutions seeking to borrow or lend
negotiate loan terms directly with each other or indirectly through a fed funds broker. To
expedite the lending process and reduce transaction costs, most overnight loans are booked
without a contract. These verbal agreements rely on lending relationships and on established
credit lines between borrowing and lending institutions. Participants include commercial banks,
thrift institutions, agencies and branches of foreign banks in the United States, federal agencies,
and government securities dealers.

2

http://ecfr.gpoaccess.gov/cgi/t/text/textidx?c=ecfr&sid=b190e5829176d4ca80bef82dd7a11a1b&rgn=div5&view=text&node=12:2.0.1.1.5&idno=12

9

IV.

Other Funding Sources
Depository institutions have several alternatives to the fed funds market to meet their funding
needs. First, they can borrow at the discount window from one of the three lending programs:
primary credit, secondary credit and seasonal credit programs.3 Unlike fed funds loans,
borrowing from the discount window is collateralized. However, the Federal Reserve accepts a
broad range of assets as discount window collateral, including home mortgages and related
assets, and thus collateral is unlikely to be a limiting factor.4 More importantly, banks have been
reluctant to borrow from the discount window because of a perceived “stigma”.5 Federal Reserve
banks extend primary credit on a short-term basis to banks that are adequately or well capitalized
(CAMEL rating of 1-3), for up to 90 days at a rate currently 25 basis points above the target
federal funds rate.6 Discount window loans are typically overnight and allow for early repayment
of the loan if issued for a longer term.
Second, banks can bid to borrow funds from the Term Auction Facility (TAF), created on
December 12, 2007.7 The TAF provides funding at interest rates and amounts set by biweekly
auctions. Unlike the discount window and fed funds loans, TAF funding cannot be prepaid and is

3

Primary credit is extended to depository institutions with strong financial positions while secondary credit is offered to those
institutions that do not qualify for primary credit. Small depository institutions in agricultural communities are the typical users
of seasonal credit.
4

Acceptable collateral include U.S. government and agency securities, certain types of foreign sovereign debt obligations,
municipal or corporate obligations of investment quality, commercial paper of investment quality, bank issued assets by an
institution in “sound financial condition” and customer obligations that meet credit-quality standards. See
http://www.frbdiscountwindow.org/20090819margins_announcement.cfm?hdrID=14 for a list of acceptable collateral for
discount window loans as well as their corresponding collateral margins.
5

Armantier et al. (2009b) and Furfine (2003) find empirical evidence for discount window stigma.

6

In March 17, 2008, the spread between the primary rate at the discount window and the federal funds target was narrowed from
50 to 25 basis points and the maximum maturity of discount window loans extended from 30 to 90 days.

7

Armantier et al. (2008) presents a detailed analysis of the liquidity conditions in the term funding markets leading up to the
introduction of the Term Auction Facility as well as the structure and results of the first ten TAF auctions. See also
http://atthebank.ny.frb.org/BankBusiness/facilities.shtml#taf for more information on the facility.

10

available only on pre-specified dates and on a term basis. Borrowing is collateralized and assets
eligible for collateral are the same as those eligible to be pledged at the discount window. In
contrast to the discount window, TAF funding is not perceived to be associated with stigma. The
first TAF auction was held on December 17, 2007, auctioning $20 billion, and the size of the
auctions were increased over time to a peak of $150 billion on October 6th, 2008. Auctions of 84day credit were established in July 2008 to supplement the existing 28-day auctions.
Borrowing in the repo market is a third alternative. A repurchase agreement, or repo, is a
financial contract that allows the use of a financial security as collateral for a cash loan, mostly
on an overnight basis, at a rate known as the repo rate. The overnight repo rate is generally lower
than the fed funds rate.
The repo market is a large and opaque over-the-counter market which exceeded $10 trillion in
the US by mid-2008 (Hördahl and King (2008)). Gorton and Metrick (2009a) finds evidence for
a “run on repo” in the two weeks following the Lehman’s bankruptcy. They estimate that
average haircuts for non-US Treasury collateral increased from approximately 25 percent to 43
percent in these two weeks, and argue that this pricing change was the result of concerns about
the illiquidity of the assets being used as collateral.8

V.

Data
Fed funds data for this analysis come from a proprietary transaction-level dataset which contains
all transfers sent and received by institutions through Fedwire. An institution that maintains an
account at a Reserve bank can generally become a Fedwire participant and use this account to
8

See also Gorton and Metrick (2009b) for a more detailed analysis of the impact of financial turmoil on repo haircuts.

11

make large-value payments as well as to settle interbank loans. Fed fund loans are thus a subset
of all Fedwire transactions. We identify transfers as fed funds transactions using an algorithm
similar to the one proposed by Furfine (1999). Similar data is used in Bartolini et al. (2009),
Bech and Atalay (2008) and Ashcraft and Duffie (2007), among others.9 The data include the
date, amount, interest rate, time of delivery and time of return as well as the identity of the lender
and the borrower of every transaction sent over Fedwire. The borrower and lender are identified
at the lead American Banking Association (ABA) level, which corresponds with a bank-level
RSSD. We aggregate the fed funds data to the bank holding company level and aggregate loans
between each borrower-lender pair on a daily basis, calculating the federal funds rate for each
borrower-lender pair as a weighted average.
We augment this data with quarterly information on bank characteristics as filed in the
Consolidated Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies (FR Y-9C).10 It provides
information on credit risk variables, total assets and financial ratios. In addition, we merge
information from proprietary Federal Reserve databases on reserve requirements and discount
window borrowing. Discount window data include information on the borrower, amount
borrowed, available collateral and interest rate. This data is described in greater detail by
Armantier et al. (2009a) in their analysis of the interaction between TAF bidding and discount
window borrowing.

9

As previously noted, this methodology presents some weaknesses. First, only fed fund loans settled through Fedwire are
identified. Second, term fed funds loans are not included. Third, sending and receiving institutions may act as correspondent or
brokers of the actual parties. Forth, rates outside the specified window are missed. Fifth, other overnight loans settled through
Fedwire, such as Eurodollars or tri-party repos, could be misidentified as fed funds.

10

Consolidated Reports of Income and Condition (FR Y-9C) are available from the Federal Reserve online at
http://chicagofed.org/economic_research_and_data/bhc_data.cfm. Data become available about two to three months after the end
of each quarter (e.g., data for the third quarter of 2008 became available at the beginning of December 2008).

12

VI.

The Federal Funds Market 2007-2008
Despite theoretical predictions and public perception of a collapse in interbank lending around
financial crises, the overnight federal funds market was remarkably stable through the recent
period of turmoil in the financial markets. Figures 1-6 show the amount, participation and
interest rates in the fed funds market beginning in 2007. We highlight four key dates in each
figure:11 i) August 9th, 2007 – BNP Paribas tells investors that they cannot value assets in two
funds, ii) March 16th, 2008 – JP Morgan announces that it will acquire Bear Stearns for $2 a
share, iii) September 15th, 2008 – Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy after failing to find a
merger partner, and iv) October 9th, 2008 – First day of the first maintenance period after the
Federal Reserve’s announcement that it will pay interest on required reserve balances and on
excess balances held by or on behalf of depository institutions.12
As shown in FIGURE 1 and FIGURE 2, the daily amount of transactions is surprisingly stable
through the period, rising from an average daily amount of $177 billion in January of 2007 to a
peak of more than $250 billion immediately post-Bear Stearns on March 17th, 2008, and
stabilizing at approximately $190 billion post-Lehman. Fed funds market volume begins to fall
only after the interest on reserves (IOR) period begins. Similarly, as shown in FIGURE 3 and
FIGURE 4, the number of borrowers is relatively stable through the Lehman Brothers episode
11

See Hellerstein, Ryan and Shrader (2009) and also http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/global_economy/Crisis_Timeline.pdf
for a detailed description of the key events surrounding the financial turmoil after June 2007.
12

The Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006 authorizes the Federal Reserve to pay interest on reserve balances and on
excess balances held by or on behalf of depository institutions beginning October 1, 2011. The effective date of this authority was
advanced to October 1, 2008 by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008. Initially, the interest rate paid on required
reserve balances was 10 basis points below the average target federal funds rate over a reserve maintenance period while the rate
for excess balances was set at 75 basis points below the lowest target federal funds rate for a reserve maintenance period. The
Federal Reserve began to pay interest for the maintenance periods beginning on October 9, 2008. The interest rate paid on
required reserve balances was modified to 35 basis points below the lowest target federal funds rate on October 23, 2008. On
November 6, 2008, the rate paid on required reserve balances was set equal to the average target federal funds rate over the
reserve maintenance period while the interest rate on excess balances was equal to the lowest target federal funds rate in effect
during the reserve maintenance period. Since December 18, 2008 the interest rate on required reserve balances and excess
balances has been 25 basis points.

13

ranging between 130 and 200 banks. In contrast, the number of lenders fell from 250-300 in the
summer of 2008 to hover around 265 after Lehman Brothers, and fell even more dramatically
after the payment of interest on reserves to the 2009 level of around 100-115. As shown in
FIGURE 5 and
FIGURE 6, the daily fed funds rate was relatively stable after the Bear Stearns’ episode until
Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy. The weighted average rate jumped more than 60 basis points on
September 15, 2008, with substantially more widening of the distribution.
[FIGURE 1 - FIGURE 6]

VII.

Definition of variables

In order to understand the impact of the financial crisis on the fed funds market, we study the
period surrounding the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. We begin the pre-Lehman period on
April 1, 2008 so as to avoid the period surrounding the collapse of Bear Stearns and sample
through February 28, 2009 so that there are an equal number of days preceding and following the
event. We aggregate the data into two samples for the analysis in TABLE III – TABLE VIII so that
we can examine the importance of both borrower and lender characteristics. The first sample,
aggregating all fed funds loans to each borrower in a day, consists of 21,003 observations from
360 borrowers. The second sample, aggregating all fed funds loans from each lender in a day,
consists of 20,354 observations from 274 lenders. Each analysis is conducted with one
observation per borrower – day (lender – day).

14

We allow market conditions to vary in different windows around the bankruptcy, selecting
breakpoints around the following events:


September 15th , 2008 – Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy (pre-market open)



September 16th, 2008 – Federal Reserve loans $85 billion to AIG (after market close)



October 9th, 2008 – Federal Reserve begins to pay interest on required and excess reserve
balances (IOR)



October 14th, 2008 – 9 large banks agree to capital injection from Treasury (CPP)

We indicate with binary variables the following time periods: 2 weeks pre Lehman (August 29th,
2008 to September 4th, 2008), 1 week pre-Lehman (September 5th, 2008 to September 11th,
2008), Friday September 12th, 2008, Monday September 15th, 2008, Tuesday September 16th,
2008, Post-AIG and pre-IOR (September 17th, 2008 to October 8th, 2008), post-IOR and pre-CPP
(October 9th, 2008 to October 13th, 2008), and monthly after CPP (October 14th, 2008 to
November 10th, 2008 and thereafter). In the tables, we present coefficients only through the 1
month post-CPP period. Dummy variables for each month are included but not shown due to
table size limitations. Estimated coefficients are available upon request.
We analyze three variables to assess conditions in the fed funds market: price, amount and
number of counterparties. We measure the price of fed funds with the weighted average spread
between the rate for that bank and the target federal funds rate on that day.13 The amount of fed
funds loans is calculated as the log of the total amount borrowed in $ millions plus one. We
include in this analysis only banks that were observed borrowing in the market at any time from
13

In unreported specifications, we estimated TABLE V using spread to the effective fed funds rate rather than the
target. Results for the interaction of bank characteristics were similar, although the positive coefficient on Monday
9/15 was naturally reduced, since the effective rate was dramatically higher than the target rate on that day.

15

2007 through the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy.14 Finally we calculate the number of
counterparties as the log of the number of different lenders (borrowers) in a given day. We also
tabulate the daily percentage of banks borrowing, by dividing the number of unique borrowers
by the total 360 banks that borrowed in the sample time period (April 2007 to February 2008).
Summary statistics for the fed funds market in this time period are presented in TABLE I. While
the mean and median amount of daily loans do not fall, the mean spread between banks’ fed
funds loan rates and the target fed funds rate almost doubles in the period immediately
surrounding the Lehman’s bankruptcy, and the volatility of spreads increases as well. It is worth
noting that even in the pre-Lehman time period, approximately 30% of borrowers actually
borrow on any given day. This number falls to 27.5% surrounding Lehman’s bankruptcy, and the
decline in mean daily borrowers is significantly different from the pre-Lehman period only after
IOR (October 2008).
[TABLE I]
Table II shows bank characteristics from the call reports for the sample borrowing and lending
banks. The borrower sample includes only borrowers with call report data so that we can
measure banks’ characteristics consistently. It includes loans from all lenders, including
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) and US subsidiaries of foreign banking organizations.
As summarized in TABLE II, the median borrower in this market has more than $1billion in assets
(the mean is $27 billion) and non-performing loans of 0.8% of total loans as of December 31,
2007 (the mean level of non-performing loans is 1.1%).

14

In unreported specifications, we estimated similar results expanding the analysis to include banks which did not
borrow, filling in the amount to be the log of one, effectively creating observations for banks who did not borrow on
a given day with amounts of 0.

16

The analysis also considers the relationship between lender characteristics and the price, amount
and number of counterparties of fed funds loans after the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy. The
lender sample is different from the borrower sample, because it includes only lenders with call
report data. Excluded are loans from GSEs and US subsidiaries of foreign banking organizations,
but we included loans to those entities. The median lender in this market has characteristics that
are similar to those of the median borrower, with close to $1billion in assets and non-performing
loans of 0.8% of total loans as of December 31, 2007, again the mean values are $26 billion and
1.3%, respectively.
[TABLE II]

VIII.

The Effects of Shocks to the Interbank Market
In the following analyses we want to shed light on the functioning of the fed funds market in the
aftermath of a major shock to the banking industry, the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. Our
objective is to document which banks were able to access the market after the onset of the
Lehman crisis and at what terms. The alternative view is that this shock led to a market wide
collapse of the fed funds market and prevented even banks that are good credit risks from
accessing to the market. For that purpose we look at different dimensions of access to credit such
as the interest rate at which banks borrow, the amount of loans, and the number of
counterparties. The last two are particularly important since many participants suggest that credit
risk in the interbank market is managed via credit rationing rather than interest rates.

17

In TABLE III we first look at the effect of the Lehman’s bankruptcy on the fed funds market with
and without controlling for fixed bank borrower characteristics. This allows us to separate the
effect of the crisis on a given bank from the composition effects of who (was able to) access the
interbank market after the Lehman crisis. The first column is a probit estimation with a
dependent variable equal to one if a bank borrows on a given day. We do not estimate a probit
model with borrower fixed effects because fixed effects for the 20 banks that borrow every day
(including the period around Lehman’s bankruptcy) would perfectly predict access and thus be
excluded from the analysis, distorting the results. The dependent variable in the next two
columns is the spread to target (the difference between the weighted average interest rate for a
given bank and the target interest rate), columns (4) and (5) report the effect on the log of the
amount borrowed and finally columns (6) and (7) show the log number of counterparties for a
given borrower.
In contrast to theoretical predictions of a cessation in trading, without controlling for bank fixed
effects, there does not seem to be much happening in the two days following Lehman’s
bankruptcy. While the probit estimation suggests access to the interbank market decreased
around the Lehman’s bankruptcy, the change to the market is not the abrupt cessation of activity
predicted by some theories. Rather than a sudden large negative coefficient immediately after
Lehman’s bankruptcy, we estimate small negative coefficients beginning in August 2008. These
negative coefficients become significantly more negative only after IOR.
There is no statistically significant change in the amount borrowed (column (4)) or the number of
counterparties (column (6)). Spreads increase on Monday, September 15th, but begin falling
thereafter (column (2)). Results are similar when the data are grouped by lender and controlling

18

for fixed lender characteristics and when data is included for all borrowers and all lenders (see
TABLE XIII and TABLE XIV in Appendix).
But that hides a dramatic shift in the flow of funds and the distribution of rates across different
borrowers revealed by controlling for borrower fixed effects. When we include borrower fixed
effects in column (5) the coefficient on the post Lehman dummy is negative and significant with
a coefficient estimate of -0.19 on September 15th. The economic effect is economically large
since a point estimate of -0.19 translates into a reduction of lending of 17.3%. The results
suggest that while after the Lehman’s bankruptcy the average loan size of banks in the fed funds
market did not drop (TABLE III, column (4)), for any given bank the amount borrowed decreased
(TABLE III, column (5)). These two seemingly contrary effects can only be reconciled if there is a
change in the composition of banks that are borrowing in the market: larger banks or those banks
that were able to borrow larger amounts must have accessed the interbank market less often after
the Lehman’s bankruptcy. Therefore, the average loan in the sample is unchanged, while at the
same time the average bank in the sample sees a decline in the amount borrowed. It seems that
those banks that usually borrow a lot and often from the market were the ones facing very
different borrowing terms or even losing access, while banks that use the market less seem to
have increased their borrowing.
Similarly, Column (7) shows that there is a reduction in the number of counterparties a bank
borrows from post-Lehman only after including borrower fixed effects. The coefficient on the
post-Lehman dummy is negative in the cross section but not significant. This suggests that a
given borrower in the sample borrows from fewer counterparties post-Lehman. Even those banks
which are able to access the fed funds market after the Lehman’s bankruptcy borrow from a
smaller number of counterparties.
19

It is important to note that when including borrower fixed effects in TABLE III the adjusted Rsquared jumps dramatically. So clearly bank characteristics are an important determinant of
banks’ borrowing in the fed funds market. In fact, including only borrower characteristics such
as assets, ROA, NPL levels and risk ratios instead of bank fixed effects, we can explain about
70% of the cross sectional variation of bank borrowing and interest rates (unreported results).
[TABLE III]
In TABLE V - TABLE VII we begin to disentangle the impact of the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy
on banks of different size and performance metrics. We first estimate a probit specification
where the dependent variable is a binary variable Accesst,b equal to one when banks borrow
(lend)

,

,

,

,

,

,

and then for each of the fed funds terms Ft,b (spread to target, log amount and log number of
counterparties):

,

,

,

,

,

,

where b indexes bank borrowers or lenders, t indexes time, Date is a vector of dummy variables
equal to 1 in the time period of interest and 0 otherwise, X

b,2007

is the bank characteristic of

interest such as % NPLs or % Repo measured as of December 31, 2007, Assetsb,2007, are bank
borrower or lender assets as of December 31, 2007, Amountb,t is the amount borrowed or lent in
the fed funds market (not included when the dependent variable is amount), and εb,t is an error
term. The Fed Funds terms specifications include αb fixed effects for bank borrowers (lenders).

20

We consider characteristics of borrowing (lending) banks in two ways. First, we split the sample
into three equally sized bins by asset size. The smallest banks are those with less than $937
million in assets, and the largest have more than $3.5 billion. In the fed funds terms
specifications (TABLE IV to TABLE VII), there are fewer observations in the smaller bank group,
because smaller banks are less frequent borrowers (both in the pre- and post-crisis periods). We
estimate the same specifications separately for each size group, allowing all of the coefficients to
vary with bank size. We present the coefficients for the largest and smallest banks to show how
pricing changes differently for large and small banks. When the difference in coefficients
between columns is statistically significant, the coefficients are shown in bold type. It is worth
emphasizing that the fed funds terms regressions include borrower (lender) fixed effects. Our
identification therefore is only driven by changes in the sensitivity of fed funds terms to banks’
pre-crisis characteristics. That means we estimate a change in the slope of the relationship
between bank characteristics and fed funds’ loan amounts and pricing.
Since the fed funds terms specifications already include controls for bank fixed effects, splitting
the sample by asset size also allows us to see if the time period effect is different for banks of
different sizes. We also control for the interaction of asset size and the date dummies in each
specification shown in TABLE V - TABLE VII, although these coefficients are not presented in the
tables. In the specifications with spread or counterparties as a dependent variable, we control for
interaction of amount borrowed divided by asset size and the date dummies in each specification,
although these coefficients are not presented in the tables. We next add the interaction of bank
characteristics such as the percentage of non-performing loans with time period dummies to the
specifications sorted by bank size. The end result is effectively a triple difference-in-difference
estimation, testing to see if the market becomes more sensitive to these underlying characteristics
21

in the post-Lehman period, and if fed funds borrowing of small and large banks is differentially
sensitive to these characteristics.
We first test to see if borrowing (lending) is associated with borrower (lender) characteristics
(TABLE V). We find that borrowers and lenders that are large access the fed funds market less
after Lehman’s bankruptcy. Furthermore, it is the worst performing large banks that access the
market least – the coefficient on % NPL is negative and statistically significant for large
borrowers. Surprisingly, this pattern is reversed for lenders – the worst performing large lenders
are actually more likely to lend on the Monday and Tuesday following Lehman’s bankruptcy.
TABLE V examines how interbank lending rates for large and small banks changed after the
Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy. While smaller borrowers see an increase in spreads of over 94
basis points on Monday, the larger borrowers have no significant increase in their spreads. PostLehman spread changes are similar for small and large lenders. In columns (3) and (4) and (7)
and (8) we add interactions of the post-Lehman dummies with non-performing loans as a proxy
of borrower and lender quality.15 Immediately after the Lehman’s bankruptcy, the relationship
between spreads and quality is no different from that of the pre-crisis period.
These results underscore again that interest rates in the fed fund markets did not become
increasingly sensitive to bank performance metrics in a consistent manner. Yet this does not
necessarily mean that lenders are not concerned about the counterparty risk of banks. But rather
the results suggest that lenders seem to be more likely to manage their risk exposure to individual
banks by the amount they lend to a given bank or even whether they lend at all to the bank. The
fact that interest rates go up for the smaller banks but not for the larger banks does not
15

Surprisingly, we do not consistently see a flight to quality as measured by ROA or risk ratio. These results are
available upon request.

22

necessarily constitute a flight to size. In contrast these trends could be driven by rationing in the
market. If only smaller banks are able to access the fed funds market after the Lehman Brothers
shock but at higher rates, we could find higher rates for smaller banks. But in this case the higher
rate is an indication that only smaller banks are able to access the market, while large banks are
not. The results of the next two tables will provide additional evidence to corroborate this
interpretation.
[TABLE V]
We next describe in TABLE VI the daily amount borrowed by banks in the fed funds market.
Interestingly we see a difference in the effect on larger versus smaller banks which comes
through differences in bank quality. The decline in borrowing on September 15th is largest for
large banks with high amounts of non-performing loans (-49.1). This means that the reduction in
loan amounts post Lehman for large banks is concentrated in banks with more non-performing
loans.
Borrowers that have higher quality metrics are able to access larger loans in the fed funds market
on September 15th. The interaction between NPLs and Monday shows banks with higher NPLs
are associated with lower borrowing post Lehman.16 The relationship is also economically large.
These results underscore that banks manage their risk exposure in the interbank market via
rationing of loan amounts rather than interest rates. Large banks with high percentages of NPLs
continue to borrow less even after the Federal Reserve’s investment in AIG was announced after
the close of the market on September 16th. In unreported analysis, we found similar results when
we estimated similar specifications looking only at a binary measure of whether a bank accessed
the market or not.
16

Similarly, lower ROAs and lower risk ratios are associated with lower borrowing post Lehman.

23

In contrast, lender characteristics such as NPLs are not associated with changes in the amount
lent immediately after Lehman Brothers. This means that even riskier banks did not hoard funds
on the Monday and Tuesday after Lehman’s failure. While we do not observe meaningful
differences in the lending amounts of riskier banks, it is impossible to know from amounts if
these lenders were trying to send a positive signal to the interbank market or simply did not want
to hoard cash.
[TABLE VI]
Finally in TABLE VII we look at the composition of counterparties. We again begin by splitting
the specification between the smallest and largest banks. Controlling for amount borrowed, we
see a sharp difference in the number of counterparties for smaller versus large borrowers. The
direct effect of the Monday (9/15) post-Lehman dummy now turns positive for smaller
borrowers while the coefficient for large borrowers is negative and highly significant; the point
estimate is -0.129. Large banks see a statistically significant reduction in counterparties they
borrow from while smaller banks have more counterparties immediately post Lehman. Smaller
banks do not seem to be as strongly affected by the Lehman shock. In fact, the market was
functioning well enough that small banks were able to add more counterparties in order to
maintain their level of borrowing from the market. The reduction in counterparties for larger
banks appears to be driven by larger banks with worse performance (as measured by NPLs). In
contrast, smaller banks’ number of counterparties does not appear to be associated with
performance.
We find an interesting relationship between lender characteristics and counterparties. For every
additional 1% in NPLs, larger lenders increase their counterparties by 8% on September 15th.

24

Effectively, worse performing larger banks are distributing the same amount of money to more
counterparties – spreading the signal that they are lending to even more banks. We do not see a
similar increase in counterparties for small banks, perhaps because it is more difficult for them to
quickly increase counterparties.
Overall we show that large banks that are borrowing in the fed funds market see a sharp increase
in spreads and a drop in loan amounts immediately following the Lehman’s bankruptcy. These
effects are particularly strong for large banks with high NPL levels. In contrast, small banks do
not experience the same fall in loan amounts. However, immediately before the Federal
Reserve’s $85 billion loan to AIG is announced (and again after the initial CPP announcement)
we see that spreads for large banks return to pre-crisis levels or below. These results suggest that
the Lehman’s bankruptcy led to a change in beliefs in the interbank market about whether the
authorities would let big banks fail. In response we see that lenders in the fed funds market
started both pricing the credit risk of and reducing exposure to poorly performing large banks
(rather than a complete freeze of the market). However, as soon as the AIG loan is announced
the fear of counterparty risk for large banks is alleviated and loan amounts and spreads go back
to pre-crisis levels. In contrast, we do not see any significant changes in banks’ average lending
amounts in response to the crisis. There is some evidence that especially larger banks lend to
more counterparties. These results do not seem consistent with liquidity hoarding by banks in the
interbank market.
[TABLE VII]

25

IX.

Discount Window Analysis
One concern with the preceding analysis is that observed transactions are the result of the
intersection of supply and demand. To cleanly differentiate between the supply and demand
effects we would need to observe the levels and changes of (unmet) demand and supply of
liquidity that banks have. This is very difficult to obtain since it entails knowing the amount and
the interest rate schedule at which each bank would have liked to borrow.
The overnight interbank market provides a rare opportunity to observe latent demand, since we
can observe other sources of funding that banks access. In particular we obtained data on the
amount of loans that banks draw down from the discount window. Borrowing from the discount
window is a near perfect proxy for latent or unmet demand: on the one hand it is provided by the
Federal Reserve at the same periodicity as fed funds, i.e. as daily overnight loans. But the rate is
higher than the target fed funds rate (the rate has been 25 basis point higher than the target rate
since March 17, 2008 and was 50 basis points higher prior to that). Second, while discount
window loans are collateralized, collateral is unlikely to be a limiting factor for discount window
access. Finally, the discount window can be accessed at the end of the day, allowing banks to
first transact in the fed funds market. However, in addition to the interest rate premium,
accessing the discount window is associated with a stigma. So banks will only resort to this form
of liquidity if they are shut out from other forms of funding.
Therefore, we first analyze whether the level of borrowing from the discount window increased
dramatically after the Lehman’s bankruptcy. Similar to the analysis in TABLE IV, we include in
the possible sample all banks that borrow from the fed funds market from April 2008 to February

26

2009, and indicate with a binary variable equal to one if they access the discount window.17 In a
second step we examine which types of banks accessed the discount window after Lehman. If the
main predictor of accessing the discount window is poor past performance, we infer that the fed
funds market is allocating funds to better banks, which would be consistent with the predicted
demand shortfalls of weaker banks. However, in contrast, if we see that even banks with good
past performance have to go to the discount window to meet their liquidity needs in the postLehman period, it would be a sign of dysfunction in the fed funds markets.
In column (1) of TABLE VIII we use a probit estimator of the likelihood that a bank goes to the
discount window pre-and post-Lehman controlling for the interest rate and lending amount this
bank had in its last transaction on the fed funds market. There is a clear increase in the likelihood
of accessing the discount window, especially on Monday, September 15th. In specifications (2)–
(5) we then explore the likelihood that a bank accesses the discount window as a function of
bank characteristics and its past borrowing behavior in the fed funds market. We find a very
strong and economically large correlation between bank ROA and the likelihood of accessing the
discount window. Only banks that have very poor performance as measured by ROA turn to the
discount window. We find similar results with NPL on Tuesday September 16th, but the NPL
results are not statistically significant in every time period, perhaps because the number of banks
accessing the window is quite small.
So overall, while we cannot rule out that some banks were screened out of the market it appears
that the turmoil in the interbank market cannot have been that big that completely normal and

17

We include as controls the amount borrowed on the most recent previous day. As a result, we exclude
observations where banks have not yet borrowed, resulting in a lower number of observations compared to the fed
funds access analysis (TABLE IV).

27

solvent banks had to turn to the discount window for liquidity. This provides evidence that the
interbank market was not completely frozen through the crisis.
[TABLE VIII]

X.

Historical Repo Financing as a Demand Measure
Our next measure of bank demand for fed funds exploits disruptions in other overnight funding
markets to identify banks that might have increased demand for overnight funds. According to
market participants, in normal times, banks will seek liquidity in the fed funds and repo markets
and will substitute between the markets depending on pricing (subject to collateral availability).
As shown by Gorton and Metrick (2009a) this market was severely disrupted after Lehman’s
failure, with dramatically increased haircuts and pricing. Therefore, to the extent that these two
markets are substitutes, post-Lehman fed funds borrowing demand should increase for banks that
fund a larger percentage of their assets with repo borrowing. We examine the relationship
between bank borrowing (lending) and changes in the access to overnight repo markets in TABLE
IX and TABLE X.
In TABLE IX and TABLE X, we interact % Repo, the percentage of assets the bank financed with
repurchase agreements (repos) as of December 31st, 2007 with the time period dummies. This
allows us to estimate the relationship between a proxy for demand for fed funds and fed funds
terms. The dependent variable in the first two columns is spread to target, in the next two
columns the log amount and in the final two columns the log number of counterparties. TABLE
IX examines the impact of increased liquidity demand for borrowers and TABLE X summarizes
the identical analysis for lenders. Immediately following Lehman’s bankruptcy, there is no
28

relationship between borrowers’ repo financing and their fed funds amount borrowed. In fact,
controlling for % NPL, the coefficients in column (4) are higher than those in column (3) of
TABLE IX in the three days immediately surrounding the Lehman’s bankruptcy (rows 2-4),
indicating that banks that should have higher demand for fed funds loans are not increasing their
borrowing more than banks which do not have reduced access to an important source of
overnight funding. If pre-crisis reliance on repo funding is an indicator for increased liquidity
demand post Lehman, our results suggest that lending in the fed fund market did not expand in
response to increased demand; not even for the best of these borrowers (those with low NPL
levels).
Just as borrowers which relied on the repo market for overnight financing should have higher
demand for fed funds, lenders which relied on the repo market for overnight financing might
reduce their supply of fed funds when the repo market dried up. In this market we do see that in
many cases the coefficients in column (4) of TABLE X are lower than the coefficients in column
(3) (rows 2-4) after Monday, September 15th although the difference is not statistically
significant. Again, this effect is reversed for lenders with higher NPLs. Lenders with high NPLs
and high repos actually lend more than did lenders with high NPLS and low repos, although the
difference is statistically significant in some time periods only.
[TABLE IX and TABLE X]

XI.

Predicted Demand
Finally, we attempt to estimate fed funds market demand by estimating the pre-crisis relationship
between fed funds borrowing, borrower characteristics and macroeconomic variables. We use
29

the estimates from the pre-crisis specification to predict post-crisis demand. We then calculate
the difference between predicted demand and actual borrowing. Of course, this methodology
assumes that the estimated pre-crisis relationships are similar to post-crisis relationships. While
this may not be the case, predicted demand based on pre-crisis correlations remains an
interesting counterfactual.
TABLE XI presents the results from the pre-crisis estimation (January 1, 2007 to August 29,
2008). We estimate an OLS model of the relationship between the log of amount borrowed and
the following bank characteristics: Daily: log of average amount borrowed in the previous
month, log of customer funds sent, log of customer funds received, difference between reserve
balance without fed funds transactions and required reserves (all from Federal Reserve
databases); Quarterly: assets, ROA, risk ratio, % NPL, % MBS, % Repos (from the Y-9C). We
also include the following daily macroeconomic variables: target fed funds rate, one month term
rates on: AA asset-backed commercial paper, certificates of deposit, financial commercial paper,
LIBOR and OIS, overnight rates on treasury repos and MBS repos. In addition, we allow fixed
effects for end of maintenance period days, calendar months and quarter end dates, and estimate
the model separately for small and large banks. We explain more than 60% of the variation in
amount borrowed with these variables.
We create a variable “forecast error” which is the difference between actual borrowing and
predicted borrowing and then see if bank characteristics are associated with actual borrowing
being significantly below predicted borrowing. In TABLE XII we replicate the analysis in the first
four columns of TABLE VI replacing as the dependent variable “forecast error.” When forecast
error is high, predicted borrowing is higher than actual borrowing, suggesting the possibility of
unmet demand. As expected, predicted borrowing is much higher than actual borrowing
30

immediately following the Lehman’s bankruptcy, especially for smaller banks. After September
17th, predicted values are much higher than actual values for the largest banks, while smaller
banks continue to borrow more than the pre-crisis relationships would predict. Most of that
difference is driven by bank characteristics, since the difference between smaller and larger
banks is no longer statistically significant once measures of quality are added. Post-crisis
borrowing shortfalls are associated with low quality banks (high NPLs) experiencing higher
shortfalls (see specifications (3) and (4) of TABLE XII).
[TABLE XI AND TABLE XII]

XII.

Conclusions

This research presents a first detailed look at the events in the fed funds market in the 2008
financial crisis. In the immediate aftermath of the Lehman’s bankruptcy we see that the market
seems to become sensitive to bank specific characteristics, not only in the amounts lent to
borrowers but even in the cost of funds. We see sharp differences between large and small banks
in their access to credit: Large banks show reduced amounts of daily borrowing after Lehman
and borrow from fewer counterparties. In fact, the interest rate spread at which large banks are
borrowing in the fed funds market after Lehman goes down. Assuming that in the very short-run
banks do not change their demand for liquidity, this is likely to be an effect of credit rationing. In
contrast, smaller banks were able to increase the amount borrowed from the interbank market
and even managed to add lending counterparties during the crisis. We do not find evidence of a
complete cessation of lending predicted by some theoretical models, nor do we find evidence
that riskier lenders are more likely to hoard liquidity at the height of the crisis.
31

We also see that only the worst performing banks in terms of ROA started accessing the Federal
Reserve’s discount window after the Lehman’s bankruptcy. It seems reasonable to assume that
these are banks which were rationed by the fed funds market since private banks were not willing
to lend to them. While again it is difficult to assess whether this means that interbank markets
operated efficiently after the crisis, it is, however, reassuring that we do not observe well
performing banks having to turn to the discount window. This would have been a very alarming
indication of dysfunction in the fed funds market.
This research is only a first step in understanding how the fed funds market has been affected by
the financial crisis and how robust this market is against financial contagion. It will be important
in future research to investigate more directly how lenders in the market reacted to the change in
the perception of bank risk. We need to understand much better how fed fund loans are priced
and how they are affected by expectations about government and central bank interventions. The
same is true for the decision on the extensive margin, e.g. the decision to add or drop
counterparties. Finally we believe that it is important to investigate the role that banking
relationships and repeat interactions in the fed funds market can play in improved monitoring of
counterparty risks or as a vehicle to provide coinsurance of liquidity needs.

32

FIGURE 1: DAILY AMOUNT OF FEDERAL FUNDS TRANSACTIONS ($ MILLIONS)
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Daily Amount

Avg. Monthy Amount

FIGURE 1 shows average daily amount borrowed in the fed funds market in US $ millions and the monthly average of this amount
from January 2nd, 2007 to August 28th, 2009. The red lines indicate the following dates: i) August 9th, 2007 – BNP Paribas tells
investors that they cannot value assets in two funds ii) March 16th, 2008 – JP Morgan announces that it will acquire Bear Stearns
for $2 a share, iii) September 15th, 2008 – Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy after failing to find a merger partner, and iv)
October 9th, 2008 – First day of the first maintenance period after the Federal Reserve’s announcement that it will pay interest
on required reserve balances and on excess balances held by or on behalf of depository institutions.

FIGURE 2: DAILY AMOUNT OF FEDERAL FUNDS TRANSACTIONS ($ MILLIONS)

300
250
200
150
100
50
0
03/03/08

04/03/08

05/03/08

06/03/08

Daily Amount

07/03/08

08/03/08

09/03/08

10/03/08

Avg. Monthy Amount

FIGURE 2 shows average daily amount borrowed in the fed funds market in US $ millions and the monthly average of this amount
from March 3rd, 2008 to October 8th, 2008. The red lines indicate the following dates: i) March 16th, 2008 – JP Morgan
announces that it will acquire Bear Stearns for $2 a share, and ii) September 15th, 2008 – Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy
after failing to find a merger partner.

33

FIGURE 3: DAILY NUMBER OF BORROWERS AND LENDERS
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

Number of Borrowers

Number of Lenders

FIGURE 3 shows average daily number of borrowers and lenders in the fed funds market from January 2nd, 2007 to August 28th,
2009. The red lines indicate the following dates: i) August 9th, 2007 – BNP Paribas tells investors that they cannot value assets in
two funds ii) March 16th, 2008 – JP Morgan announces that it will acquire Bear Stearns for $2 a share, iii) September 15th, 2008 –
Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy after failing to find a merger partner, and iv) October 9th, 2008 – First day of the first
maintenance period after the Federal Reserve’s announcement that it will pay interest on required reserve balances and on excess
balances held by or on behalf of depository institutions.

FIGURE 4: DAILY NUMBER OF BORROWERS AND LENDERS
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
03/03/08

04/03/08

05/03/08

06/03/08

Number of Borrowers

07/03/08

08/03/08

09/03/08

10/03/08

Number of Lenders

FIGURE 4 shows average daily number of borrowers and lenders in the fed funds market from March 3rd, 2008 to October 8th,
2008. The red lines indicate the following dates: i) March 16th, 2008 – JP Morgan announces that it will acquire Bear Stearns for
$2 a share, and ii) September 15th, 2008 – Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy after failing to find a merger partner.

34

FIGURE 5: DAILY FED FUNDS
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00

Fed Funds Rate

25th Percentile

75th Percentile

FIGURE 5 shows the weighted average daily fed funds rate as well as the daily fed funds rate in the 25th and 75th percentile of
borrowers from January 2nd, 2007 to August 28th, 2009. The red lines indicate the following dates: i) August 9th, 2007 – BNP
Paribas tells investors that they cannot value assets in two funds ii) March 16th, 2008 – JP Morgan announces that it will acquire
Bear Stearns for $2 a share, iii) September 15th, 2008 – Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy after failing to find a merger
partner, and iv) October 9th, 2008 – First day of the first maintenance period after the Federal Reserve’s announcement that it
will pay interest on required reserve balances and on excess balances held by or on behalf of depository institutions.

FIGURE 6: DAILY FED FUNDS RATES
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
03/03/08

04/03/08

05/03/08

Fed Funds Rate

06/03/08

07/03/08

25th Percentile

08/03/08

09/03/08

10/03/08

75th Percentile

FIGURE 6 shows the weighted average daily fed funds rate as well as the daily fed funds rate for the 25th and 75th percentile of
borrowers from March 3rd, 2008 to October 8th, 2008. The red lines indicate the following dates: i) March 16th, 2008 – JP
Morgan announces that it will acquire Bear Stearns for $2 a share, and ii) September 15th, 2008 – Lehman Brothers files for
bankruptcy after failing to find a merger partner.

35

TABLE I : FED FUNDS MARKET SUMMARY STATISTICS

Pre-Lehman (4/1 - 9/11):
Spread to Target
Amount ($M)
Counterparties
Borrowers / Day
Surrounding Lehman (9/12 - 9/16)
Spread to Target
Amount ($M)
Counterparties
Borrowers / Day
Post-Lehman (9/17 - 2/28)
Spread to Target
Amount ($M)
Counterparties
Borrowers / Day

Obs.

25%

12,391
12,391
12,391
115

0.0112
20.0
1.0
.278

297
297
297
3
8,315
8,315
8,315
111

Median

Mean

75%

StdDev.

0.1006
70.0
2.0
.303

0.1260
1,234.3
7.6
.299

0.2250
395.0
8.0
.317

0.1941
4,069.4
13.9
.028

0.0000
20.0
1.0
.269

0.1875
85.0
2.0
.275

0.2234
1,264.1
7.4
.275

0.5000
423.2
8.0
.281

0.6173
4,327.7
13.1
.006

-0.4905
20.0
1.0
.183

0.1000
85.0
2.0
.203

-0.0399
1,331.9
5.9
.208

0.2835
465.0
7.0
.228

0.5281
4,204.0
8.9
.032

Note: The sample consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. Spread to
Target is the weighted average spread between the banks’ fed funds loans and the target federal funds rate on that day. Amount is
amount borrowed by a bank in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of US $). Counterparties is the number of
counterparties each bank has on that day. Borrowers / Day is the number of active borrowers per day as a percent of all 360
borrowers that borrowed from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009.

36

TABLE II: FED FUNDS MARKET SUMMARY STATISTICS
Obs.

25%

Median

Mean

75%

StdDev.

Borrower Characteristics:
Non-Performing Loans (%)
Assets ($M)
Repurchase Agreements (%)

360
360
360

0.4148
487
0.0000

0.8252
1,403
1.7068

1.1424
27,832
3.1951

1.3581
4,684
5.2044

1.4801
176,337
3.8930

Lender Characteristics:
Non-Performing Loans (%)
Assets ($M)
Repurchase Agreements (%)

376
376
376

0.2442
325
0.0000

0.7781
831
0.6372

1.2894
26,184
2.6752

1.4328
3,312
3.8593

1.9332
172,577
4.1637

21,003
21,003
21,003
229
229
229

-0.0076
20.0
1.0
109,313.5
1.0
0.2492

0.1001
75.0
2.0
125,032.2
2.0
1.9509

0.0617
1,273.4
6.9
122,392.8
1.4
1.3390

0.2500
425.0
8.0
139,279.3
2.0
2.0435

0.3807
4,127.0
12.2
23,467.1
0.8
0.8890

Fed Funds Variables:
Spread to Target
Amount ($M)
Counterparties
Total Amount ($M)
Target Rate (%)
Fed Funds Rate (%)

Note: The sample for borrowers consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009.
The sample for lenders consists of 26,700 observations from 376 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. NonPerforming Loans (%) is total non-performing loans divided by total loans. Assets is total bank assets (in millions of US $).
Repurchase Agreements (%) is the amount of securities sold under agreements to repurchase divided by the amount of total
assets. Note that Non-Performing Loans (%) and Repurchase Agreements (%) are in percentage format here, but are in decimal
format for all specifications. Bank characteristics are measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. Spread to Target is
the weighted average spread between the borrowers’ fed funds loans and the target federal funds rate on that day. Amount is
amount borrowed by each bank in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of US $). Counterparties is the number of
counterparties each bank has on that day. Total Amount is the daily sum of Amount across banks. Target Rate (%) is the
overnight target rate set by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Fed Funds Rate (%) is the weighted average daily fed
funds rate.

37

TABLE III: DEPENDENT VARIABLES, BORROWERS
Access

Spread to Target

Probit
(1)
2 weeks Pre-Leh (8/29-9/4)
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)
Friday (9/12)
Monday (9/15)
Tuesday (9/16)
Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)
Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)
1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)
Borrower Fixed Effects
N
Adjusted R-squared

-0.059
(0.034)
-0.095
(0.037)
-0.063
(0.047)
-0.080
(0.046)
-0.097
(0.047)
-0.148
(0.032)
-0.300
(0.048)
-0.228
(0.040)
No
81,576

OLS
(2)
*
***

*
**
***
***
***

0.008
(0.008)
-0.022
(0.008)
0.067
(0.011)
0.242
(0.087)
-0.021
(0.053)
-0.224
(0.037)
-0.440
(0.047)
-0.515
(0.028)
No
21,003
0.27

Amount

OLS
(3)

***
***
***

***
***
***

0.008
(0.006)
-0.017
(0.007)
0.076
(0.008)
0.253
(0.087)
-0.013
(0.049)
-0.229
(0.036)
-0.388
(0.043)
-0.494
(0.026)
Yes
21,003
0.51

**
***
***

***
***
***

Counterparties

OLS
(4)

OLS
(5)

OLS
(6)

-0.051
(0.101)
0.016
(0.104)
-0.059
(0.152)
0.010
(0.150)
0.070
(0.141)
-0.050
(0.094)
0.297
(0.168)
0.152
(0.115)
No
21,003
0.00

-0.077
(0.056)
-0.033
(0.055)
-0.076
(0.082)
-0.190
(0.093)
-0.096
(0.076)
-0.249
(0.063)
-0.319
(0.093)
-0.259
(0.082)
Yes
21,003
0.86

0.029
(0.053)
0.059
(0.056)
0.030
(0.073)
-0.029
(0.075)
0.035
(0.073)
0.035
(0.050)
0.145
(0.085)
-0.018
(0.064)
No
21,003
0.00

*

**

***
***
***

OLS
(7)

*

-0.004
(0.035)
0.008
(0.037)
0.002
(0.049)
-0.122
(0.053)
-0.062
(0.050)
-0.096
(0.038)
-0.182
(0.054)
-0.252
(0.055)
Yes
21,003
0.83

**

**
***
***

Note: The sample used in column (1) consists of 81,576 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009, where observations have been filled in with 0’s on days
which banks do not borrow. The sample used in columns (2) – (7) consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009, where only banks that
borrow are present. Access is an indicator equal to 1 if the bank borrowed on that day. Spread to Target is the weighted average spread between the banks’ fed funds loans and the target
federal funds rate on that day. Amount is the logarithm of the amount borrowed in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of US $). Counterparties is the logarithm of the number of
counterparties each bank has on that day.

38

TABLE IV: IMPACT OF LEHMAN EVENT ON ACCESS
Borrowers
Access
2 weeks Pre-Leh (8/29-9/4)

Large

Small

Large

Small

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-3.586 ***
(0.937)

1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)

-4.102 ***
(0.976)

Friday (9/12)

-3.888 ***
(1.101)

Monday (9/15)

-6.038 ***
(1.705)

Tuesday (9/16)

-5.120 ***
(1.324)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)

-4.712 ***
(0.919)

Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

-5.378 ***
(1.141)

1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)

-5.116 ***
(0.900)

2 weeks Pre-Leh x %NPL

-43.195 **
(17.005)

1 week Pre-Leh x %NPL

-49.976 ***
(17.394)

Friday x %NPL

-42.300 **
(17.800)

Monday x %NPL

-71.045 ***
(23.368)

Tuesday x %NPL

-51.931 ***
(19.379)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR x %NPL

-56.501 ***
(17.723)

Post IOR, pre-CPP x %NPL

-57.972 ***
(21.747)

1 month post-CPP x %NPL

-54.558 ***
(17.184)

Borrower Fixed Effects
N

Lenders

-0.995
(1.104)
-1.070
(1.165)
-2.352
(2.245)
-1.071
(1.782)
0.328
(1.687)
-3.002 ***
(0.969)
-4.703 ***
(1.364)
-2.413 **

-2.025 ***
(0.642)
-1.800 ***
(0.614)
-1.764 **
(0.739)
-2.349 ***
(0.724)
-2.938 ***
(0.739)
-2.067 ***
(0.559)
-2.162 ***
(0.662)
-3.247 ***

0.174
(0.840)
-0.195
(0.829)
0.566
(0.890)
0.347
(0.900)
0.386
(0.888)
0.321
(0.791)
0.022
(0.900)
-0.715

(0.995)

(0.558)

(0.909)

2.249

15.485

3.750

(4.450)

(9.740)

(5.306)

0.360

17.683 *

4.942

(4.397)

(9.821)

(5.282)

-17.150

15.009

6.436

(18.111)

(10.194)

(5.892)

0.494
(5.869)
0.589

29.302 ***
(11.338)
22.341 **

-0.194
(5.949)
2.237

(4.784)

(10.622)

(5.776)

1.954

10.747

1.148

(3.852)

(9.047)

(4.677)

3.032

-1.624

3.443

(4.626)

(10.786)

(5.787)

4.329

5.193

1.208

(4.578)

(8.838)

(5.023)

No

No

No

No

23,378

31,948

27,696

28,357

Note: The sample for borrowers consists of 81,576 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009.
The sample for lenders consists of 84,853 observations from 379 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. We divide the
samples into terciles, where Large is the top tercile of assets and Small is the bottom tercile of assets. The dependent variable is
Access, an indicator variable equal to 1 if the bank borrowed / lent federal funds on that day. %NPL is the amount of nonperforming loans divided by the amount of total loans. Assets is the logarithm of bank assets (in millions of US $). Bank
characteristics are measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. All specifications control for the interaction of Assets
and the time period dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below
coefficient estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of significance, respectively.
Coefficients are bolded where their difference is statistically significant.

39

TABLE V: IMPACT OF THE LEHMAN EVENT ON SPREADS
Borrowers
Spread to Target
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)

Small

Large

Small

Large

Small

Large

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.021

0.029

0.093

-0.005

-0.052

(0.024)

(0.041)

(0.500)

(0.047)

(0.050)

-0.017 **
(0.007)

Friday (9/12)

0.079 ***
(0.010)

Monday (9/15)

0.154
(0.114)

Tuesday (9/16)

-0.098 *
(0.058)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)

-0.322 ***
(0.043)

Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

-0.483 ***
(0.043)

1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)

Lenders

Large

-0.584 ***
(0.027)

0.104 ***
(0.035)
0.943 ***
(0.243)
0.355 *
(0.203)

-0.008
(0.067)

0.049

0.144
(0.122)

0.175

0.545

(0.516)

(1.244)
1.537
(0.954)

-0.198

-0.065

3.727

(0.186)

(0.283)

(7.433)

Monday x %NPL

0.079

-0.280

(0.154)

(0.396)

0.953

Post IOR, pre-CPP x %NPL
1 month post-CPP x %NPL

-0.420 ***
(0.056)
-0.486 ***

(0.012)
0.322 ***
(0.119)
-0.297 ***
(0.066)
-0.501 ***
(0.068)
-0.526 ***
(0.057)
-0.552 ***

0.022

(0.069)

(0.080)

-0.478

0.431

(0.574)

(0.833)

-1.357 ***
(0.420)
-1.358 ***
(0.174)
-0.961 ***
(0.306)
-0.442 ***

0.400
(0.381)
0.043
(0.392)
-0.158
(0.454)
-0.150
-0.017

(1.646)

(0.825)

(0.720)

(0.230)

3.569

-3.732

-0.538

-0.050

(3.032)

(2.323)

(0.592)

(0.410)

3.193

-1.447

2.554

(7.393)

(6.022)

(5.379)

-19.354 **

(9.397)

(8.324)

10.114

-10.845 ***

(6.911)

(3.327)

(0.042)

0.080

-0.950

-17.575 *

(0.035)

0.062 ***

-0.298

7.994 **
(3.839)
-0.027

-3.714
(2.910)

8.201

-6.036

-0.500

(4.601)

(3.354)

4.560

2.733 **
(1.173)

0.371
(2.538)

(1.770)

(9.622)
(4.671)

Adjusted R-squared

-0.427 ***
(0.045)

(0.008)

(0.290)

(18.405)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR x %NPL

-0.242 ***
(0.086)

-0.014 *

(0.158)

31.407 *

Tuesday x %NPL

(0.013)

(2.340)

0.254

-0.166 ***

0.072 ***

0.699

(0.336)

(0.041)

(0.010)

(0.747)

0.146

Friday x %NPL

N

(0.195)

(0.091)

1 week Pre-Leh x %NPL

Fixed Effects

0.360 *

-0.026 ***

Small

-4.888 *
(2.765)

-2.293

-2.296

(2.148)

(1.800)

Borrower

Borrower

Borrower

Borrower

Lender

Lender

Lender

Lender

13,887

1,951

13,887

1,951

10,469

9,233

10,469

9,233

0.50

0.49

0.52

0.51

0.40

0.51

0.41

0.52

40

Note: The sample for borrowers consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. The sample for lenders consists of 26,700 observations from
376 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. We divide the samples into terciles, where Large is the top tercile of assets and Small is the bottom tercile of assets. The dependent
variable is Spread to Target – the weighted average spread between the banks’ fed funds loans and the target federal funds rate on that day. Assets is the logarithm of bank assets (in
millions of US $). %NPL is total non-performing loans divided by total loans. All specifications control for amount borrowed as a percentage of bank assets. Specifications (3), (4), (7) and
(8) include controls for the interaction of Assets and the time periods. Bank characteristics are measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. Standard errors are clustered at the
bank level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of significance, respectively. Coefficients are bolded where their difference is statistically
significant.

41

TABLE VI: IMPACT OF THE LEHMAN EVENT ON AMOUNT BORROWED / LENT
Borrowers
Amount
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)
Friday (9/12)
Monday (9/15)

Small

Large

Small

Large

Small

Large

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.047

0.057

0.368

-0.317

0.079

-0.028

(0.074)

(0.065)

(0.305)

(0.549)

(0.074)

(0.055)

(0.344)

-0.084

0.119

-0.166

0.134

-0.006

0.359

-0.364

(0.099)

(0.085)

(0.501)

(0.118)

(0.073)

(0.511)

(0.589)

-0.289 **
(0.117)

Tuesday (9/16)
Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)

-0.491
(0.585)
0.117

0.421

-0.070

(0.424)

(0.575)

(0.102)

-0.267 ***
-0.289 ***
-0.273 ***

-0.082

-0.300

0.635

-0.084

(0.092)

(0.410)

(1.275)

(0.073)

-0.536 **
(0.224)

-0.030
(0.575)

17.315 ***
(5.604)

-0.171

0.351

0.660

(0.168)

(0.497)

(1.676)

-49.652 ***
(13.668)

Friday x %NPL

-31.274
(22.139)

Monday x %NPL

-49.159 ***

Tuesday x %NPL
Post-AIG, pre-IOR x %NPL

-0.199 **
(0.082)
-0.177 ***
(0.062)

(8)
-0.666 *
(0.382)

0.280

-0.339

(0.529)

(0.519)

0.411

-0.507

(0.523)

(0.550)

0.020

-0.468

(0.373)

(0.395)

-0.157

-0.064

-0.712

-0.712

(0.143)

(0.084)

(0.665)

(0.530)

-0.543 ***
(0.122)

-0.185 *
(0.097)

0.011
(0.638)
7.881 *

-7.077
(4.812)

(4.100)

-7.946 *
(4.127)
-12.037 ***

-1.456 *
(0.761)
-2.307
(1.647)

6.189

-4.328

(6.602)

(2.683)

0.397

-5.779 *

(2.695)

(5.463)

-35.325

-6.169

4.378

-4.511

(25.199)

(11.294)

(5.699)

(2.946)

-1.719

0.407

-4.041

(6.967)

(4.188)

(2.777)

(14.919)
2.210
(34.169)
1 month post-CPP x %NPL

-0.194 **
(0.080)

0.573 *

Small

(19.010)

-46.921 ***

Post IOR, pre-CPP x %NPL

Adjusted R-squared

-0.002
(0.103)

-0.196

1 week Pre-Leh x %NPL

N

-1.081 **
(0.436)

(0.130)

(0.103)

Fixed Effects

(0.425)

-0.079

(0.108)
1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)

-0.060
(0.119)

-1.283 ***

(0.096)
(0.084)
Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

Lenders

Large

8.930 ***
(2.721)

(3.172)

-0.775

0.506

(6.460)

(3.569)

-13.318

0.273

-5.864

-2.440

(16.879)

(6.538)

(8.891)

(3.930)

Borrower

Borrower

Borrower

Borrower

Lender

Lender

Lender

Lender

13,887

1,951

13,887

1,951

10,469

9,233

10,469

9,233

0.81

0.78

0.82

0.78

0.83

0.94

0.84

0.94

42

Note: The sample for borrowers consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. The sample for lenders consists of 26,700 observations from
376 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. We divide the samples into terciles, where Large is the top tercile of assets and Small is the bottom tercile of assets. The dependent
variable is Log Amount – the logarithm of the amount of a bank’s loans in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of US $). Assets is the logarithm of bank assets (in millions of US $).
%NPL is total non-performing loans divided by total loans. Specifications (3), (4), (7) and (8) include controls for the interaction of Assets and the time periods. Bank characteristics are
measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of
significance, respectively. Coefficients are bolded where their difference is statistically significant.

43

TABLE VII: IMPACT OF THE LEHMAN EVENT ON NUMBER OF COUNTERPARTIES
Borrowers
Counterparties
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)
Friday (9/12)
Monday (9/15)

Small

Large

Small

Large

Small

Large

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.005

0.030

0.060

-0.111

0.016

0.005

0.052

-0.229

(0.036)

(0.024)

(0.186)

(0.258)

(0.039)

(0.032)

(0.194)

(0.321)

-0.005

0.041

0.004

-0.220

0.069

0.032

-0.101

-0.130

(0.051)

(0.043)

(0.211)

(0.208)

(0.057)

(0.028)

(0.297)

(0.211)

-0.129 **
(0.052)

Tuesday (9/16)

-0.078
(0.054)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)
Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

0.038

0.332

-0.244

-0.024

-0.042

0.273

-0.159

(0.260)

(0.274)

(0.057)

(0.041)

(0.252)

(0.230)

0.151 **
(0.076)

-0.060

0.067
(0.056)

-0.113 **
-0.267 ***
(0.054)

-0.030
(0.031)
-0.003
(0.032)

1 week Pre-Leh x %NPL

0.708 **
(0.292)
0.538 ***
(0.188)
0.522 *
(0.277)
0.973 ***
(0.266)
-20.991 ***
(6.547)

Friday x %NPL
Monday x %NPL

-0.054
(0.299)

-0.131

-0.222

(0.376)

(0.355)

-0.122 ***
(0.040)
-0.245 ***
(0.078)
-0.302 ***
(0.051)

-0.035

-0.122

-0.295

(0.041)

(0.203)

(0.372)

0.034

-0.366

(0.053)

(0.354)

-0.658 *
(0.362)

-0.083

0.053

-0.778

(0.069)

(0.237)

(0.713)

5.224 **

-1.130
(1.249)

(2.432)

-0.007
(0.780)

-4.871

5.255

-0.504

(3.353)

(0.724)

-22.845 **

Post-AIG, pre-IOR x %NPL

-22.105 **

Post IOR, pre-CPP x %NPL

-23.640 *

(9.567)
(12.500)

Adjusted R-squared

0.067
(1.832)

-0.051
(0.042)

(3.517)

(11.065)

N

-0.502
(0.523)

-0.034
(0.072)

-12.604

(7.678)

1 month post-CPP x %NPL

-0.481 *
(0.291)

(10.730)
-16.927 **

Tuesday x %NPL

Fixed Effects

Small

(0.037)

(0.040)
(0.056)
1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)

Lenders

Large

7.800 ***

-0.964

-0.688

(1.729)

(2.938)

-3.876

3.213

-1.099

(3.453)

(4.364)

(1.856)

0.809

0.228

-0.088

(1.874)

(2.592)

(0.974)

6.898 *

-0.245
(0.993)

(3.950)

(1.586)

1.300
(2.113)

-6.547

0.761

0.638

-0.705

(9.678)

(1.446)

(4.197)

(1.982)

Borrower

Borrower

Borrower

Borrower

Lender

Lender

Lender

Lender

13,887

1,951

13,887

1,951

10,469

9,233

10,469

9,233

0.87

0.62

0.89

0.62

0.85

0.92

0.85

0.92

44

Note: The sample for borrowers consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. The sample for lenders consists of 26,700 observations from
376 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. We divide the samples into terciles, where Large is the top tercile of assets and Small is the bottom tercile of assets. The dependent
variable is Counterparties – the logarithm of the number of counterparties each bank has on that day. Assets is the logarithm of bank assets (in millions of US $). %NPL is total nonperforming loans divided by total loans. All specifications control for amount borrowed as a percentage of bank assets. Specifications (3), (4), (7) and (8) include controls for the interaction
of Assets and the time periods. Bank characteristics are measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of significance, respectively. Coefficients are bolded where their difference is statistically significant.

45

TABLE VIII: DISCOUNT WINDOW BORROWING
Percent

%NPL

Borrowers

(1)

2 weeks Pre-Leh (8/29-9/4)

1.0

0.057

1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)

1.6

Access

(0.176)
0.253 **
(0.116)
Friday (9/12)

1.7

0.266
(0.163)

Monday (9/15)

3.9

0.640 ***
(0.139)

Tuesday (9/16)

1.7

0.264
(0.180)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)

2.3

0.387 ***
(0.096)

Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

2.4

0.379 ***
(0.142)

1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)

2.1

0.317 ***
(0.122)

2 weeks Pre-Leh x Characteristic
1 week Pre-Leh x Characteristic
Friday x Characteristic
Monday x Characteristic
Tuesday x Characteristic

(2)
-0.879 ***
(0.308)
-1.006 ***
(0.290)
-1.212 ***
(0.384)

1 month post-CPP x Characteristic

(0.479)
-1.156 **
(0.556)

(0.315)
-0.970 ***
(0.285)
-1.085 ***
(0.330)

(0.512)
-0.885 *
(0.461)
-1.035 **
(0.507)

-0.051

-0.155

-0.037

(0.333)

(0.526)

-0.724 **
(0.287)

-0.665
(0.490)

-0.597 *
(0.335)

-0.543
(0.511)

-0.115

-0.025

-0.082

-0.013

(0.373)

(0.560)

(0.323)

(0.494)

1.188

1.300

(0.743)

(0.878)

1.207 *
(0.670)

1.288
(0.791)

0.574

0.689

0.621

0.710

(0.548)

(0.712)

(0.498)

(0.645)

-17.938

-17.322

-29.462

-30.274

(18.984)

(18.761)

(22.153)

(21.743)

-2.970

-2.666

-25.286

-26.473

(7.859)

(7.768)

(16.795)

(16.175)

3.473

3.756

-34.010

-33.989

(5.280)

(5.240)

(24.860)

(24.646)

-4.312

-4.294

(9.773)

(9.803)
7.921 *
(4.328)

1.546

1.562

(3.762)

(3.815)

-50.817 **
(24.612)
-75.161 ***
(27.737)
-43.624 **
(17.305)

4.578

4.498

-41.523

(5.462)

(5.562)

(25.291)

-52.650 **
(24.136)
-75.552 ***
(27.432)
-45.363 ***
(16.914)
-44.179 *
(24.892)

3.936

3.943

-27.866

-30.432

(4.312)

(4.378)

(24.591)

(24.161)

Amount
Previous Fed Funds
Spread
Same Day Fed Funds
Amount
Same Day Fed Funds
Access Dummy
N

-0.922 *

(5)
-0.823

(0.546)

Previous Fed Funds

Borrower Fixed Effects

(0.536)

-0.909 ***

-0.175

7.767 *

Post IOR, pre-CPP x Characteristic

-0.786

(4)

(0.337)

(4.315)
Post-AIG, pre-IOR x Characteristic

RoA
(3)

0.068

0.068

(0.070)

(0.069)

0.086

0.118

(0.209)

(0.209)

-0.071

-0.072

(0.051)

(0.052)

0.238

0.250

(0.186)

(0.186)

No

No

No

No

No

64,583

64,583

64,583

64,583

64,583

Note: The sample consists of 64,583 observations from 359 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. The dependent
variable is Access, an indicator variable equal to 1 if the bank borrowed from the discount window on that day. Percent
Borrowers is the daily percentage of active borrowers over the total number of borrowers in the sample, averaged across the days
in the different time periods. %NPL is the amount of non-performing loans divided by the amount of total loans. ROA is net
income divided by assets. Assets is the logarithm of bank assets (in millions of US $). Bank characteristics are measured as of
the Call Report as of December 2007. Previous Fed Funds Amount is the logarithm of the total amount borrowed in the fed
funds market on the most recent previous day. Previous Fed Funds Spread is the weighted average spread paid in the fed funds
market on the most recent previous day. Same Day Fed Funds Amount is the logarithm of the total amount borrowed in the fed
funds market on the same day. Same Day Fed Funds Access Dummy is an indicator variable equal to one if the bank borrowed in
the fed funds market on that day. Specifications (2) through (5) control for the interaction of Assets and the time period
dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses below coefficient estimates. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of significance, respectively.

46

TABLE IX: IMPACT OF LEHMAN EVENT ON SPREAD, AMOUNT AND COUNTERPARTIES FOR BORROWERS, SPLIT BY DEMAND PROXIES
Spread to Target
% Repo ≥ / <
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)
Friday (9/12)
Monday (9/15)
Tuesday (9/16)

< 0.0

≥ 0.04

< 0.0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.015

-0.004

(0.131)

(0.033)

(0.364)

(0.262)

0.135

0.018

-0.554

-0.489

(0.116)

(0.059)

(0.370)

(0.484)

-0.498

0.229

(1.146)

(0.548)

(0.474)

(0.536)

(0.258)

-0.081

-0.413

0.240

0.245

(0.387)

(0.516)

(0.397)

(0.272)

1.225 *
1.324 ***
(0.165)

Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

1.965 ***
(0.711)

1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)

0.671 ***
(0.187)

1 week Pre-Leh x %NPL
Friday x %NPL

1 month post-CPP x %NPL
Borrower Fixed Effects

-1.910 **
(0.952)

-15.961 **
-8.171 *

-0.647 **
(0.280)

56.991 **
(25.808)

-23.585 *
-27.732 *
(14.304)

-2.873

-18.191

(6.291)

(17.008)

9.691

2.944

(7.600)

(5.530)

-10.226

2.973

(9.763)

(11.334)

16.987 *
(10.098)

(0.124)
-0.569 **

-0.168
(0.170)
0.078

-0.107

(12.304)

-0.225 *

(0.215)

(0.376)

3.065

(0.077)

-0.415

-0.383

(3.848)

-0.322 ***

(0.586)

(0.372)
-4.030

1.230

-0.319

0.200

(6.195)

-4.313 *

0.149

(0.170)
1.489

(4.730)
Post IOR, pre-CPP x %NPL

-0.900 *
(0.503)

(1.239)

(7.541)
Post-AIG, pre-IOR x %NPL

-0.011
(0.242)

-1.006 **

-0.078

(9.540)
Tuesday x %NPL

0.098
(0.277)

-1.021 ***

(1.416)
(2.382)
Monday x %NPL

Counterparties

≥ 0.04

(0.648)
Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)

Amount

< 0.0

-35.433 **
(14.462)
-55.830 *
(31.591)

0.769 ***
(0.274)

≥ 0.04
(6)
0.241
(0.170)
0.189
(0.135)
0.438 **
(0.207)
0.700 ***
(0.234)
0.615 ***
(0.159)
0.546 **
(0.238)
0.758 ***
(0.183)

-0.901

-8.516

(1.558)

(7.377)

-6.975 **
(3.447)

-11.256
(8.868)

-19.842

0.699

5.921

(25.536)

(2.526)

(9.915)

-34.729 **
(14.169)
-23.874 *
(12.373)

-10.814 **
(5.106)

-6.150
(11.703)

-1.927

-8.148

(1.630)

(10.662)

-18.890

0.446

-19.795

(39.931)

(2.216)

(13.864)

5.159

-0.311

-7.708

-0.818

(4.121)

(4.494)

(9.504)

(19.083)

-3.075 **
(1.447)

-7.488
(9.674)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

N

2,799

9,927

2,799

9,927

2,799

9,927

Adjusted R-squared

0.58

0.50

0.85

0.87

0.89

0.93

47

Note: The sample consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. We divide the samples into terciles where banks in the bottom tercile have
%Repo value of less than .00176 and banks in the top tercile have a %Repo value of greater than or equal to .03721. The dependent variables are: Spread to Target – the weighted average
spread between the banks’ fed funds loans and the target federal funds rate on that day; Amount – the logarithm of the amount borrowed in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of
US $); and Counterparties – the logarithm of the number of counterparties each bank has on that day. All specifications include controls for the interaction of Assets and the time period
dummies. Specifications (1), (2), (5) and (6) control for amount borrowed as a percentage of bank assets. %Repo is the amount of securities sold under agreements to repurchase divided by
the amount of total assets. %NPL is total non-performing loans divided by total loans. Bank characteristics are measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. Standard errors are
clustered at the bank level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of significance, respectively. Coefficients are bolded where their difference is
statistically significant.

48

TABLE X: IMPACT OF LEHMAN EVENT ON SPREAD, AMOUNT AND COUNTERPARTIES FOR LENDERS, SPLIT BY DEMAND PROXIES
Spread to Target
% Repo ≥ / <
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)
Friday (9/12)

≤ 0.0

≥ 0.03

≤ 0.0

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.002

0.040

-0.292

0.279

-0.090

-0.008

(0.029)

(0.040)

(0.218)

(0.264)

(0.144)

(0.151)

-0.120

0.081

-0.104

-0.070

(0.050)

(0.307)

(0.325)

(0.143)

(0.175)

-0.673

-0.008

-0.289

0.093

0.079

(0.460)

(0.287)

(0.388)

(0.120)

(0.165)

-0.119

-0.073

0.049

-0.119

(0.378)

(0.405)

(0.212)

(0.277)

-0.163

-0.269

0.076

-0.026

(0.262)

(0.340)

(0.203)

(0.169)

0.215

0.106

0.260

0.111

(0.324)

(0.435)

(0.241)

(0.277)

0.218

0.166

0.235

0.117

(0.501)

(0.523)

(0.380)

(0.224)

0.071 **
1.064 ***
(0.359)

Tuesday (9/16)

0.224
(0.207)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)

-0.080
(0.209)

Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

-0.480 *
(0.267)

1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)
1 week Pre-Leh x %NPL
Friday x %NPL
Monday x %NPL
Tuesday x %NPL
Post-AIG, pre-IOR x %NPL

-0.557 ***

1 month post-CPP x %NPL
Lender Fixed Effects
N
Adjusted R-squared

0.084 *

-1.169 ***
(0.357)
-1.399 ***
(0.145)
-1.073 ***
(0.198)
-0.660 ***

(0.177)

(0.149)

0.066

-1.441

(0.147)

(1.119)

-0.256

-0.317

(0.310)

(0.894)

-1.815

-0.856

(2.971)

(9.420)

-2.436

8.943

(1.858)

(5.553)

-3.006 **
(1.235)

Post IOR, pre-CPP x %NPL

Counterparties

≥ 0.03

(0.036)
Monday (9/15)

Amount

≤ 0.0

-2.380 **

1.871
(2.786)
3.848

-3.616 **
(1.570)

14.509 **

-0.130

≥ 0.03

8.815 **

(6.613)

(0.494)

(3.880)

9.755

-0.555

6.197

(2.203)

(8.199)

(0.651)

(4.471)

-2.912

11.378

-0.103

(2.905)

(9.846)

(0.824)

(4.549)

13.890

-0.501

3.841

(8.679)

(0.745)

(6.485)

7.186

-0.755

-1.596

(7.061)

(0.690)

(3.943)

-1.336

0.822

-5.529
(7.314)

-3.825 *

-3.405 **
(1.511)
-4.935 ***
(1.491)
-3.904 **

11.029 **

(1.149)

(4.901)

(1.947)

(11.943)

(1.239)

-1.759

-0.675

-1.888

-18.170

-1.738

-0.666

(1.300)

(3.791)

(3.967)

(12.038)

(2.155)

(5.553)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

12,211

8,967

12,211

8,967

12,211

8,967

0.50

0.47

0.91

0.88

0.90

0.87

49

Note: The sample consists of 26,700 observations from 376 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. We divide the sample into terciles, where banks in the bottom tercile have
%Repo value equal to 0 and banks in the top tercile have a %Repo value of greater than or equal to .02502. The dependent variables are: Spread to Target – the weighted average spread
between the banks’ fed funds loans and the target federal funds rate on that day; Amount – the logarithm of the amount lent in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of US $); and
Counterparties – the logarithm of the number of counterparties each bank has on that day. All specifications include controls for the interaction of Assets and the time period dummies.
Specifications (1), (2), (5) and (6) control for amount borrowed as a percentage of bank assets. %Repo is the amount of securities sold under agreements to repurchase divided by the
amount of total assets. %NPL is total non-performing loans divided by total loans. Bank characteristics are measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. Standard errors are
clustered at the bank level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of significance, respectively. Coefficients are bolded where their difference is
statistically significant.

50

TABLE XI: DEMAND PREDICTIONS
Amount
Avg. Amount in Prev. Month
. Month 1
Customer Funds Sent
Customer Funds Sent 1
Customer Funds Received
Customer Funds Received 1
Distance from Req. Reserves
Distance from Req. Reserves 1
Assets
Assets 1
ROA
ROA 1
Risk Ratio
Risk Ratio 1
%NPL
%NPL 1
%MBS
%MBS 1
%Repo
%Repo 1
Target Rate
Target Fed Funds Rate 1
1M AA Asset-Backed CP
1M AA Asset-Backed CP 1
1M Certificates of Deposit
1M Certificates of Deposit 1
1M Financial CP
1M Financial CP 1
1M LIBOR
1M LIBOR 1
Overnight Treasury Repo
Overnight Treasury Repo 1
Overnight MBS Repo
Overnight MBS Repo 1
1M OIS
1M OIS 1
Maintenance Day Fixed
Effects
Month Fixed Effects
Quarter End Fixed Effects
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(1)
Large
0.825
(0.007)
0.026
(0.007)
-0.026
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.100
(0.010)
-2.561
(1.503)
-0.390
(0.137)
0.020
(0.549)
0.583
(0.093)
-0.966
(0.195)
0.106
(0.078)
-0.099
(0.058)
0.289
(0.181)
0.069
(0.085)
-0.371
(0.201)
-0.066
(0.016)
-0.057
(0.055)
0.101
(0.066)
Yes
Yes
Yes
14,487
0.64

***
***
***

***
*
***

***
***

*

*
***

(2)
Small
0.788
(0.013)
0.055
(0.012)
0.021
(0.012)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.050
(0.020)
2.269
(2.226)
-0.086
(0.222)
-0.187
(0.653)
0.409
(0.122)
-1.143
(0.342)
-0.149
(0.118)
-0.094
(0.085)
-0.316
(0.267)
-0.068
(0.123)
0.232
(0.295)
-0.056
(0.023)
0.225
(0.082)
0.199
(0.098)

***
***
*
***
**

***
***

**
***
**

Yes
Yes
Yes
4,446
0.69

51

Note: The sample ranges from January 1, 2007 to August 29, 2008 with observations are included only if a bank borrowed on
that day. The dependent variable is Amount, the logarithm of the amount borrowed in that day. Avg. Amount in Prev. Month is
the logarithm of the average amount borrowed in the previous calendar month. Customer Funds Sent and Customer Funds
Received are the logarithm of customer funds sent and received. Distance from Req. Reserves is difference between the bank’s
beginning of day balance (without any fed funds transactions) and the bank’s required reserve amount divided by total assets.
Assets is total bank assets (in millions of US $). ROA is net income divided by assets. Risk Ratio is Tier 1 plus Tier 2 Capital
divided by assets. %NPL is total non-performing loans divided by total loans. %MBS is the amount of mortgage-backed
securities divided by the amount of total assets. %Repo is the amount of securities sold under agreements to repurchase divided
by the amount of total assets. Target Rate is the overnight target rate set by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1M
AA Asset-Backed CP, 1M Certificates of Deposit, 1M Financial CP, 1M LIBOR, 1M OIS are one month term rates on AA assetbacked commercial paper, certificates of deposit, financial commercial paper, LIBOR and OIS. On British holidays, 1M LIBOR
is filled in with the previous business day’s rate. Overnight Treasury Repo and Overnight MBS Repo are overnight rates on
treasury repos and MBS repos. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of significance,
respectively.

52

TABLE XII: DETERMINANTS OF FORECAST ERROR
Predicted less Actual
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)

Large

Small

Large

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.159 ***
(0.060)

Friday (9/12)

0.196 **
(0.078)

Monday (9/15)

0.157
(0.125)

Tuesday (9/16)

0.216 **
(0.104)

Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)

-0.461 ***
(0.098)

Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)

-0.873 ***
(0.128)

1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)

-0.570 ***
(0.106)

0.237 ***

0.162

(0.081)

(0.115)

(0.108)

0.059

0.031

0.015

(0.055)

(0.176)

(0.062)

0.509 ***
(0.091)
0.458 ***
(0.144)
0.371 ***
(0.098)
0.412 *
(0.232)
-0.040
(0.178)

-0.044
(0.248)
0.039
(0.229)
-0.689 ***
(0.218)
-0.467 **
(0.219)
-0.385 ***
(0.131)
33.372 ***
(9.531)

Friday x %NPL

16.757
(16.172)

Monday x %NPL

21.263

Tuesday x %NPL
Post-AIG, pre-IOR x %NPL
Post IOR, pre-CPP x %NPL

Adjusted R-squared

0.350 *
(0.202)
0.370 **
(0.148)
0.886 ***
(0.124)
-0.079
(0.243)
4.430
(5.298)
3.223 *
(1.855)
8.675 ***
(1.624)

18.129

7.892

(21.402)

(10.239)

23.830

-0.162

(18.958)

(6.034)

-42.552 *

1 month post-CPP x %NPL

0.363 ***
(0.064)

(20.019)

(25.077)

N

(4)

-0.163

1 week Pre-Leh x %NPL

Borrower Fixed Effects

Small

-24.138 ***
(2.222)

-19.055

2.191

(12.923)

(5.569)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

13,864

1,698

13,864

1,698

0.22

0.14

0.23

0.15

53

Note: The sample consists of 21,003 observations from 360 borrowers from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. We divide the sample into terciles, where Large is the top tercile of assets
and Small is the bottom tercile of assets. The dependent variable is Predicted less Actual – the difference between the predicted estimate for borrowing calculated using the relationships
estimated from January 1, 2007 to August 29, 2008 (presented in TABLE 10) and actual borrowing. %NPL is total non-performing loans divided by total loans. Bank characteristics are
measured as of the Call Report as of December 2007. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level of
significance, respectively.

54

APPENDIX

TABLE XIII: DEPENDENT VARIABLES, LENDERS
Access

Spread to Target

(1)
2 weeks Pre-Leh (8/29-9/4)
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)
Friday (9/12)
Monday (9/15)
Tuesday (9/16)
Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)
Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)
1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)
Lender Fixed Effects
N
Adjusted R-squared

0.070
(0.032)
0.046
(0.033)
0.066
(0.046)
-0.086
(0.044)
-0.136
(0.044)
-0.160
(0.036)
-0.296
(0.055)
-0.497
(0.047)
No
84,853

**

*
***
***
***
***

(2)

(3)

-0.005
(0.007)
-0.024
(0.005)
0.054
(0.007)
0.178
(0.072)
-0.303
(0.047)
-0.509
(0.034)
-0.523
(0.040)
-0.513
(0.027)
No
26,700
0.29

0.006
(0.006)
-0.015
(0.005)
0.067
(0.007)
0.168
(0.071)
-0.306
(0.045)
-0.507
(0.034)
-0.530
(0.034)
-0.560
(0.023)
Yes
26,700
0.48

***
***
**
***
***
***
***

Amount
(4)

***
***
**
***
***
***
***

-0.029
(0.065)
0.017
(0.063)
0.002
(0.092)
-0.016
(0.091)
0.052
(0.093)
0.143
(0.074)
0.261
(0.134)
0.244
(0.127)
No
26,700
0.01

Counterparties
(5)

*
*
*

0.023
(0.042)
0.030
(0.041)
0.035
(0.060)
-0.099
(0.058)
-0.131
(0.056)
-0.113
(0.046)
-0.066
(0.072)
-0.334
(0.070)
Yes
26,700
0.88

(6)

*
**
**

***

-0.030
(0.028)
-0.019
(0.030)
0.011
(0.040)
-0.016
(0.043)
0.042
(0.049)
0.000
(0.037)
0.007
(0.060)
0.041
(0.060)
No
26,700
0.01

(7)
-0.005
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.022)
0.040
(0.028)
-0.064
(0.030)
-0.079
(0.036)
-0.113
(0.027)
-0.153
(0.044)
-0.267
(0.042)
Yes
26,700
0.86

Note: The sample used in column (1) consists of 84,853 observations from 376 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009, where observations have been filled in with 0’s on
days which banks do not lend. The sample used in columns (2) – (7) consists of 26,700 observations from 376 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009, where only banks
that lend are present. Spread to Target is the weighted average spread between the banks’ fed funds loans and the target federal funds rate on that day. Amount is the logarithm of
the amount lent in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of US $). Counterparties is the logarithm of the number of counterparties each bank has on that day.

55

**
**
***
***
***

TABLE XIV: DEPENDENT VARIABLES, LENDERS WITH FULL SAMPLE
Spread to Target
(1)
2 weeks Pre-Leh (8/29-9/4)
1 week Pre-Lehman (9/5-9/11)
Friday (9/12)
Monday (9/15)
Tuesday (9/16)
Post-AIG, pre-IOR (9/17-10/8)
Post-IOR, pre-CPP (10/9-10/13)
1 month post-CPP (10/14-11/10)
Lender Fixed Effects
N
Adjusted R-squared

-0.010
(0.005)
-0.029
(0.004)
0.057
(0.007)
0.231
(0.063)
-0.163
(0.050)
-0.408
(0.030)
-0.459
(0.038)
-0.548
(0.019)
No
45,175
0.24

Amount

(2)
**
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

-0.002
(0.005)
-0.021
(0.004)
0.071
(0.007)
0.225
(0.063)
-0.169
(0.048)
-0.411
(0.029)
-0.465
(0.036)
-0.582
(0.017)
Yes
45,175
0.40

(3)

***
***
***
***
***
***
***

-0.089
(0.052)
-0.055
(0.052)
-0.056
(0.079)
0.039
(0.080)
0.112
(0.083)
0.141
(0.063)
0.279
(0.108)
0.285
(0.103)
No
45,175
0.01

*

**
***
***

Counterparties
(4)

(5)

-0.051
(0.036)
-0.045
(0.038)
-0.049
(0.057)
-0.093
(0.048)
-0.113
(0.051)
-0.083
(0.040)
-0.048
(0.058)
-0.310
(0.062)
Yes
45,175
0.87

-0.047
(0.022)
-0.040
(0.024)
-0.029
(0.033)
-0.023
(0.037)
0.047
(0.041)
-0.021
(0.029)
0.006
(0.045)
0.016
(0.044)
No
45,175
0.00

*
**
**

***

(6)
**
*

-0.034
(0.018)
-0.029
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.026)
-0.084
(0.028)
-0.083
(0.031)
-0.110
(0.023)
-0.143
(0.034)
-0.250
(0.033)
Yes
45,175
0.82

*

***
***
***
***
***

Note: The sample consists of 45,176 observations from 552 lenders from April 1, 2008 to February 28, 2009. Spread to Target is the weighted average spread between the banks’
fed funds loans and the target federal funds rate on that day. Amount is the logarithm of the amount lent in the fed funds market on that day (in millions of US $). Counterparties is
the logarithm of the number of counterparties each bank has on that day.

56

References
Acharya, V., Douglas Gale and Tanju Yorulmazer (2009), “Rollover Risk and Market Freezes", New
York University working paper, http://www.nyu.edu/econ/user/galed/papers/paper09-08-31.pdf
Acharya, V. and Ouarda Merrouche (2009), “Precautionary Hoarding of Liquidity and Inter-Bank
Markets: Evidence from the Sub-prime Crisis”, NYU working paper, http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~sternfin/
vacharya/public_html/acharya_merrouche.pdf
Allen, F., Elena Carletti and Douglas Gale (2009), “Interbank Market Liquidity and Central Bank
Intervention”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(5), July 2009, 639-652.
Armantier, O., Sandra Krieger, and James McAndrews (2008), “The Federal Reserve’s Term Auction
Facility”, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, volume 14, number 5.
Armantier, O., Eric Ghysels and Asani Sarkar (2009a), “Bank Borrowing from the Discount Window and
TAF during the Crisis”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York working paper.
Armantier, O., Eric Ghysels, Asani Sarkar and Jeff Shrader (2009b), “Using TAF Bids to Test of
Discount Window Stigma”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York working paper.
Ashcraft, A. and Darrell Duffie (2007),”Systemic Dynamics in the Federal Funds Market”, American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, volume 97, 221-225.
Bartolini, L., Spence Hilton, and James McAndrews (2009), “Settlement Delays in the Money Market”,
Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.
Bech, M. L. and Enghin Atalay (2008), “The Topology of the Federal Funds Market”, Federal Reserve
Bank of NY Staff Report number 354.
Bolton, P., Tano Santos and Jose Scheinkman (2009), “Outside and Inside Liquidity”, Princeton working
paper, http://www.princeton.edu/~joses/wp/Outside.pdf
Bruche, M. and Javier Suarez (2010), “Deposit Insurance and Money Market Freezes”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 57(1), 45-61.
Brunetti, C., Mario di Filippo and Jeffrey H. Harris (2009), “Effects of Central Bank Intervention on the
Interbank Market during the Sub-Prime Crisis”, working paper, https://jshare.johnshopkins.edu/myweb/
celsob/research.html#Mario

57

Cocco, J. F., Francisco J. Gomes and Nuno C. Martins (2009), “Lending relationships in the interbank
market”, Journal of Financial Intermediation 18, 24–48.
Diamond, D.W. and Raghuram G. Rajan (2009), “Fear of Fire Sales and the Credit Freeze”, University of
Chicago Booth School working paper,
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/douglas.diamond/research/Fear%20of%20Fire%20April%2019.pdf
Flannery, M. (1996), “Financial Crises, Payment System Problems, and Discount Window Lending”,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (November 1996, Part II), 804‐824.
Flannery, M. and Sorin M. Sorescu (1996), “Evidence of Bank Market Discipline in Subordinated
Debenture Yields: 1983‐1991”, Journal of Finance, (September 1996), 1347‐1377.
Freixas, X. and Emmanuelle Gabillon (1999), "Optimal Regulation of a Fully Insured Deposit Banking
System", Journal of Regulatory Economics, 16(2), 111-134.
Freixas, X. and José Jorge (2008), “The Role of Interbank Markets in Monetary Policy: A Model With
Rationing”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 40, No. 6, 1151-1176.
Freixas, X., Antoine Martin and David Skeie (2009), “Bank Liquidity, Interbank Markets, and Monetary
Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report number 371.
Furfine, C. (1999), “The Microstructure of the Federal Funds Market”, Financial Markets, Institutions,
and Instrument, 8(5): 24-44.
Furfine, C. (2001), “Banks Monitoring Banks: Evidence from the Overnight Federal Funds Market”,
Journal of Business, 74(1): 33-58.
Furfine, C. (2002), “Interbank Markets in a Crisis”, European Economic Review, 46(4-5), 809-820.
Furfine, C. (2003), “Standing Facilities and Interbank Borrowing: Evidence from the Fed's New Discount
Window”, International Finance, 6(3): 329-347.
Gale, D. and Sudipto Bhattacharya (1987), “Preference Shocks, Liquidity and Central Bank Policy”, New
Approaches to Monetary Economics, W. Barnett and K. Singleton, eds., New York: Cambridge
University Press, 69-88.
Gorton G. and Andrew Metrick (2009a), “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo“, Yale ICF Working
Paper number 09-14.

58

Gorton G. and Andrew Metrick (2009b), “Haircuts”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper number 15273.
Halsall, C., John Jackson and Ouarda Merrouche (2008), “Interest Rate Volatility and the Timing of
Interbank Loans in the Sterling Money Market 2003-2008”, working paper.
Heider F., Marie Hoerova and Cornelia Holthausen (2009), “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market
Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk”, European Banking Center Discussion Paper No. 2009-11S,
Center Discussion Paper Series No. 2009-40S
Hellerstein, R., William Ryan and Jeffrey Shrader (2009), “The New York Fed’s timelines of policy
responses to the global financial crisis”, VOX, http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3764
Hördahl P. and Michael R King (2008), “Developments in repo markets during the financial turmoil”, BIS
Quarterly Review, December 2008, 37-53.
Memmel, C. and Ingrid Stein (2008), “Contagion in the German interbank market”, working paper
http://www.efmaefm.org/0EFMAMEETINGS/EFMA%20ANNUAL%20MEETINGS/2008athens/Memmel.pdf
Morris, S. and Hyun Song Shin (2009), “Contagious Adverse Selection”, Princeton working paper,
http://www.princeton.edu/~hsshin/www/ContagiousAdverseSelection.pdf
Wetherilt, A., Peter Zimmerman and Kimmo Soramäki (2009), “The sterling unsecured loan market
during 2006–2008: insights from network topology”, Simulation analyses and stress testing of payment
networks, Scientific monographs E: 42, 277-314.

59

