                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LEVERAGE AND ASSET BUBBLES:
                       AVERTING ARMAGEDDON WITH CHAPTER 11?

                                            Marcus Miller
                                           Joseph E. Stiglitz

                                         Working Paper 15817
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15817


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




We thank seminar and conference participants for their comments, especially John Driffill, Sayantan
Ghosal, Peter Hammond, Anton Korinek, Chris Kubelec, Michael McMahon, Tomo Ota, Herakles
Polemarchakis, Mathan Satchi, David Vines and Lei Zhang. Miller is grateful for the opportunity provided
by a Houblon Norman Fellowship to work on this topic at the Bank of England; Han Hao Li and Ashwin
Moheeput are thanked for research assistance. The views expressed are those of the authors, however,
and not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Marcus Miller and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Leverage and Asset Bubbles: Averting Armageddon with Chapter 11?
Marcus Miller and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 15817
March 2010
JEL No. E32,G21,G32,G33,G34

                                              ABSTRACT

An iconic model with high leverage and overvalued collateral assets is used to illustrate the amplification
mechanism driving asset prices to ‘overshoot’ equilibrium when an asset bubble bursts—threatening
widespread insolvency and what Richard Koo calls a ‘balance sheet recession’.

Besides interest rates cuts, asset purchases and capital restructuring are key to crisis resolution. The
usual bankruptcy procedures for doing this fail to internalise the price effects of asset ‘fire-sales’ to
pay down debts, however. We discuss how official intervention in the form of ‘super’ Chapter 11 actions
can help prevent asset price correction causing widespread economic disruption.


Marcus Miller
University of Warwick
Department of Economics
Coventry
CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
marcus.miller@warwick.ac.uk

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 814
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu
                                                                                          2


“There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your
philosophy.” Hamlet


From 2007 to 2009 a chain of events, beginning with unexpected losses in the US
sub-prime mortgage market, was destined to bring the global financial system close to
collapse and to drag the world economy into recession. “One of the key challenges
posed by this crisis,” says Williamson (2009) “is to understand how such major
consequences can flow from such a seemingly minor event.” Before describing an
amplification mechanism involving overpriced assets and excessive leverage, we
begin by looking, albeit briefly, at what the current macroeconomic paradigm may
have to say.


The canonical New Keynesian/New Classical macroeconomic model, as outlined in
Woodford’s Interest and Prices (2003) for example, focuses on using interest rates to
control inflation in a setting where the private sector optimises inter-temporally but
wages and prices are relatively inflexible. Under the convenient assumption of a
representative agent with rational expectations, credit flows and leverage are left out
of the picture, however. As Bean (2009) ruefully observes in his Schumpeter lecture
to the EEA, “there are no financial frictions to speak of, [and] financial
intermediation plays a negligible role in Mike Woodford’s magisterial state-of-the-art
opus.”


Even when heterogeneity as between lenders and borrowers is taken into account, and
some financial friction—in the form of a ‘wedge’ or spread between the rate charged
to borrowers and that paid to lenders—is introduced, the key policy implications are
not much changed, it seems, as long as the spread is accommodated by prompt
adjustment in policy rates. What Cúrdia and Woodford had to say at the Bank of
International Settlements in June 2008 was summarised by the Chief Economist at the
IMF as follows: “The effects of a worsening of financial intermediation, they tell us,
are likely to be limited. Changes in the wedge have important distribution effects, but
small aggregate effects. Monetary policy still works. Indeed, optimal monetary
policy remains simple,” Blanchard (2008).
                                                                                                  3


Others were less sanguine: the experience of Japan in the 1990s, for instance, led
Richard Koo (2008) to warn that the credit crunch would be followed by a protracted
process of de-leveraging and that radical policy easing was needed to combat a
“balance sheet recession.”1 The actual response of monetary and fiscal policy has in
fact been dramatic—including near-zero policy rates and extraordinary official
intervention to prevent the collapse of the financial system, amounting to around
three quarters of GDP in the U.K. and U.S. for example.


This may be, as the Governor of the Bank of Japan suggested at the Jackson Hole
conference, “a good time to review the prevailing philosophy in the light of the
current crisis,” Shirakawa (2009). The Wicksellian perspective that Woodford
advocates has surely freed monetary economics from some of the simpler nostrums of
Friedman’s Monetarism; but the macroeconomic models it has encouraged central
bankers to use—with their representative agents, rational expectations, small shocks,
missing banking sector, etc.—seem to miss the point: that things can suddenly go
badly wrong so that emergency measures are needed to “avert Armageddon.”


To see how the economy works during times of stress and financial instability would
ideally involve weaving financial intermediation more carefully into the existing
framework, including “incentive distortions and information frictions,” Bean (2009).
Some of the consequences of credit inter-linkages and their policy implications—
including circumstances that render monetary policy ineffective—have been analysed
in Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003); and Gai et al (2008) have studied systemic crises in
a setting with intermediaries. But, even without intermediaries, a credit-constrained
market economy—where collateral is used to handle repudiation risk—can exhibit
liquidity crises and asset price crashes, Geanakoplos (2003).


How to get something big from something small: that is surely the issue. Like
Krishnamurthy (2009), we focus on the amplification mechanism present in “balance
sheet” models.2 For the purpose at hand—to study the dangers posed by “excessive
leverage” and how capital restructuring may be needed to avert economic collapse


1
  Wolf (2009) comments of Koo’s book: “His big point, though simple, is ignored by conventional
economics: balance sheets matter.”
2
  He warns too of the onset of Knightian uncertainty in a crisis.
                                                                                                      4


when an asset bubble bursts—we make use of a stripped-down framework of
heterogeneous agents with explicit credit constraints but no intermediaries. As an
iconic representation of an economy where shocks are amplified, we turn to the
model of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) where productive Small Businesses borrow
from wealth-owners with “deep pockets” who face diminishing returns. Debts are
secured by collateral; but the collateral requirements generate significant externalities
so aggregate shocks have persistent effects. Though the framework has non-
contingent debt contracts, this approach has subsequently been extended to allow for
state-dependence, Krishnamurthy (2003) and Lorenzoni (2008).3


An asset ‘bubble’ is included, and its collapse is the aggregate shock threatening large
scale default—with assets being transferred to the less productive but “deep-pockets”
agents. As this is clearly inefficient for the economy as a whole, there should be room
for renegotiation of contracts. Usually this would be taken care of by the bankruptcy
courts—under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code in the case of the U.S. But the law
is essentially designed for idiosyncratic events in which assets may be disposed of at
going market prices. In the face of a macroeconomic shock, a bankruptcy judge can
hardly be expected to understand that what would be good for a specific case (e.g.
sale of some assets), could, if generally implemented in many similar cases, trigger a
collapse in prices: there will be a pecuniary externality that is not taken into account.


Since it is not obvious that “micro” bankruptcy law will offer an efficient outcome
from a macro perspective, there is a case for a “super” Chapter 11 approach, to
substitute for procedures usually employed in common bankruptcy law by imposing
similar remedies on a macro scale, so as to internalize the externalities caused in the
event of a re-sale of assets. Capital restructuring and asset purchasing facilities are
discussed in this light.


Our results are consistent with the conclusion of Cúrdia and Woodford (2008) in that
big interest rate cuts can, in principle, help to minimize the consequences of this type
of financial shock. But there are amplification mechanisms working through balance

3
 Even with state-contingent contracts, however, Lorenzoni shows that the combination of debtors who
must post collateral and a lack of insurance against aggregate shocks still leaves room for significant
pecuniary externalities –with “inefficient” credit booms leading to excessive collateral price
adjustments.
                                                                                                    5


sheets and asset prices that are missing from standard macroeconomic models. If the
shock is big enough, interest rate policy alone will not pack enough punch to avert
collapse: and the monetary authorities may be stymied by “agency” problems as
intermediaries fail to intermediate.


In conclusion, official data on financial support measures undertaken in the UK and USA
from 2007-2009 are briefly discussed from the balance sheet perspective taken in this
paper.


1. Asset Allocation and Pricing with Credit Constraints


In the framework of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), hereafter KM, heterogeneity of
tastes and technology as between borrowers and lenders plays a central role.
Borrowers are relatively impatient, poor, but highly productive Small Businesses
who want to acquire capital assets (“land”) as a factor of production4; patient
wealth-owners with “deep pockets,” but declining marginal productivity, are
willing to finance small businesses by supplying them with short-term, roll-over
funding on a fully-collateralised basis. The reason for the collateral constraint is
repudiation risk: the idiosyncratic skill of small businesses entrepreneurs is non-
contractible and cannot be taken over by the creditor in payment of debt. It is
assumed that the fixed endowment of land is always fully employed: by whom is
the issue.


Before turning to detail, we sketch the process of land acquisition by Small
Businesses, or SBs, starting from an initial holding below equilibrium ( kt 1  k * ).

The horizontal line in Figure 1 shows the (constant) marginal productivity of land,  ,
in the SB sector while the upward-sloping line ZE indicates the “user cost” of land, its

discounted productivity in the other sector ( whose holdings will be k  kt ).




4
  KM label the borrowers farmers but in the present context it seems more appropriate to think of
them as Small Businesses: in the UK, for example, small and medium-sized enterprises employ
more than half the workforce in the private sector.
                                                                                                                        6


                                                X'
          SB Productivity
           and User Cost
                                                                                                         0   k
                                                                                            U (k )  (              )
                                                                                                              R
                                                X

                                                                                        E                     User Cost
                              SB Productivity                     B
                         α
                                                     A



                                                            A'


                         Z                                                                               X'
                             βo/R
                  β/ R                                                                              X
                                                                                    *
                                                     kt-1        kt   SB Holdings   k                                       k



      Fig.1. Not So Fast: Credit-Constrained Expansion by Small Businesses


The flow of profits accruing to the Small Businesses on initial land holdings, k t 1 , are

used to expand production. As land prices reflect the lower productivity of wealth
owners—and not the relatively higher productivity of small businesses—current
profits (used as a down payment on borrowing to acquire more land) permit an
expansion of holdings, as is shown by the hyperbola XX through A which intersects
the “user cost” schedule at A'. (Land holding in periods t+1 can likewise be found
using X'X'.) The fact that SB net worth, k , increases step-by-step as k approaches k *
from below reflects the fact that with credit rationing, there is delay in exploiting
the relatively higher productivity of assets in this sector.


1.1 The Amplification Mechanism: Micro-foundations


Before considering what happens when an asset bubble collapses, consider how things
evolve with perfect foresight, starting with Small Businesses who borrow up to the hilt
and happily postpone consumption of traded goods to some later date5. Their flow of
funds accounts shows land holdings, denoted kt, evolving as:


Land Accumulation = Income + Net Borrowing

5
 For simplicity, the production and current consumption of non-traded goods by credit-constrained
agents in the original model are omitted here.
                                                                                                             7


or, in symbols,
                              qt (k t  k t 1 )  k t 1  bt  Rbt 1                  (1)

where bt is the amount of one-period borrowing to be repaid as Rbt ( R is one plus the
one-period interest rate), qt is price of land, and  measures the productivity of land in
this sector.


Non-contractibility imposes limits on borrowing: and debt contracts secured on land
are the only financial instruments that creditors can rely on6. This puts a strict upper
limit on the amount of external finance that can be raised: so the rate of expansion of the
Small Businesses is determined not by their inherent earning power but by their ability to
acquire collateral.


The credit constraint, assumed to bind at all times, is that borrowing gross of
interest matches the expected value of land, i.e.


                                         bt  Et qt 1 k t / R                            (2)


As the degree of leverage is keyed to expectations of future prices, there will be more
lending when capital gains are in prospect (as was true for sub-prime lending according
to Gorton, 2008). This will be crucial when an asset bubble is considered. But with
perfect foresight of future land values, substitution into (1) yields an “accumulation”
equation for Small Businesses who use all their net worth to make down payments on
land, namely:


ACC                             (qt  qt 1 / R)kt  kt 1                               (3)


where the expression in parentheses on the left is the down-payment required to
purchase a unit of land and the term on the right measures both the productivity of those
resources in this sector and SB net worth.7



6
  Simple rental contracts are excluded because tenants may face a “hold up” problem if they add
investment of their own - as KM assume later in the paper cited.
7
 By definition, the net worth of property companies at the beginning of date t is the value of tradable output
and land held from the previous period, net of debt repayment, i.e. ( + qt )kt-1 - Rbt-1 = kt-1 .
                                                                                                                 8


As for deep-pocket investors, they equalise expected returns from using land as a
productive asset themselves and from lending (on a secured basis) at the rate of interest
R, so


ARB                             f ' (k t )  Et qt 1  qt  ( R  1)qt                    (4)


where f (kt) is the marginal productivity of land in the unconstrained sector (expressed
as a function of kt the amount of land in the constrained sector as in Figure 1
above, assuming the total amount of land is fixed8).


This arbitrage condition can be rewritten to show how the “down payment” by the
borrower has to match the “user cost” of land:


                            q t  q t 1 / R  f ' (k t ) / R  u (k t )                   (5)


where u(kt) is the discounted marginal productivity of land for deep-pocketed
investors (where there is also a one period lag in production).


The simple dynamics of asset accumulation by small businesses indicated in Figure 1
comes from substituting (5) into (3) to give:


                                                u (k t )k t  k t 1                      (6)


where the absence of asset prices in (6) reflects the assumption of perfect
foresight.


For analytical simplicity, assume (as in Figure 1) that the “user cost” of land for
Small Businesses is linearly related to their collective holdings kt, so:




8
    Note that, with fixed total endowment k and diminishing returns in production in the unconstrained

sector where output is g ( k  kt ) , defining f '( kt )  g '( k  kt ) implies that   f ''   g ''  0 i.e.
Small Businesses face a rising cost of acquiring land.
                                                                                                   9


                               u (k t )  (  0  k t ) / R                       (7)


where  corresponds to the second derivative of the production function in the
unconstrained sector, i.e. measures the rate of decline in the marginal productivity of
land used by deep pocket investors, and the discount factor 1/R reflects a one-period lag
in production. As for the price of land, this is determined by deep pocket investors as
the present discounted value of their own “user cost,” i.e.


                                        
                                qt   u (kt  s ) / R s                           (8)
                                       s 0




where this is measured along the path towards equilibrium.


1.2 Amplification and Persistence: Macro-Dynamics


To summarize, with current profits used to pay the user cost, asset allocation and prices
in the absence of shocks evolve as follows:


ACC                     (  0   k t 1 )k t 1 / R  k t                        (9)


ARB                         qt 1  Rqt  (  0   k t ) .                        (10)


The recursive structure – so it seems that land prices do not affect the process of
acquisition – depends crucially on the assumption of perfect foresight, however.
Accumulation will be affected by “errors of forecast” in prices, as we see presently.
The accumulation process has two points of stationarity. There is a stable equilibrium,
k *  ( R   0 ) /  ,  q*  (  0  k *) /( R  1) , where land is allocated efficiently in

terms of its productivity. There is another, inefficient and unstable, equilibrium, k *  0 ,
 q*   0 /( R  1) , where credit-constrained Small Businesses have lost all their

property. A key issue is whether there are forces which might throw the system into the
inefficient equilibrium, at least for a while.
                                                                                                        10


For convenience, the system may be linearised around the stable equilibrium so:


                     k t01   .....0  k t0 
                      0                0 
                     qt 1    ...R  qt                                 (11)


                   R
where                    1          is the stable root and the variables are measured from
               0  2 k *

equilibrium ( so kt0  kt  k * ). The dynamics of adjustment on the path to
equilibrium will lie on the path shown schematically as SS in Figure 2, where actual
outturns will be discrete points because of the discrete time formulation.


       Asset Price                                                                         Q
         qt
                                                                                               S
                                                                               B
       R                                                         E                Asset Price jump
q* 
       R 1                                               θ                A
                          Saddle-path
                                                              Q
                                  S                   Initial
                                                      condition


       0     X
       R 1




                                                                                   SB asset Holdings
                                                                      k*                           kt




Fig. 2. Stable Convergence: Amplified Shocks


The unstable eigenvector is vertical: but the slope of the stable path, effectively a
weighted average of productivity in the two sectors, is


        
             0.                                                             (12)
       R
The parameter  measures the sensitivity of land prices to fully anticipated transfers
                                                                                         11


of ownership between the two sectors: but what if there is an aggregate shock?


Assuming the system is in equilibrium at E, the immediate effect of a technology
shock ( in the form of a temporary increase in productivity for all Small Businesses)
is shown in Figure 2 by the intersection of the “initial condition” QQ, specified
algebraically below, with the stable path SS. As the figure suggests, the impact on
land allocation has two components. The distance EA, measured horizontally from
equilibrium to the initial condition QQ, indicates how far Small Businesses could
expand at a constant land price, as they go on the acquisition trail using the extra
profits as down-payment on fresh borrowing. Because all businesses are doing the
same, however, the price of land will increase, raising borrower net worth and
allowing for more acquisitions. This is the “financial accelerator” that takes short-run
equilibrium from point A to point B on SS. From there, in the absence of fresh shocks,
the system will gradually return to equilibrium along the stable path.


1.3 The Initial Condition - the Acquisition Schedule


To take account of the positive productivity shock, Small Business net worth in
equation (8) must be corrected for the “error of forecast.” So, at the time of the shock,
kt and qt must satisfy


(  0   kt )kt / R  [    (qt  q*)]k *                         (13)


where  is the common productivity shock. On the left is the opportunity cost of
land kt used by SBs ( the “user cost” times quantity held): on the right the “corrected” net
worth of the Small Businesses in aggregate.


Given the linearization, this initial condition can be recast as


(  0  2  k *)kt0 / R   /   kt0  (  qt0 )k *                (14)


where the variables are now measured from equilibrium and the term qt0 k * indicates
the presence of a “financial accelerator.” This implies that
                                                                                         12


kt0  (  qt0 )c                                                   (15)


where c  k *  /  , which is the upward-sloping schedule QQ in Figure 2—the
“acquisition schedule” of highly-levered players unexpectedly flush with fresh funds.


2. A Bursting Bubble, De-leveraging and Potential Collapse


2.1 Asset Bubbles


While the Real Business Cycle literature is concerned with technology shocks, our
focus—like Koo (2008) in his account of the Japanese experience—is on aggregate
financial shocks, a negative asset-price correction in particular. Instead of unanticipated
profits triggering acquisitions, balance sheet write-downs will trigger liquidation.


How plausible is it to postulate a large, collective error of forecast of this kind?
Standard neoclassical theory precludes the existence of bubbles: so does the efficient
markets hypothesis. As Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) demonstrate, however, the
backwards induction argument typically used to rule out bubbles fails if people
disagree. Lack of common knowledge—in the form, say, of dispersed beliefs about
when a bubble will end—can be sufficient to generate its persistence.


To account for the existence of the bubble in US house prices that peaked in 2006,
Robert Shiller (2008, p. 62) took a behavioural perspective—observing that people
“try to think of speculative events as rational responses to information… [and] accept
as simple fact the stories that accompany the bubble.” So, too, did Laibson (2009), in
his Hahn Lecture to the Royal Economic Society—with extrapolation of beliefs and
trend-chasing, wishful-thinking and over-confidence, plus the phenomenon of so-
called “social proof,” all cited as relevant factors.


Inflated asset prices can often be rationalised by plausible stories of anticipated
fundamentals. Say, in the current context, there is news of a potential technological
improvement for Small Businesses which promises higher productivity (i.e. higher α)
and a greater share of resources for that sector. With the expectation of widespread
                                                                                                                    13


implementation at a later time T, the asset price should jump on the news, with land
allocation shifting from E to A on the acquisition schedule QQ, and increase steadily
thereafter towards the higher value stable path S'S' associated with the  '   along the
integral curve shown in Figure 3. But what if, when the asset price has reached B at
time T-1 and all Small Businesses are set for expansion next period, the promised
implementation fails to occur?


                  qt
                                                                                                  E'
                                                                                                           S'
           'R
q **                                                                                                  Q
           R 1                                                              B
                                                                                     C                          S
                                                                                 A
           R                                                       E
    q* 
           R 1                                             θ
                                  S'
                                                            Q
                                 S            D




            0    z
           R 1



                                                                                                  SB Asset Holdings
                                                                         *                   **
                                                                        k                k                          kt



           Fig. 3. False Dawn: a Bubble as Collective Illusion


There will be a nasty shock common to Small Businesses as asset prices fall and their
balance sheets are marked-to-market: they have, by assumption, been borrowing the
discounted value of land one period ahead, and will be loaded-up with debt without the
anticipated flow of income needed to service it. Liquidation not acquisition will now be
their mantra as they try to pay down their debts.9 The “fire-sales” will add to the
downward pressure on land prices as the financial accelerator goes into reverse. There
will, effectively, be an increased demand for liquidity (as suggested by the “disposal
schedule” DD drawn through B in the Figure and discussed further below). The asset
price correction may well “overshoot”: could it lead to widespread insolvency?
9
  So long as the shock comes after they have put in their labour and committed their net worth, small
businesses cannot unilaterally bargain a debt write-down: so – like US farmers in the Great Depression -
they will try to sell assets to “pay down” their debts.
                                                                                                               14



2.2 “Firesales” and the Prospect of Insolvency


For analytical convenience, consider the canonical case of price overvaluation when
land holdings are at k*, i.e. the bubble path is the unstable eigenvector that passes
vertically through E; and the size of the bubble is measured by the excess above of E of
points at points such as B or B'. At equilibrium, E, all revenues are used to pay
interest on debt; so interest payments on the bubble path are partly covered by fresh
borrowing, as in a Ponzi scheme.10 The ending of the bubble will clearly pose a
liquidity problem and may threaten insolvency, as indicated in Figure 4 by the initial
conditions, labelled DD, D'D' (for bubbles of different size), assuming perfect foresight
prevails after the bubble bursts.


      Asset Price
             qt                                                         B'
                                                                                      D'     Initial
                                                                                             conditions
                                              SC
                                                                                      D
                                                                              B                                S

            R
     q* 
            R 1                                                  θ               E

              qx
                                                        X
                               S

                          D'

            0      G
                                   D

            R 1




                               Insolvency                   Solvency                       SB Asset Holdings
                                                   kc                        k*                           kt




Fig. 4. Aftermath of an Asset Bubble


                               rq * k * rk * R
10
     At E itself, rb * k *                        k * ; above E, where q  q * , interest charges
                                  R      (1  R) R
exceed current revenue.
                                                                                            15


How are these initial conditions defined? Allowing for an adverse price shock again
involves correcting the net worth in equation (8) for the error of forecast, so kt and qt
are implicitly defined by


(  0   kt )kt / R  [  (q b  qt )]k *  [  (q b  q*)  (q * qt )]k *      (16)


together with pricing equation (11) above. Given the linearization, this initial
condition can be rewritten as


(  0  2 k *)kt0 / R  ( /  )kt0  ((q b  q*)  qt0 )k *  (   kt0 )k *   (17)


where (q b  q*)k   is the absolute size of the net worth correction for “excess

borrowing” and qt0 k *  kt0 k * is the “financial accelerator” due to fire-sales that this

induces. Defining c  k *  /  as before, this can be written as
kt0  (  qt0 )c                                                                  (18)


defining the “disposal” schedules shown DD, D'D' in Figure 4.


These schedules for asset disposal by Small Businesses can be interpreted as an
unexpected need for liquidity on their part, Krishnamurthy (2009). From this
perspective, asset prices have to fall until the balance-sheet-driven “demand for
liquidity” by Small Businesses (measured to the left from k* to DD, for example) is
matched by the “supply of liquidity” by the residual buyers of land who have no
balance sheet problems (the agents with “deep pockets”) whose take-up of land is
measured from k* to SS.


In his discussion of amplification through balance sheets and asset prices,
Krishnamurthy assumes that the “overshooting” will not be severe enough to render
the illiquid agents insolvent: so equilibrium might be reached at a point such as X ,
with asset price such as q X , where prompt de-leveraging permits stable convergence
back to E. According to Koo (2008, p. 14,15), however, de-leveraging made many
firms technically insolvent in Japan after the bubble burst, a situation which we can
                                                                                                          16


represent by the disposal schedule D'D' (associated with the collapse of a larger asset
bubble) which fails to intersect SS to the right of SC, the Solvency Constraint.


2.3 The Solvency Constraint


How this constraint may be determined can be seen with reference to Figure 5, where
each side of equation (16) is plotted separately, using the version linearised around
equilibrium, so the opportunity cost of land (  0  2 k *)kt0 / R is shown as OO .


  Net worth                                 SC                                    Opportunity Cost
                                                                                           O

                       Insolvency                    Solvency                                    N


                                                                    E
                                                                C            k *
                                                         B
                                                                                  Initial Shock

                                                 A                           F
                                                                θ

                                                                                  Effect of
                                                                                  'Fire-sales'
                                                 I
                   
          N                         F       kc                          k*                           kt
                                        O            k *

Fig. 5 Net Worth, “Fire-sales” and the Prospect of Widespread Insolvency



In the absence of shocks, the aggregate net worth of credit-constrained businesses will
lie on the line NN passing through the origin with slope α (with the steps A,B,C,
converging to equilibrium at E with net worth of  k * as described earlier with
reference to Fig. 1). Where land holdings of k* have become overvalued, however, an
asset price correction will reduce net worth, as debt contracted beforehand exceeds the
value of the collateral assets at the equilibrium price. This adverse balance sheet effect
is shown by , the distance EF in the figure. But net worth will also be reduced by asset
price “overshooting” due to fire-sales. The schedule incorporating both these effects is
                                                                                                        17


shown as FF11 with slope  , where the “overshooting” term is given by the
approximation ( qt  q*)   ( kt  k *) . The point kC   k * , where fire-sales have
reduced net worth to zero, identifies the Solvency Constraint, labelled SC here and in
Fig. 4. As this would imply losses of  k * due to fire-sales, it implies that
  (   )k * is the largest financial hit consistent with the solvency of small
business enterprise without intervention.12


In fact, highly leveraged borrowers can very easily become insolvent. If their net
worth were only 5% of assets held as collateral for loans, a correction of asset prices
in excess of this would be enough to wipe out their net worth—even before fire-sales
begin. (The system becomes a good deal more robust, however, when borrowers are
subject to a prudential margin requirement which provides an ex ante buffer against such
losses, Edison et al (2000), Gai et al (2008): with “dynamic provisioning,” the shock to
net worth will be cushioned by this buffer.13)


As Koo describes it, the collapse of an economy-wide asset bubble could be the
economic equivalent of the collapse of a supernova—with the “black hole” of
insolvency threatening to swallow whole sectors of an over-leveraged economy. The
consequences of technical insolvency were seen as so severe,14 indeed, that a pre-
emptive strategy of concealing the true balance sheet position was apparently
widespread in Japan.15




11
   That the net worth function FF slopes downward to the left in the figure shows how the volume of fire-
sales drives down the price.
12
   Note that, for  0  0 , the “user cost” will always be non-negative, so the linearity of the schedule
OO in the Figure is potentially misleading. Without linearizing, the maximum sustainable aggregate
shock can be found as a limiting point of intersection between the net worth schedule FF and the
(non-linear) opportunity cost schedule, as in Edison et al (2000)
13
   If, for example, prudential margin requirements are suspended after the shock - leaving only the
down-payments as described above - the initial equilibrium for kt may be found as before, except that
the shock  will be net of the prudential margin held beforehand. Silonov (2008) looks at dynamic
margins in this context.
14
   “If it becomes known that a borrower is technically insolvent, loans extended to the company will
become bad loans and the lender will be forced by government regulators to cut off credit, and try to
collect on existing loans.” Koo (2008,p.44)
15
   “Only the executives who borrowed the money and the bankers who lent it truly understand the problem.
But since neither will ever reveal this information to outsiders, external observers remain wholly oblivious
to the situation.” Koo (2008,p.45)
                                                                                        18



3. Averting the Threat of Mass Insolvency


Wholesale reallocation of assets to relatively unproductive, “deep pocket” lenders
would obviously be socially inefficient. What can be done to avert it (assuming
assets are marked-to-market, so concealment is not an option)? One way is through
a cut in interest rates that, if big enough, and if the situation is not dire enough, would
boost asset prices and guarantee that the net-worth of borrowers does not fall too
much, guaranteeing an equilibrium without outright default, even if at very
discounted asset prices. Another way is through an explicit capital restructuring in
which leverage is reduced, either by capital injections, debt-equity swaps, or simple
debt forgiveness. The problem of capital restructuring is that the presence of
externalities implies the need for some macro-agency (essentially some government-
sponsored institution) that would consolidate the troubled businesses and decide
simultaneously (and this is the key) how all of them would be resolved in a common
procedure, whether through capital injections by this agency or agency-sponsored
debt-equity swaps. The key is that some agency should resolve most problems in a
single take, to internalize the re-sale consequences of individual cases. As it not only
has to be big enough but also to have greater powers of enforcement than private
creditors, that probably calls for the hand of the government. A third way is for the
government to purchase the assets themselves, supplying liquidity to prevent asset
prices from collapsing. We consider these actions, starting with asset purchase.


3.1 Asset Purchase by Government Agencies


Agencies of government can check the collapse of asset prices by acting as “buyer
of last resort.” (Figure 4 shows how buying at a floor price of q X will prevent

insolvency after a bubble bursts at B', for example.) The authorities effectively
augment the supply of liquidity so that de-leveraging can take place without
causing insolvency. This was, it seems, the idea behind the original Paulson plan in
the U.S..
                                                                                        19



3.2 Capital Restructuring: Chapter 11 Procedures


When the “going concern” value of small businesses after restructuring exceeds
the alternative “user cost,” the principles of bankruptcy law confirm that they
should be kept going; and in the U.S. for example Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code
aims at restructuring the balance sheet so as to avoid premature liquidation. The
customary legal procedures are, however, designed to handle small, idiosyncratic
shocks—not macro shocks hitting the whole economy. Judges can hardly be expected
to take account of externalities imposed by “fire-sales” of the assets involved in
individual cases, making outright liquidation much more likely.


Internalising the price effects of asset “fire-sales” in the midst of a crisis requires an
override of normal restructuring procedures—what we refer to as “super” Chapter
11 actions, where the principles of bankruptcy are applied at a macro level. Three
kinds of restructuring are considered in broad outline: a debt-equity swap, a
temporary capital injection, and a debt write-down. How these might work in
practice—at least for banks—has been vividly demonstrated in the recent
restructuring of bank balance sheets in the U.K. and U.S., see Table 1 below.


(A) Debt-Equity Swap


Capital restructuring under Chapter 11 frequently involves an exchange of debt for an
equity share, so lenders become owners, relieving the borrower of collateral
requirements and interest payment obligations, Zingales (2008). In Figure 5, for
example, the excess debt EF owed to the wealth owner could be swapped for equity
of the same value. (To avoid the moral hazard problem of equity ownership in the
KM framework, however, an agency taking up such ownership rights would need
ways of enforcing payment beyond those available to private creditors.)


(B) Capital Injection


A key element of the financial support for the U.K. financial sector has been the
provision of capital injections in preference shares or unsecured debt. How can this
                                                                                           20


avoid a meltdown if it is designed to be temporary? The answer, broadly speaking, is
by checking the de-leveraging process that follows a shock to net worth, and so
limiting the negative externality of asset sales.


In terms of the canonical model we use, let deep-pocket lenders provide unsecured
financing Γ when the shock occurs, to be repaid as RΓ one period later, where R is the
gross market rate of interest. (To avoid the moral hazard problem of unsecured
lending, assume also that the capital injection is arranged through the agency of the
government, which has ways of enforcing payment beyond those available to private
creditors.)

   Net worth
                                           SC                                     U


                                                                                      N


                                                                   E
                                                          C

                                                      B                    Δ
                                             A
                                                               Γ
                                                 RΓ
                                                                       F

                                            A'
                                     kc              θ
          N                                                                               kt
                                                                   k*
                                 U     F




Fig. 6. A Capital Injection to “Avert Armageddon”


This extra capital will shift the financing constraint up from FF, as shown in Fig. 6,
giving first-period equilibrium at A' and so avoiding insolvency. By providing
financial support to indigent Small Businesses in this way, their immediate need for
liquidity has been reduced, as Krishnamurthy (2009) puts it, so the fire-sales
equilibrium is less dire. (The disposal schedule shown as D'D' in Figure 4 will be
shifted downwards, checking the fall in prices.) Some of the capital injections
provided to the financial sector have, in fact, been repaid fairly promptly on both
                                                                                                   21


sides of the Atlantic. Figure 6 illustrates a special case where borrowers are able to
repay the temporary finance with interest in the very next period16.


(C) Loan Write-Downs


What about debt forgiveness? A loan write-down is another way of avoiding the
negative externalities caused by loan enforcement programmes. As Stiglitz (2008) has
argued:


           We need bankruptcy reform allowing for homeowners to write down the value of
           their homes and stay in their houses, in addition to the help that the current legislation
           proposes. [Furthermore], the government could assume part of the mortgage, taking
           advantage of the lower interest rate at which it has access to funds and its greater
           ability to demand repayment. In return for the lower interest rate—which would
           make housing more affordable—it could demand from the homeowner the
           conversion of the loan into a recourse loan (reducing the likelihood of default), and
           from the original holders of the mortgage, a write down of the value of the mortgage
           to say 90% of the current market price.


3.3 Monetary Policy: Emergency Rate Cuts


Cúrdia and Woodford (2008) recommend a prompt cut in policy rates to offset
financial frictions, and the model we use confirms that reducing the real interest rate
when a bubble bursts—and for a while thereafter17—should, in principle, help to limit
the fire-sales at the root of the crisis. But how reliable is this remedy?


The positive potential of cutting the interest rate is illustrated in Figure 7, where the
threat of insolvency posed by a bursting bubble is headed off and the system recovers,
as shown by the path labelled B,A, AT, E. (Note that the figure now includes the
stable path (S'S') and equilibrium (E') associated with a permanently lower level of
interest rates (R'<R); and an integral curve II associated with this equilibrium.).




16
     Repayment will of course slow down the rate of acquisition, as shown in the figure.
17
     Quite a long time, if Japanese experience is any guide.
                                                                                                                22


              Asset Price
                 qt                                   SC
                                                                                                       S'
                R '                                                                 E'
q * *( R' )                                                                                   B'
                R'1                                                                                  D
                                                                                               B
                                                                                                    Asset Price
                                                                                                 Correction
                R                                                                                          S
 q * ( R) 
                R 1     S'                                                                    E
                         I                                 A
                                     D'
                                                                      AT
                         Initial
                       conditions
                                      D S
                                                                                 I




                               Insolvency        SC                   Solvency                      Holdings by SB
                                                      kc       kt+T                       k*                         kt


  Fig. 7. Cheap Credit Can Help



  By construction, the lowering of the interest rates to R' for T periods after the bubble
  bursts at B should prevent insolvency, with initial equilibrium at point A: and return
  to equilibrium will be achieved providing it takes T periods to travel from A to AT
  i.e. to travel along the integral curve II from its intersection with the disposal
  schedule DD to its intersection with the stable path SS. (But if the bubble was larger,
  at point B' for example, this would not avert insolvency: a longer duration or a deeper
  cut of the interest rate would be called for.)


  Though the analysis seems to provide substantial support for Cúrdia and Woodford
  (2008), the efficacy of rate cuts is hobbled by two factors.18 First, of course, due to
  the zero-bound on nominal rates, there is only so-much cutting that the Central bank


  18
     For emerging markets, where dollarised debts are a potent source of balance sheet shocks, cutting
  interest rates in a crisis is usually not an option for external reasons - strengthening the case for Chap
  11-style restructuring procedures, both domestically, Furman and Stiglitz (1998), Miller and Stiglitz
  (1999) and internationally, Stiglitz (2006, Chap 7).
                                                                                       23


can do! Second—and just as important—the benefit of crisis cuts in policy rates may
not be passed on to Small Businesses.


In an environment with intermediaries, “agency problems” can easily arise19: and the
easing of monetary policy in a crisis may well be offset by an increase in risk
aversion by banks. If banks retain the benefits for themselves - increasing their
margins so as to recapitalise, for example—then, as Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003, pp.
126-128) point out, the easing of policy rates will be like pushing on a string.


The optimistic results attributed to rate cuts come with an important caveat: that
monetary economics without banking is like the Macbeth’s banquet without the ghost
of Banquo!


4. Conclusion


By adding an asset bubble to a canonical model of highly leveraged businesses, we
have highlighted the vicious downward spiral that may develop when asset prices
begin to fall and have outlined a variety of measures that may be used to check this -
with the government stepping in because of the externalities and moral hazard
involved. Emergency action to restore and restructure balance sheets is not unusual
in emerging markets facing financial crisis, in Thailand for instance20, and in
Argentina (where dollar bank loans of Small Businesses were “pesified” by law soon
after the peso collapsed in early 2002). But it stands in sharp contrast to the view
from conventional models - that “the effects of a worsening of financial
intermediation are likely to be limited” and can be handled by interest rate cuts alone.


Besides cutting interest rates as far as they can, the authorities in both the US and UK
have of course undertaken extraordinary financial interventions, amounting in total to
around three quarters of GDP—interventions that have more than doubled the size of
central bank balance sheets—as shown in Table 1.




19
     As discussed in Hellman et al (2000), for example.
20
     As discussed in Edison et al (2000).
                                                                                           24


Table 1. Size of financial system support measures

Trillions (local currencies)
                                           United Kingdom       United States
                                           Jan. Latest          Jan. Latest
                                           2007 2009            2007 2009
Available central bank support

Current direct lending to
financial institutions                     0.05 0.10            0.04     0.44

Asset purchases and other
loans                                        –   0.15            –       3.32

Collateral swaps                             –   0.19            –       0.20

Central bank currency
swap lines                                   –   No limit        –       No limit

Available government support

Guarantees of financial
institutions’ liabilities                    –   0.37            –       2.08

Insurance of financial assets                –   0.46            –       3.74

Capital injections to banks and
special purpose vehicles                     –   0.06            –       0.70

Increase in public sector support            –   1.26            –       10.44

Memo: US dollar amount                       –   2.06            –       10.44

Percentage of GDP                            –   88%             –       73%

Memo: Actual size of central
bank’s balance sheet                       0.09 0.22            0.91     2.09

Percentage of GDP                            6       15          7        15


Source: Bank of England Financial Stability Report (2009, June, p.20).



Three items are of particular note from the balance sheet perspective adopted in this
paper. First the asset purchases which include overt purchase of corporate debt, as
well as indirect support via portfolio reallocation—as when the Central Bank buys
government debt from financial institutions, allowing them to take on more corporate
debt. Asset purchases in the US, including Mortgage Backed Securities, amount to
over 3 trillion dollars, almost a third of the total support provided. This will include
purchases under the provisions of the original $700 billion TARP proposal made by
Mr Paulson. For the UK, the figures include purchases under the Asset Purchase
                                                                                                       25


Facility designed to provide continued support in the form of Quantitative Easing
once interest rates had reached their effective lower limit. Official purchases of
troubled assets are, of course, designed to limit the fall in the price of the assets
involved, providing liquidity to those in need, see Krishnamurty (2009) and Figure 4
above.21


Second the capital injections, amounting to between four and five percent of GDP in
both countries. These would seem to correspond broadly-speaking to the Chapter 11
style intervention described above—officially coordinated balance sheet support
designed to prevent industry-wide insolvency. It is interesting to note that, despite
the initial focus on asset purchases in the U.S., such capital injections constitute a
larger fraction of the total support in the U.S. than in the U.K.


Finally, current direct lending to financial institutions, in the top line of the table,
which has eased credit conditions by broadening the range of collateral accepted by
the central bank, Krishnamurthy (2009).


This official support has been largely directed at the financial sector itself; and Bean
(2009) concludes his Schumpeter Lecture with a call to develop macroeconomic
models including financial intermediation, replete with distorted incentives and
problems of information. Simple iconic models may be useful, in the meantime, to
study the implosive dynamics of systems under stress and how to check them.22




21
   To relate these figures to the KM model, one would have to treat the financial intermediaries as
raising funds for Small Business and consolidate these two sectors; likewise, to consolidate the
Government with the “ deep-pocket” investors.
22
   Ex-ante, preventive measures, in the form of Pigovian taxes on highly leveraged institutions, are
discussed in Korinek (2009).
                                                                                       26


References


Abreu, D and M.K. Brunnermeier (2003). “Bubbles and Crashes,” Econometrica,
71(1), pp. 173-204.


Bean, C. (2009). “The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction,”
Schumpeter Lecture presented at Annual Congress of the European Economic
Association, Barcelona, 23-27 August.


Blanchard, O. (2008). “Discussion of Cúrdia and Woodford,” Bank for International
Settlements Annual Conference, “Whither Monetary Policy?” Lucerne, Switzerland,
26-27 June


Cúrdia, V. and M. Woodford (2008). “Credit Market Frictions and Optimal Monetary
Policy,” paper presented at Bank for International Settlements Annual Conference,
“Whither Monetary Policy?” Lucerne, Switzerland, 26-27 June.


Edison, H., P. Luangaram, and M. Miller (2000). “Asset Bubbles, Leverage and
‘Lifeboats’: Elements of the East Asian Crisis,” Economic Journal, 110, pp. 309-334.


Bank of England Financial Stability Review (2009). Vol. 24 (June).


Furman, J. and J.E. Stiglitz (1998). “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East
Asia,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 29(2), pp. 1-136.


Gai, P., S. Kapadia, S. Millard, and A. Perez (2008). “Financial Innovation,
Macroeconomic Stability and Systemic Crises,” Economic Journal, 118, pp. 401-426.


Geanakoplos, J. (2003). “Liquidity, Default, and Crashes: Endogenous Contracts in
General Equilibrium,” Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and
Applications, Eighth World Conference, Econometric Society Monographs, vol. 2,
pp.170–205.


Gorton, G. B. (2008). “The Panic of 2007.” NBER WP Number 14358 (September).
                                                                                       27



Hellmann, T., K. Murdock, and J.E. Stiglitz (2000). ”Liberalization, Moral Hazard in
Banking and Bank Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?’ American
Economic Review, 90(1), pp. 147-65.


Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997). “Credit cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
(April), pp.211-248.


Koo, R.C. (2008). The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great
Recession, Singapore: J. Wiley.


Korinek, A. (2009). “Systemic Risk-Taking: Amplification Effects, Externalities, and
Regulatory Responses,” paper presented at IDB Meeting, BCA, Buenos Aires, 30
September.


Krishnamurthy, A. (2003). “Collateral Constraints and the Amplification
Mechanism,” Journal of Economic Theory, 111(2), pp. 277-92.


Krishnamurthy, A. (2009). “Amplification Mechanisms in Liquidity Crises,”
American Economic Journal, forthcoming.


Laibson, D. (2009). “Bubble Economics,” Frank Hahn Lecture at the Royal
Economic Society Annual Meetings, University of Surrey, 20-22 April.


Lorenzoni, G. (2008). “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies, 75,
pp.809-833.


Miller, M. and J.E. Stiglitz (1999). “Bankruptcy Protection Against Macroeconomic
Shocks: the Case for a ‘Super Chapter 11,’” Unpublished. Available at
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/csgr/research/keytopic/global/milrstig.pdf.


Shiller, R. J. (2008). The Subprime Solution, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
                                                                                       28


Shirakawa, M. (2009). “International Policy Response to Financial Crises,” paper
presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium on “Financial
Stability and Macroeconomic Policy,” Jackson Hole, 20-22 August.


Silonov, V. V. (2008). The Kiyotaki and Moore Model: Introduction of Dynamic
Margin, MSc Dissertation, University of Warwick.


Stiglitz, J.E. (2006). Making Globalization Work, London: Allen Lane.


Stiglitz, J.E. (2008). “We Aren’t Done Yet: Comments on the Financial Crises and
Bailout,” Economists’ Voice, The Berkeley Electronic Press, October.


Stiglitz, J.E. and B. Greenwald (2003). Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary
Economics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


Williamson, J. (2009). “Understanding the Crisis of 2007-09,” Presidential Address to
Section F of the British Science Association, University of Surrey, 10 September.


Wolf, M. (2009). “Japan’s lessons for a world of balance-sheet deflation,” Financial
Times, 17 Feb.


Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


Zingales, L. (2008). “Why Paulson is Wrong,” Economists’ Voice, The Berkeley
Electronic Press (October).
