NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOME COMPUTER USE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF HUMAN CAPITAL
Ofer Malamud
Cristian Pop-Eleches
Working Paper 15814
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15814

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

This project would not have been possible without financial support from the Spencer Foundation,
the Population Research Center (PRC) at NORC and the University of Chicago, ISERP at Columbia
University, and the Center for Human Potential and Public Policy (CHPPP). We wish to thank Kerwin
Charles, Janet Currie, Ray Fisman, Nora Gordon, Caroline Hoxby, Eleanor Kane, Larry Katz, Jens
Ludwig, Bruce Meyer, Doug Miller, Andrei Schleifer, Cristina Vatulescu, Wesley Yin, as well as
seminar participants at the Demography Workshop, the Applied Micro Workshop and the CHPPP
Workshop at Chicago and the NBER Economics of Education Program Meetings. We are grateful
to Grigore Pop-Eleches who has greatly contributed to the development and implementation of the
project. We also thank Ioana Veghes at Gallup Romania for managing the survey and the data collection
effort. All errors and opinions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ofer Malamud and Cristian Pop-Eleches. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Home Computer Use and the Development of Human Capital
Ofer Malamud and Cristian Pop-Eleches
NBER Working Paper No. 15814
March 2010
JEL No. I21,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a regression discontinuity design to estimate the effect of home computers on child
and adolescent outcomes. We collected survey data from households who participated in a unique
government program in Romania which allocated vouchers for the purchase of a home computer to
low-income children based on a simple ranking of family income. We show that children in households
who received a voucher were substantially more likely to own and use a computer than their counterparts
who did not receive a voucher. Our main results indicate that that home computer use has both positive
and negative effects on the development of human capital. Children who won a voucher had significantly
lower school grades in Math, English and Romanian but significantly higher scores in a test of computer
skills and in self-reported measures of computer fluency. There is also evidence that winning a voucher
increased cognitive ability, as measured by Raven's Progressive Matrices. We do not find much evidence
for an effect on non-cognitive outcomes. Finally, the presence of parental rules regarding computer
use and homework appear to mitigate the effects of computer ownership, suggesting that parental monitoring
and supervision may be important mediating factors.

Ofer Malamud
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
malamud@uchicago.edu
Cristian Pop-Eleches
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cp2124@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

The development of the personal computer in the late 1970s enabled households to purchase a
computer for the home, and children to gain access to an important new technology. At present,
over three-quarters of all American children aged 3 to 17 years live in a household with a computer.
(U.S. Census Bureau, 2005) However, large disparities in computer ownership by race and family
income remain. Data from the 2003 Current Population Survey (CPS) indicate that less than half
of children with family incomes under $25,000 lived in a household with a computer, compared to
92 percent of those with family incomes over $100,000. Furthermore, access to computer technology
is far less common among children in developing countries, and the disparities between the rich
and poor are often much greater. Estimates from the OECD’s 2003 Programme for International
Student Assessment (PISA) show that most 15 year old students in developed countries have access
to a computer at home (91 percent in the United States). In contrast, only about half of 15 year old
students have access to a home computer in emerging Eastern European countries such as Poland,
Latvia and Serbia.1 Among 15 year olds in the bottom SES quartile within these countries, fewer
than a quarter have access to a home computer.2 (OECD, 2005)
Many government and non-governmental organizations are trying to bridge this “digital divide”
across nations and between households. For example, Brazil embarked on some of the earliest
government-run initiatives to bring inexpensive computers to its citizens. In 2003, the government
announced a plan to encourage domestic manufacturers to develop inexpensive consumer PCs for
Brazilians with incomes between $140 and $1,400 USD. (Rebelo, 2005) The One Laptop per Child
(OLPC) program has received substantial publicity in its e¤orts to develop a cheap laptop computer
suitable for children in developing countries. Uruguay has already completed its Plan Ceibal by
providing a free OLPC laptop to every primary school child, while other countries, such as Peru
and Columbia, have placed orders for hundreds of thousands of computers. (de Russe, 2009) Even
1

This is probably an understatement of cross-country disparities in access since 15 year olds who remain enrolled
in school in developing countries are more likely to come from advantaged family backgrounds.
2
This fraction is substantially lower for less-developed countries such as Thailand, Tunisia, and Turkey, and
essentially zero for countries in sub-Saharan Africa and parts of south Asia.

2

in cases where these computers are provided for school use, they are also intended to serve as
home computers.3 However, these major e¤orts to increase computer access among children are
happening despite relatively little credible evidence regarding the e¤ect of home computers on
children’s educational and behavioral outcomes.
The risks and bene…ts of increased computers use among children have been a matter of substantial public debate. As with concerns about television, many have expressed the worry that
children might become “addicted”to interactive computer products.4 Some negative physical consequences are clearly associated with long periods of computer use, such as repetitive strain injuries,
eye strain, and increased risk of obesity. Excessive computer use is also hypothesized to lead to
decreased social involvement and isolation. If computers are used for playing games or for accessing
the Internet, children may be exposed to adult content that can have detrimental e¤ects on social
and behavioral outcomes. More generally, it is possible that time spent on a computer displaces
other activities more valuable from a developmental perspective. On the other hand, computers
may help introduce children to an important new technology. This may foster the development
of computer skills which lead to better labor market outcomes as adult.5 Computers may also
facilitate learning through the use of educational software. Indeed, in contrast to television, the
interactive nature of computer technology has often been viewed with great promise.6 Since computers represent such a versatile technology, the potential risks and bene…ts are highly dependent
on the availability of di¤erent types of software and the patterns of actual use. Indeed, evidence
from the 2003 CPS indicates that 83 percent of American children aged 3 to 17 with a computer at
home used it to play games, the most common single use. (U.S. Census Bureau, 2005) Moreover, in
considering the e¤ect of home computers on child and adolescent outcomes, parental involvement
3

The chairman of OPLC, Nicholas Negroponte, explains that “mobility is important, especially with regard to taking the computer home at night.. . . .bringing the laptop home engages the family.”http://laptop.org/faq.en_US.html
4
Nevertheless, recent evidence on the e¤ect of early exposure to television on test scores suggests that (1950s)
television did not lead to lower cognitive achievement. (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2008) In related studies, Olken
(2009) …nds that television and radio reduces social participation in Indonesia while Jensen and Oster (2009) show
that access to cable TV improves women’s status in India.
5
Krueger (1993) estimated a large wage premium among Americans who use a computer at work. However,
DiNardo and Pishke (1997) have cast some doubt on whether these represent causal estimates for the e¤ect of
computer use by taking advantage of more detailed information on work activities from Germany.
6
See Wartella and Jennings (2000) for comparisons between computers and more traditional media.

3

and monitoring may be especially important mediating factors.7
This paper seeks to provide a credible estimate for the e¤ect of access to a home computer
on the development of human capital for children and adolescents from disadvantaged households.
We analyze a government program administered by the Romanian Ministry of Education which
subsidized the purchase of home computers. The program awarded approximately 35,000 vouchers
worth 200 Euros (about $300) in 2008 towards the purchase of a personal computer for low-income
students enrolled in Romania’s public schools. Similar to programs in other countries, the Euro 200
program was intended to increase home computer use among disadvantaged families and promote
computer skills for school-aged children. Since the …xed number of vouchers were allocated based
on a simple ranking of family income, we employ a regression discontinuity design that allows
comparisons across students very similar in family income and other respects, but markedly di¤erent
in their access to a computer at home. Using data that we collected through in-person household
interviews, we estimate the impact of winning a program voucher on computer ownership and use,
academic achievement, cognitive assessments, computer skills, and various behavioral outcomes.
Our …ndings indicate that home computer use has both positive and negative e¤ects on child
outcomes. We …nd that winning a voucher increased the likelihood of households owning a home
computer by over 50 percentage points, making them almost twice as likely to own a computer
as compared to households who had incomes above the program threshold. As expected, higher
rates of computer ownership also led to increased computer use, with children in households who
won a voucher using computers about 3 to 4 hours a week more than their counterparts who did
not win a voucher. We …nd strong evidence that children in households who won a voucher had
signi…cantly lower school grades in Math, English and Romanian, with most estimates clustered
around an e¤ect size of 1/3 of a standard deviation. On the other hand, we estimate that children
in household who won a voucher had signi…cantly higher scores in a test of computer skills and in
self-reported measures of computer ‡uency, with e¤ect sizes of about 1/3 of a standard deviation.
7

In their qualitative study of home computer use, Giacquinta et. al. (1993) …nd that children engaged in educational computing only if parents took a very active role in selecting software and spending time with the children at
the computer. When left on their own, most of the children in their sample only used home computers for games and
regarded educational programs as boring.

4

There is also some evidence that winning a voucher increased cognitive ability, as measured by a
Raven’s Progressive Matrices test. We do not …nd much evidence that winning a computer voucher
a¤ects behavioral outcomes. In summary, home computers use has an important impact on the
development of human capital. Although less precise, the same pattern of results holds for a smaller
sample of households who received a computer voucher four years earlier, suggesting that our main
…ndings persist over time.
These results may not be so surprising given that few parents or children report having educational software installed on their computer, and few children report using the computer for
homework or other educational purposes. Instead, most computers had games installed and children reported that most of the computer time was spent playing games. There is also some evidence
that winning a computer voucher reduced the time spent doing homework, watching TV, and reading. Interestingly, we …nd evidence that the presence of parental rules regarding homework mitigate
some of the negative e¤ects of winning a computer voucher without a¤ecting the gains to computer
skills and cognitive ability. On the other hand, the presence of rules regarding computer use reduce
the positive impacts on computer skills without improving academic achievement. Although these
results are merely suggestive since such rules are not randomly assigned, they may indicate that
encouraging homework is more e¤ective than restricting computer use.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related literature regarding the e¤ect
of home (and school) computers on child and adolescent outcomes. Section 3 provides background
on the Euro 200 program. Section 4 describes the data collection e¤ort and the resulting data.
Section 5 explains the empirical strategy which underlies the analysis. Section 6 presents the results
and Section 7 concludes.

2

Related Literature

There is a small but growing literature examining the e¤ect of home computer use on educational
outcomes using readily available survey data. Attewell and Battle (1999) use the 1988 National
Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS-88) to show that having a home computer is associated

5

with higher test scores in Math and reading. Fairlie (2005) use data from the Computer and
Internet Use Supplement to the 2001 CPS to show that having access to a home computer is
also associated with a higher likelihood of being enrolled in school. While the raw di¤erence
in school enrollment between teenagers with and without home computers is over 10 percentage
points, the di¤erential is only 1.4 percentage points after controlling for family income, parental
education, parental occupation and other background characteristics. This indicates that selection
on observable characteristics is quite substantial in this setting, and suggests that selection on
unobserved characteristics may lead to even further bias. Beltran, Das, and Fairlie (2010) extend
this work using the 2000-2003 CPS Supplements and National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLYS)
1997 to …nd that teenagers with home computers are 6 to 8 percentage points more likely to graduate
from high school.8 Although they attempt to address the possibility of omitted variables by using
parental use of the Internet at work and the presence of another teenager in the household as
instruments, the resulting estimates are statistically insigni…cant and there are plausible reasons
why the exclusion restrictions may be violated.
Fuchs and Woessmann (2004) estimate the relationship between the availability of home computers and student achievement in Math and reading tests using PISA data. They observe that the
positive correlation between home computers and student performance actually becomes negative
once they control for detailed student, family and school characteristics. While they recognize that
this analysis remains “descriptive rather than causal,”they maintain that these estimates should be
closer to the true causal e¤ect from an exogenous variation in computer availability. Several recent
papers exploit randomized experiments in order to address some of the concerns regarding causal
inference. Fairlie and London (2009) conduct a …eld experiment in which …nancial aid students
attending a large college in Northern California were randomly selected to receive free home computers. While they …nd some positive e¤ects of providing computers on educational outcomes and
self-reported computer skills, their estimates lack su¢ cient precision to enable strong inferences.
Servon and Kaestner (2008) examine the impact of providing a home computer and Internet service
8

Schmitt and Wadsworth (2004) also provide evidence of a positive relationship between home computer ownership
and subsequent academic achievement in Britain using the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS).

6

to low- and moderate-income families on their use of …nancial services but …nd little evidence of
program e¤ects.
Evidence concerning the e¤ect of computer use in school on educational attainment is also mixed.
Angrist and Lavy (2002) …nd that the quasi-random installation of computers in Israeli schools
did not lead to improvements in Math test scores. Barrera-Osorio and Linden (2009) conduct a
randomized evaluation of a Colombian program to integrate computers into public schools but …nd
little e¤ect on student test scores and other outcomes. In related work, Goolsbee and Guryan (2006)
show that Internet and communications subsidies in US schools (through the E-rate program) led
to increased Internet investment but did not lead to improved student test scores. Rouse and
Krueger (2004) present evidence from a randomized experiment showing that an instructional
reading computer program improved certain limited aspects of students language skills but did not
improve broader language abilities. In contrast, a recent study by Barrow, Markman and Rouse
(2010) evaluated a randomized experiment which provided computer instruction in algebra and
found signi…cant e¤ects on Mathematics achievement. Finally, Banerjee et. al. (2007) examine
the e¤ect of an computer-assisted learning program in India which o¤ered children two hours of
computer time per week to play games that involve solving Math problems. They …nd a positive
e¤ect of computer use on Math test scores, suggesting that closely targeted computer instruction
may be bene…cial.
Closely related to research on educational outcomes, the psychological literature has explored
the e¤ect of computer and internet use on children’s time-use, as well as cognitive and behavioral
outcomes. Subrahmanyam et. al. (2000, 2001) review some …ndings from recent US-based studies:
children with a computer at home spend more time using it and substitute away from watching
television (Kraut et al., 2001; Stanger, 1998); children playing computer based games display higher
levels of spatial ability (Subrahmanyam and Green…eld, 1994); e¤ects on social and behavioral
outcomes are quite mixed. Again, the possibility of omitted variables implies that these …ndings
are merely suggestive. However, these cognitive and non-cognitive (social and behavioral) outcomes
may play an important role in enhancing educational outcomes.

7

3

The Euro 200 Program

The voucher program, widely known as the Euro 200 program in Romania, was proposed by the
Prime Minister’s o¢ ce and adopted by unanimous vote in Parliament in June 2004 as Law 269/2004.
According to the law, the o¢ cial purpose of the program was to establish a mechanism to increase
the purchase of computers through …nancial incentives based on social criteria, in order to promote
competence in computing knowledge. Over time, the government expanded the resources allocated
to the voucher program: thus, whereas 25,051 families received vouchers in 2004, the number of
awards increased to 27,555 in 2005, 28,005 in 2006, 38,379 in 2007, and 35,484 in 2008. The
proportion of applicants who received computers also changed over time with about 20% in 2004,
53% in 2005, 96% in 2006, 100% in 2007, and 68% in 2008.9 The rules of the program speci…ed the
minimum speci…cations of computers purchased using the vouchers. In 2008, computers had to be
new and equipped with at least a 2 GHz processor, 1GB RAM memory, 160 GB hard-disk with a
keyboard, mouse and monitor, as well as some pre-installed software.
In the early rounds of the Euro 200 program, the 200 Euro (roughly $300) subsidy already
covered a large fraction of the cost a new computer that met the minimum speci…cations. For
example, in 2005, the voucher covered about 75 percent of the price of a system at Romania’s
largest computer retailer, who sold almost 40 percent of the program computers. (Comunicatii
Mobile, 2005) However, with the gradual reduction of computer prices over time, the voucher was
able to cover even higher fraction of the cost. Indeed, by 2007, two of the largest computer retailers
were able to o¤er computers that met the minimum speci…cations for 200 Euro. (Ministry of
Education, 2007). Thus, it is not surprising that according to data from the Ministry of Education,
99 percent of the issued vouchers in the regions included in our study were converted into computer
purchases by the recipients.
The program was targeted towards children from low income families.10 To be eligible to apply
9
Conseequently, we are not able to examine the 2006 and 2007 rounds of the Euro 200 program using a similar
research design.
10
There is evidence that among children who took the national exam at the end of grade 8, those who participated
in the Euro 200 program scored about 0.3 standard deviations below the national average.

8

for the program, a household was required to have at least one child under the age of 26 enrolled in
grades 1 to 12 of a private or public school or attending university. At the same time only households
with monthly family income per household member of less than 150 RON (around $65) were eligible
to apply. The calculation of income included all permanent sources of income of family members in
the month prior to the application, with the exception of unemployment bene…ts, state support for
children, merit scholarships and social scholarships.11 In 2008, 52,212 households applied for the
program and met the threshold. Following the application deadline, all the applicants were ranked
based on their family income per household member. Since the government had a limited budget,
it restricted the number of vouchers to 35,484 in the 2008 program round, which corresponded to
a maximum income of 62.58 RON (about $27).12 Neither the number of winners nor the income
threshold was known to the applicants in advance. This feature of the program is essential for
implementing the regression discontinuity design which enables us to compare students with incomes
close to the 62.58 RON threshold who experienced a discontinuity in access to a home computer.
In order to encourage the use of these computers for educational purposes, the Ministry of Education also o¤ered 530 multimedia educational lessons to voucher winners. The lessons included
subjects such as Math, biology, physics, geography, computer science, history and chemistry for
di¤erent grades and were developed under the guidelines of the Ministry of Education in accordance
with the national teaching curriculum. Computer retailers who participated in the Euro 200 program were encouraged to install these lessons at no charge on the computers of program winners.
However, as revealed by our household survey, relatively few parents report having educational
software installed on their computer, and few children report using the computer for educational
purposes.
11

The application form included several explicit warnings against reporting false incomes and families needed to
provide supporting documentation along with the application.
12
Vouchers were issued in the name of the child, and therefore not transferable. While it is possible that families,
in turn, sold their computer to other buyers, we show that most voucher winners actually kept their computers.

9

4

Data

The data used in this paper come from a 2009 household survey that we conducted with families who
applied to the 2008 round of the Euro 200 program.13 In order to conduct the survey, we obtained
a list of 6,418 families who participated in the Romanian regions of Arad, Bistrita-Nasaud, Braila,
Cluj, Maramures, Mures and Sibiu.14 This list contained the names of the parents and child who
applied to the program, the place of residence and the name of the child’s school. It also included
information on the income per family member in the month prior to the application deadline,
which is essential for implementing our regression discontinuity design. With the help of Gallup
Romania, we attempted to locate and interview each of these families in person. We succeeded
in interviewing 3,354 families for a response rate of 52%, which is in line with Gallup’s interview
rate for this population.15 While the resulting sample is not completely representative of the
program applicant pool or the population of these counties more generally, we found no evidence
that response rates di¤ered between households who won vouchers and their counterparts who did
not receive vouchers.
The household survey had three separate components. First, we interviewed the family in order to obtain demographic information about each member of the household and basic household
characteristics, including information about computer ownership. Second, we surveyed the primary
caregiver to elicit information on child outcomes for each child in the family. Third, we conducted
a separate interview with each child present at home on the day of the survey. Both the parental
and the child questionnaires included questions about our main variables of interest, such as computer ownership and use, time-use patterns, academic achievement, and the presence of behavioral
problems. In addition, we administered a cognitive ability test, a computer test, and a battery of
computer ‡uency questions to the children present at home on the day of the survey.
13

The survey was conduct in the spring of 2009, between May and June, while most children were still in school.
These regions are quite representative of Romania. We did not …nd a di¤erence between the regions in our
study as compared to the rest of the country in terms of area, population, income per capita as well as program
characteristics such as number of applicants and percent winners.
15
At the same time, we also conducted identical interviews with applicants to the 2005 round of the Euro 200
from the regions of Covasna and Valcea. For this sample, the original list included 1,554 families and we managed to
conduct 647 interview, yielding a somewhat lower response rate of 42%.
14

10

Panel A of Table 1 presents summary statistics for the main household variables. Average
monthly income per household member is about 48 RON, which translates into approximately $20.
Since the program was targeted towards low income families, it is not surprising that the sample
population is predominantly rural and has comparatively low levels of educational attainment.16
Among our 3,356 applicant families, 64.7 percent received a voucher in the 2008 round of the Euro
200 program and 98.6 percent of the awarded vouchers were cashed according to records by the
Ministry of Education. About 73 percent of all households own a computer, indicating that about
one third of households who did not qualify for a voucher in the 2008 round had a computer in
the spring of 2009. Computers are reported to be turned on for an average of 1.5 hours each day,
or about 2 hours conditional on having a computer. Interestingly, 65 percent of households have
games installed on their home computer, or 87 percent of those who own a computer. In contrast,
only about 9 percent of households have educational software installed on their home computer,
despite the fact that educational software was made available from the Ministry of Education at
no cost. Access to the Internet is limited to just 14 percent of households. Thus, when interpreting
our results, it is important to keep in mind that the voucher program increased computer access
without much of an e¤ect on Internet access.
Panel B of Table 1 presents parental reports on time-use, academic, and behavioral outcomes
for about 5,900 children.17 The sample of children is pretty evenly split between boys and girls and
ranges from 7 to 22 years of age (with only 3 percent above the age 19). On average, parents report
that children use a computer about 5 hours a week, or over 6 hours a week conditional on having a
home computer. For measures of time spent doing homework, watching TV, and reading, we focus
on a binary variable indicating daily use: whether children spent more than 1 hour a week engaged
in that activity. Academic outcomes consist of average school grades during the 2008-09 academic
year in the subjects of Math, Romanian, and English, as well as a school behavior grade. All subjects
are graded out of 10, with grades in Math, Romanian, and English averaging about 7.5, and with
16

Compared to national averages, our sample contains a somewhat larger fraction of Hungarians re‡ecting the fact
that one of the counties (Mures) has a large Hungarian majority.
17
We allowed the head of household to report on up to 5 children. This sample censoring a¤ects only 29 families
who report having between 6 and 11 children.

11

the vast majority of students receiving a 10 in behavior. We also asked parents if their children
had exhibited various behavior problems during the past three months. We created an index for
the fraction of the problems that were reported to be “sometimes” or “often” true of the child, as
opposed to “not true”for the following behaviors: trouble getting along with teachers, disobedience
at home, disobedience at school, hanging around with troublemakers, bullying others, inability to
sit still, and whether the child prefers to be alone.18 Finally, we elicited information about children’s
height and weight to form measures of BMI, as well as information about participation in sports
and service.
Table 2 presents summary statistics based on 4,600 child interviews for time-use, academic,
and behavioral outcomes, as well as cognitive and computer assessments. Average age and child
gender in the child surveys are very similar to those in the parent surveys. Children also report
doing homework and watching TV at similar frequencies to those reported by parents. In addition,
we asked children about the daily use of their computers for games, homework, and educational
activities. Almost 20 percent of children report that they play games every day. In contrast,
only 1.5 percent of children report that they use the computer for homework every day and less
than 1 percent report using educational software every day. Average grades in Math, Romanian,
and English are also comparable to parent reports. In a later section, we examine the degree of
correspondence between child and parent reports for di¤erent questions in greater detail.
We also administered an un-timed cognitive ability test based on Raven’s Progressive Matrices,
which is standardized with a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.19 This test is designed to assess
general intelligence by measuring the ability to form perceptual relations and to reason by analogy
independent of language and formal schooling. (Raven, 1939, 1956) However, a number of scholars
have argued that the test also measures an important spatial component of ability.20 We also
18

The questions are based on items used in the National Health Interview Survey and the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth Children’s Supplement (NLSY-CS). As in recent MTO evaluations (Katz, Kling, and Leibman,
2001), we focus on seven questions that asked about behaviors which the mothers could observe directly, as opposed
to generic questions about behavior or questions requiring intuition about how their child was feeling.
19
This is comprised of two di¤erent sets of test questions: one given to children aged 5-12 and another given to
children aged 13 and over. The test instrument is based on the one administered to respondents of the Mexican
Family Lifestyle Survey (MxFLS) (http://www.mx‡s.cide.edu/).
20
See, for example, Burke (1958) and Hunt (1975). Some more recent work in psychology tries to explain the small

12

administered a computer test and elicited self-reported computer ‡uency. The computer literacy
test contained 12 multiple-choice questions intended to capture a measure of computer skills (the
Data Appendix contains a full description of the computer test). Self-reported computer ‡uency
was obtained by asking children to report on their knowledge of di¤erent tasks related to operating
a computer, using applications, as well as email and the internet use (again, the Data Appendix
contains the full set of computer ‡uency questions). These questions are based on a computeremail-web (CEW) ‡uency scale by Bunz (2004) and validated by Bunz et. al. (2007) with their
actual abilities performing related tasks in an applied computer-lab session.21 We report the raw
‡uency scores ranging from 1-4 but we normalize the scales to a mean of 0 and standard deviation
of 1 in the regression analysis. We also conducted a 10 item Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale in order
to provide a self-reported measure of non-cognitive skills.22 Finally, we asked children about their
health status, problems with pain in the hands, perception of overweight or underweight, and the
frequency of smoking and drinking of alcohol.

5

Empirical strategy

We employ a regression discontinuity (RD) design to estimate the e¤ect of providing a computer
voucher to low-income students enrolled in Romania’s public schools in 2008. Since these computer
vouchers were allocated according to a simple income cuto¤, we are able to compare outcomes
across families with similar income and other characteristics, but very di¤erent levels of computer
ownership. This corresponds to a “sharp” RD design and the basic regression model used through
the analysis is as follows:

outcomei =

0

Xi + winneri + f (incomei ) + "i

(1)

but consistent sex di¤erences in Raven’s Progressive Matrices test in terms of a spatial component of ability; for
example Colom et. al. (2004) and Lynn et. al. (2004).
21
These questions were based in large part on work by Bunz (2004) to develop and validate a computer-email-web
(CEW) literacy scale. Bunz et. al. (2007) show that computer ‡uency
22
The Rosenberg test consists of 10 statements related to overall feelings of self-worth or self-acceptance. The items
are answered on a four-point scale which ranges from “strongly agree” (1) to “strongly disagree” (4). Summing the
ratings after reverse scoring the negatively worded items, scores range from 10 to 40, with higher scores indicating
lower self-esteem.

13

where outcomei represents a particular child outcome such as computer use or GPA by child i. Xi
includes a set of control variables: age, ethnicity, gender, and educational attainment of the head of
household, as well as child gender and age dummies. In practice, these control variables have very
little e¤ect on our estimates of the discontinuity and serve mainly to increase precision. winneri is
an indicator variable equal to 1 if monthly household income per capita is less than the cut-o¤ of
62.58 RON, and 0 otherwise. The coe¢ cient , our main coe¢ cient of interest, indicates the e¤ect of
receiving a Euro 200 computer voucher on the relevant outcome. Finally, f (incomei ) is a smooth
function of income, which is the forcing variable in the context of this regression discontinuity
design.
The central question for implementing this empirical strategy is how to model f (incomei ). We
consider both parametric and non-parametric functions of income to explore the robustness of our
…ndings to a variety of functional form assumptions. For our parametric speci…cations, we focus
on linear, quadratic, and cubic models, allowing the slope of these functions to vary on each side
of the cuto¤ (i.e. linear, quadratic and cubic splines). For our non-parametric speci…cations, we
follow Hahn, Todd, and van der Klaauw (2001) and Porter (2003) by using local linear regressions
to estimate the left and right limits of the discontinuity, where the di¤erence between the two is
the estimated treatment e¤ect. We estimate this in one step using a simple rectangular kernel.
Although a triangular kernel, by putting more weight on observations closer to the cuto¤ point,
has been shown to be boundary optimal (Chang, Fan, and Marron, 1997), Lee and Lemuiex (2009)
argue that a more transparent way of putting more weight on observations close to the cuto¤ is
to re-estimate a model with a rectangular kernel using smaller bandwidths. We follow Lee and
Lemuiex and implement a simple rectangular kernel. However, as in much of the earlier research,
our results are not very sensitive to the choice of kernel (Fan and Gijbels, 1996).
A more consequential decision is the choice of bandwidth. Given the absence of a widely agreedupon method for the selection of optimal bandwidths in the non-parametric RD context, we follow
Ludwig and Miller (2007) and present results for a broad range of candidate bandwidths. Our
preferred estimates are based on a bandwidth of 30 which appears to balance the goal of staying

14

relatively local to the cuto¤ while providing enough data to yield informative estimates. However,
we also consider bandwidths that are twice (60), half (15) and one fourth (7.5) the size of our
preferred bandwidth. In addition, we present two alternative approaches for estimating the optimal bandwidth: (i) a modi…ed cross-validation (CV) procedure, as described by Ludwig and Miller
(2005) and Imbens and Lemuiex (2007);23 and (ii) the Imbens-Kalyanarman (IK) optimal bandwidth, as described by Imbens and Kalyanarman (2009).24 The speci…c bandwidths determined
according to these procedures di¤er for each outcome, but most IK bandwidths range from 5-10
whereas most CV bandwidths range from 20-40.25 Finally, we follow Imbens and Lemuiex (2007)
and Lee and Lemuiex (2009) by presenting standard robust errors, but cluster by household when
running regressions at the child level to allow for within-household correlations.26
The central assumption underlying the RD design is that we have correctly speci…ed the function
of income (the forcing variable) which determines assignment of the computer voucher. However,
another important assumption is that households were not able to manipulate the forcing variable,
by reporting a lower income. While it is possible that some families under-reported their income
level, we do not believe that cheating represents a serious concern.27 The minimum cut-o¤ of 62.58
RON for the voucher program was not known ex-ante; it was determined by the amount of funds
available and by the number of households who applied and their corresponding income, none of
which were known prior to the start of the program. Moreover, in the previous rounds of 2006
and 2007, essentially all household who applied ended up receiving vouchers. Consequently, there
was a strong reason for families to believe that they would receive a voucher even if they reported
income close to the upper limit for eligibility. We o¤er an explicit test for manipulation of the
23

The cross-validiation (CV) procedure is implemented by examining prediction errors for each data point within
10 RON of the income cuto¤. Speci…cally, we generate a loss function of the average boundary prediction error, where
the predicted values of datapoints to the left (right) of the cuto¤ are based on local linear regressions using data only
to the left (right) of these points. We create this loss function for bandwidths ranging from 1 to 50 and select the
one which minimizes loss. This procedure is implemented separately for each outcome variable.
24
The IK bandwidth selection procedure is implemented using the Stata ado …le named rdob.ado (available on
Imbens’website).
25
Having plotted graphs of our dependent variables by income, it appears that the IK bandwidths are undersmoothing the data due to the extremely small bandwidths.
26
Using analytic standard errors derived based on the formula provided by Porter (2003) does little to alter our
inferences. However, these do not account for the possibility of correlated observations within-household.
27
As mentioned previously, the Euro 200 application form included stern warnings against any attempt to falsify
information on income.

15

forcing variable along the lines of McCrary (2007) in a subsequent section.
Note that we restrict most of our analysis to the reduced-form e¤ects of winning a voucher.
Some families who did not win a voucher in 2008 may have already owned a computer or decided
to buy a computer after …nding out that they would not receive one as part of the government
program. However, we do not know exactly when these computers were purchased so there may
be variation in the exposure to computer ownership that isn’t captured by observed ownership in
2009 at the time of the survey. Households who did not win a voucher but purchased a computer
just prior to the time of the survey will have had a much shorter exposure to computers than the
households who won a voucher and received computers in the summer of 2008. So instrumenting
for computer ownership with having received a voucher would not “scale up” our estimates in
the appropriate fashion. Nevertheless, although we focus on the reduced-form e¤ects, we will also
present (naive) two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates for our main outcomes in a subsequent
section.

6

Main Results

We present our main results by showing 6 di¤erent non-parametric speci…cations (bandwidths
of 60, 30, 15, 7.5, as well as the Imbens-Kalyanaraman (IK) and cross-validation (CV) optimal
bandwidths) and 3 di¤erent parametric speci…cations (linear, quadratic and cubic splines) for each
outcome.28 All our regressions include age, ethnicity, gender, and educational attainment of the
head of household, as well as child gender and age dummies. As mentioned earlier, our preferred
estimates are based on a non-parametric bandwidth of 30 which appears to balance the goal of
staying relatively local to the cuto¤ while providing enough data to yield informative estimates.
Consequently, we also display graphs of our main outcomes using local linear regressions with a
bandwidth of 30. These plot …tted values of residuals from local linear regressions of the main
outcomes on our standard set of controls (where income is always normalized to be 0 at the 62.58
28

In the interest of displaying a broad range of di¤erent speci…cations, our tables do not report some basic statistics
(number of observations, R2 , complier means, etc.). These are available from the authors.

16

RON cuto¤).29

6.1

E¤ect on Computer Ownership

We begin by displaying the dramatic e¤ect of winning a voucher on computer ownership in Table 3
and Figure 1. Panel A of Figure 1 illustrates the sharp regression discontinuity design that underlies
our empirical strategy, wherein all households with income below the cuto¤ are awarded a Euro
200 voucher. Using data from the Ministry of Education, Panel B documents that an extremely
high proportion of awarded vouchers are actually cashed in to buy computers. Thus, to a …rst
approximation, we can interpret the e¤ect of winning a voucher as the receipt of a free computer.
Columns 1 and 6 of Table 3 indicate that households who won a voucher were over 50 percentage
points more likely to have a computer at home at the discontinuity, representing at least a 170
percent increase over the likelihood of owning a computer among those who did not win a voucher.
Panel C of Figure 1 reveals a sharp discontinuity and con…rms that families around the cuto¤ with
very similar incomes experienced a very di¤erent likelihood of owning a computer at home. Panel
D shows that winning a voucher also increases actual computer use for children. The corresponding
estimates from columns 2 and 7 indicate that children in households who received a voucher report
spending around 2-4 additional hours per week as compared to children who did not receive a
voucher with similar income; our preferred estimates are clustered around 3 hours based on both
parent and child reports. Finally, the estimates in columns 3 and 8 con…rm that winning a voucher
did not lead to di¤erences in internet access.
We also examine the presence of computer software that may in‡uence whether the computer
is used for productive (or unproductive) activities. Thus, Panels E and F of Figure 1 display the
likelihood that households who won a voucher have a computer installed with educational software
and games respectively. While the e¤ect of winning on having a computer with educational software
is generally signi…cant in columns 4 and 9, it is substantially smaller than the e¤ect of winning
on having a computer with games installed in columns 5 and 10. Indeed, Panel E of Figure 1
29
Plotting the residuals yields similar graphs to those based on raw values but helps eliminates some of the noise.
See Lee and Lemuiex (2009) for a discussion of residualized outcomes.

17

con…rms that almost all children in households who won a voucher use a home computer with games
installed on it. The absence of education software is somewhat surprising given that the Ministry of
Education made such software freely available to winners of the Euro 200 program. However, this
software was not pre-installed and required additional e¤ort for installation by computer vendors
and voucher winners. The next section examines the types of computer use reported by children
in more detail, as well as time use for other types of daily activities.

6.2

E¤ect on Computer and Time Use

Table 4 and Figure 2 present estimates for the e¤ect of winning a voucher on children’s computer
use and time use based on binary variables indicating daily use.30 Information about di¤erent types
of computer use was elicited from the child survey only. Column 1 shows that children who won
a voucher were 14 percentage points more likely to use a computer for games on a daily basis. In
columns 2 and 3, we observe that winning a voucher does not translate into increased computer
use for doing homework or for using educational software. Apart from the fact that computers
are not used for strictly educational purposes, time spent in front of a computer also appears to
crowd out other important activities. Columns 5 and 7 suggest that the probability of doing at
least 1 hour of homework a day is lower for voucher winners, although this …nding is not very
precisely estimated or robust across all the speci…cations. Columns 6 and 8 indicate that winning a
computer voucher also decreases the time spent watching TV. Finally, parental reports of reading in
column 9 (which was included only in the parent survey) indicate that children in households who
won a voucher are signi…cant less likely to reading for pleasure on a daily basis. The results from
Table 4 are mirrored in Figure 2 which present graphs based on the child reports. They suggest
that the increase in computer use among winners of the Euro 200 program is mostly spent playing
games, and associated with reductions in time spent watching TV, doing homework and reading
for pleasure.31
30
As explained in Section 4, we asked children about whether they used their computer for games, homework,
and educational activities every day. For homework, watching TV, and reading, we measure daily use with a binary
variable indicating whether children spent more than 1 hour a week engaged in that activity.
31
It is important to note that we generally do not …nd signi…cant e¤ects for average measures of time-use for
homework and TV, although the estimates are mostly similar in sign and magnitude. This suggest that most of the

18

6.3

E¤ect on Academic Achievement

In Table 5 and Figure 3, we explore the impact of winning a computer voucher on measures of
academic achievement. In particular, we focus on average school grades for the 2008-2009 academic
year in Math, Romanian, and English, as well as a grade for school behavior. These are the
main subjects that are studied in Romanian schools and serve as important indicators of school
performance. As for previous outcomes, we present results based on both child and parent reports,
which serve as an important check on the validity of our measures. Columns 1 and 5 of Table 5
indicate that children in households who won a voucher have a signi…cantly lower Math GPA than
their counterparts who did not win a voucher across most speci…cations. The coe¢ cients tend to
range from about 0.3 to 0.7 representing an e¤ect size of 1/5 to 1/2 of a standard deviation, with
a preferred estimate of approximately 1/3 of a standard deviation.32 Panels A and B of Figure 3
display the corresponding discontinuity in the non-parametric plots of Math GPA on our normalized
measure of income. Columns 2 and 6 indicate a slightly larger magnitude for the negative e¤ect
of winning a voucher on GPA in Romanian language across most speci…cations, with a similar
discontinuity observed in panels C and D. Again, the e¤ect size for our preferred estimates is about
1/3 of a standard deviation. Finally, columns 3 and 7 together with panels E and F show very
similar results for the e¤ect of winning a voucher on GPA in English.33 We …nd no signi…cant
di¤erence in the e¤ect of winning a voucher on the grades received for school behavior. Overall,
these results suggest that winning a voucher and receiving a free computer through the Euro 200
program led to a lower academic performance in school.
e¤ect on time use is on the margin of daily use. The results for time spent reading are much more robust across
di¤erent speci…cations.
32
Interestingly, the magnitudes are substantially larger for smaller bandwidths. When we graph Figure 3 using
these smaller bandwidths, the resulting plots appear to be somewhat undersmoothed with a few points near the
discotinuity driving the larger results.
33
While there is a downward slope between income and academic outcomes for winners in these graphs, the slopes
on either side of the discontinuity are not statistically signi…cant from one another.

19

6.4

E¤ect on Cognitive Ability and Computer Skills

Table 6 and Figure 4 present estimates for the e¤ect of winning a computer voucher on a number
of di¤erent assessments that we administered directly to children. To begin with, we administered
an un-timed cognitive ability test based on Raven’s Progressive Matrices. As explained earlier, this
test is designed to assess general intelligence independent of formal schooling so it is likely to di¤er
from the measures of academic achievement described in the previous section. Moreover, insofar
as the test requires matching di¤erent shapes and patterns to a series of spatial con…gurations,
it may also pick up an important spatial component of ability. Column 1 of Table 6 shows that
children in households who received a voucher tend to have signi…cantly higher Raven scores than
their counterparts who did not win a voucher, with an e¤ect size of 1/3 of a standard deviation
according to our preferred speci…cation.34 Panel A of Figure 4 shows con…rms the presence of a
visible discontinuity in a graphical analysis.
We also administered two assessments to measure children’s computer skills. The …rst was
a computer test which consisted of 12 multiple choice questions intended to measure computer
knowledge –see Data Appendix for a full description of the test. Column 2 of Table 6 shows that
children in households who received a voucher have signi…cantly higher computer test scores than
those who did not win a voucher, with an e¤ect size ranging from 1/5 to 2/5 of a standard deviation
in all speci…cations. The graphical representation of this estimate is shown in Panel B of Figure 4.
The second assessment asked children about their ‡uency with respect to di¤erent dimensions of
computer use. We …nd that winning a voucher improves the ability to operate a computer (column
3) and the ability to e¤ectively use a number of applications (column 4). While the coe¢ cients
on these outcomes become insigni…cant for bandwidths smaller than 15, the magnitudes remain as
large for these speci…cation. These …ndings are con…rmed by the graphical analyses presented in
panels C and D of Figure 4. Given that internet use did not increase with program participation, it
is not surprising that we do not …nd improvements on questions related to web and email ‡uency,
34
Note that the magnitude and signi…cant of this e¤ect diminishes substantially with bandwidths smaller than 15
(including the IK bandwidth which is approximately 7 for this outcome).

20

as seen in columns 5 and 6 and panels E and F of Figure 4.

6.5

E¤ect on Non-Cognitive Outcomes

We examine the impact of winning a voucher on various non-cognitive outcomes in Table 7. From
the child survey, we elicited the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale to assess global self-esteem, and asked
children about their health status, problems due to pain in their hands and …ngers, their perception
of being overweight, and the frequency of smoking and drinking of alcohol. In the parent survey,
we asked parents to complete the Behavioral Problem Index (BPI) and provide information about
child height and weight (to construct BMI) as well as their engagement in sports and community
service activities. For almost all of these non-cognitive outcomes, we …nd no signi…cant e¤ects
across our many speci…cations.35 To summarize the evidence presented thus far, winning a voucher
and receiving a free home computer appears to have both positive and negative e¤ects on child
outcomes. While computers certainly seem to improve computer skills, they also a¤ect school
performance negatively measured by the average grades in three important academic subjects.
There is also evidence that winning a voucher and receiving a free computer leads to higher scores
on a test of general intelligence (which may also pick up a spatial component of ability).

7

Further Results

In this section, we examine a number of additional results that build on our main …ndings. We
explore whether the e¤ects of winning a computer voucher are mediated by proxies for parental
involvement and supervision, and whether they are a¤ected by child characteristics such as age
and gender. We also investigate whether the e¤ects of winning a computer voucher persist over
time, and consider a number of speci…cations checks, Finally, we discuss our …ndings in light of
our OLS and 2SLS estimates. In the interest of saving space and to improve the precision of
our estimates, all of the speci…cations in this sections are based on linear splines using the full
35
The few instances of signi…cant coe¢ cients across our many speci…cations suggest negative e¤ects (Rosenberg
Scale, BPI, Health). However, given the problems associated with multiple inference, we are hesitant to put much
weight on these …ndings.

21

sample and the standard set of controls (age, ethnicity, gender, and educational attainment of the
head of household, as well as child gender and age dummies). We also focus on nine of our main
outcome variables which include computer use, homework, Math GPA, Romanian GPA, English
GPA, Raven’s Progressive Matrices test, computer test, computer ‡uency, and application ‡uency,
all derived from the child survey instrument.

7.1

E¤ects of Parental Rules

In order to better understand the role of parental supervision and monitoring on our main results,
we introduce two indicator variables for whether parents have rules regulating computer use and
homework activities for each child. Approximately one third of children have parents who impose
rules on computer use and a similar fraction of children have parents who impose rules on homework
activities.36 We proceed to estimate equations in which the variable for winning a Euro 200 voucher
is interacted respectively with each of these parental rules.37 Appendix Table 1 presents results from
estimating this equation on our main outcome variables. Note that these variables are potentially
endogenous, so the results of this analysis need to be interpreted with care.
Panel A of Appendix Table 1 displays the interaction of our program e¤ect, winner, with
the presence of rules related to computer use. As might be expected, the interaction is negative
and signi…cant in column 1, indicating that computer use is substantially lower for children whose
parents impose rules on computer use. This also appears to lead to a lower acquisition of computer
skills, as demonstrated by the negative and signi…cant interactions for the computer test and
measures of computer ‡uency in columns 7, 8, and 9. On the other hand, the presence of rules
on computer use do not seem to impact daily homework activities, or academic achievement in
school. In Panel B, we present the analogous results for the interaction of our program e¤ect
with the presence of rules related to homework. Again, as might be expected, children whose
36

About 18 percent of children are subject to rules for both computer use and homework activities (with 13 percent
of children are subject only rules on computer use, and another 13 percent of children are subject only to rules on
homework activities).
37
Speci…cally we estimate the equation: outcomei = 0 Xi + winneri + rulesi + winneri rulesi + f (incomei ) +
"i where rulesi is an indicator for whether the parents have rules about computer use or homework activities.

22

parents impose rules on homework do more homework (the interaction is positive and signi…cant
in column 2). Moreover, this also appears to impact school performance. The presence of rules
regarding homework activities ameliorates the negative impact of winning a computer voucher on
Math, Romanian, and English GPA with the coe¢ cients on the interaction terms in columns 3, 4,
and 5 about half the size of the main e¤ects. Interestingly, having rules regulating homework does
not have a negative e¤ect on computer use or the accumulation of computer skills. Neither rules
regarding computer use or homework appear to impact scores on the Raven test.
We interpret these results as consistent with the view that parental monitoring through rules
can be important mediating factors. Furthermore, our results suggest that rules regarding computer
use reduce the positive e¤ects of winning a voucher on computer skills without improving academic
achievement, while rules regarding homework mitigate some of the negative e¤ects of winning a
computer voucher without a¤ecting the gains to computer skills or cognitive ability.

7.2

Heterogeneous E¤ects

Appendix Table 2 explores the di¤erential impact of child characteristics on the e¤ect of winning
a computer voucher for our nine main outcome variables. We estimate equations in which the
variable for winning a Euro 200 voucher is interacted with child age and gender.38 Interestingly,
Panel A does not reveal any signi…cant di¤erences in the e¤ect of winning a computer voucher
between males and females. There are substantial di¤erences in the mean levels of our outcomes
variables by gender. Girls use computers less and do more homework; they also have higher GPA
and cognitive ability scores but lower computer skills. Panel B displays the interaction between
winning a computer voucher and child age. As with gender, there are substantial di¤erences in
the mean levels of our outcomes variables. However, there is also some evidence that younger
children display the largest gains in cognitive ability as measured by Raven’s Progressive Matrices
(column 6), and in computer ‡uency (columns 8 and 9). The …nding that younger children display
larger gains in cognitive ability is consistent with work by Cunha and Heckman (2008) showing
Speci…cally, we estimate the equation: outcomei = 0 Xi + winneri + child_charsi + winneri child_charsi +
f (incomei ) + "i where child_charsi includes age, gender and number of siblings.
38

23

that cognitive skills are more malleable at early ages.

7.3

Long Term E¤ects

All of our analysis thus far has examined the impact of winning a computer voucher on outcomes
approximately one year after families would have receiving their free computer. In order to address
whether this program also had longer term impacts on child outcomes, we implemented an identical
survey on a sample of children who participated in the 2005 round of the same Euro 200 program.39
From an initial list of 1,554 families who applied to the 2005 round from the regions of Covasna
and Valcea, we were able to successfully complete 647 household interviews.40 Appendix Table 3
presents regression results using a linear spline and standard controls for our nine main outcome
variables.
Column 1 of Appendix Table 3 indicates that households who won a voucher in the 2005 round
of the Euro 200 program had signi…cantly higher levels of computer ownership, even four years
after they received a free computer. Nevertheless, the di¤erence of 17 percentage points between
households who did and did not receive a voucher is substantially smaller than the di¤erential in
the short-term. This is not surprising given that those families who applied for a voucher in 2005
but did not receive one could reapply in subsequent years. Columns 4, 5, and 6 show the long-term
e¤ects of receiving a voucher on average grades in Math, Romanian, and English respectively. The
coe¢ cients are negative but somewhat imprecise. Furthermore, if one were to re-scale the size
of these e¤ects in light of the smaller di¤erence in computer ownership, the magnitude of these
estimates suggest long term e¤ects that are similar to the short-term ones. The impact of winning
a voucher on cognitive ability as measured by the Raven’s Progressive Matrices test is positive but
insigni…cant, again with a similar magnitude if scaled appropriately. Finally, the e¤ect of winning
a voucher on computer skills is positive in two out of our three assessments. The lack of power in
39

In a previous analysis using the same sample of 2005 program participants from Covasna and Valcea, we analyzed
the short term impact as part of a smaller scale pilot study. Our main …ndings from that study are broadly consistent
with those in the current study (Malamud and Pop-Eleches, 2008).
40
In 2007 we completed 858 household interviews. Our lower response rate for the four-year follow-up is not
surprising given that more time elapsed between program and the latest follow-up.

24

most of these estimates is not surprising given the small sample and we do not wish to draw any
strong conclusions. Nevertheless, taken as a whole, these results are consistent with the persistence
of long term negative e¤ects on academic achievement, and positive long-term e¤ects on cognitive
ability and computer skills.

7.4

2SLS and OLS Estimates

Throughout the paper, we have focused on reduced-form estimates of the e¤ect of winning a computer voucher through the Euro 200 program. Given that almost all of the vouchers were actually
cashed in to buy computers (recall Panel B of Figure 1), we may be able to interpret the e¤ect
of winning a voucher as the receipt of a free computer. But this does not represent the e¤ect of
having access to a computer at home because some of the households who did not win a voucher
do report having a computer at home. However, we could scale up our reduced-form estimates by
the di¤erence in computer ownership between household who won and did not win a voucher.41
With an estimated di¤erence in computer ownership of approximately 50 percentage points, this
suggests the impact of having access to a home computer are about twice the impact of winning a
voucher (2 ). A similar scaling would be achieved by estimating 2SLS regressions in which we use
our indicator for winning a voucher (winneri ) to instrument for computer ownership (computeri ).
Note that this approach may not “scale up” our estimates in the appropriate fashion. As
explained earlier, some families who did not win a voucher in 2008 may have already owned a
computer or decided to buy a computer after …nding out that they would not receive one as
part of the government program. However, we do not know exactly when these computers were
purchased so there may be variation in the exposure to computer ownership that isn’t captured by
observed ownership in 2009 at the time of the survey. Households who did not win a voucher but
purchased a computer just prior to the time of the survey will have had a much shorter exposure
to computers than the households who won a voucher and received computers in the summer of
41
Note that this resembles the standard calculation used in moving from an intention-to-treat (ITT) estimator
to a treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimator. Such scaling of the reduced form estimate by the proportion of
individuals that actually received the treatment was introduced by Bloom (1984).

25

2008. Nevertheless, the di¤erence in computer ownership of 50 percentage points at the time of
the survey does provide a useful benchmark. Consequently, we present (naive) 2SLS estimates of
computer ownership on our main nine outcomes in Appendix Table 5. The 2SLS estimates con…rm
that the e¤ects of computer ownership are approximately twice as large as the reduced-form e¤ects
of winning a computer voucher.
Although we have used a regression discontinuity design in order to overcome the problem of
omitted variables and selection bias, it would also be interesting to compare our causal estimates
with those that would emerge from a conventional OLS analysis. We attempt to implement this
comparison by estimating an OLS regression for children in households that did not receive a computer voucher through the Euro 200 program.42 Approximately 37 percent of the 1,186 household
in our sample who did not receive a voucher reported owning a computer at the time of the survey.
The OLS estimates for our nine main outcome variables are reported in Appendix Table 4. As
with reduced-form and 2SLS estimates, owning a computer is associated with higher scores on the
computer test as well as greater ‡uency in operating a computer and using applications. Indeed, the
magnitude of the coe¢ cients in these OLS regressions are strikingly similar to those from 2SLS.
On the other hand, owning a computer is also associated with higher average grades in Math,
Romanian, and English. Insofar as our causal estimates indicate a negative impact of winning
a computer voucher on average grades, this suggests that children in households who purchased
computers were more likely to have higher academic achievement. Finally, the OLS estimate for
the e¤ect of computer ownership on cognitive ability is positive and signi…cant but only two-thirds
the magnitude of the 2SLS estimate.

7.5

Speci…cation Checks

An important assumption underlying our empirical strategy is that all household and child characteristics, other than receipt of a computer voucher through the Euro 200 program, vary continuously
around the income cuto¤ of 62.58 RON. While we cannot verify this assumption for unobserved
42
Speci…cally we estimate the equation: outcomei =
indicator variable for computer ownership.

0

Xi + computeri + f (incomei ) + "i where computeri is an

26

characteristics, we can check whether our main control variables indeed vary continuously around
the income cuto¤. Appendix Table 6 con…rms that the discontinuities for gender, age, ethnicity
and education of the head of household as well as age of the child are almost always small and
statistically insigni…cant across our many speci…cations. In only one of ten control variables (gender
of child) do we reject the null hypothesis. The smoothness of these controls around the discontinuity is also readily observed in Appendix Figure 1, which plots a selection of the control variables
included in the table.
The other important assumption underlying our RD design is that households were not able
to manipulate the forcing variable, by reporting a lower income. As explained earlier, we do not
believe that such under-reporting represents a serious concern. The minimum cut-o¤ of 62.58 RON
for the voucher program was not known ex-ante (it was determined by the amount of funds available
and by the number of households who applied and their corresponding income, none of which were
known prior to the start of the program). Moreover, in the 2006 and 2007 rounds of the Euro 200
program, essentially all household who applied ended up receiving vouchers so it was reasonable
for families to believe that they would receive a voucher even if they reported income close to the
upper limit for eligibility. Nevertheless, we also examine for evidence of manipulation by checking
the frequency density along the lines of McCrary (2007). Appendix Figure 2 plots local linear
regressions of the density of children over income from the child survey (in panel A) and the parent
survey (in panel B). In both cases, the density varies continuously over di¤erent income levels with
no signi…cant discontinuity around the income cuto¤.
Finally, we examine the degree of correspondence between the parent and child reports in their
responses to the same survey questions. For questions that represented information about household
characteristics such as computer ownership, access to the Internet, and the presence of educational
software, the responses of children and their parents were identical 96 to 98 percent of the time.
For questions regarding average grades in Math, Romanian and English, the responses of children
and their parents were identical 91 to 92 percent of the time. For questions regarding time-use
such as daily homework activities and daily watching of TV, the responses of children and their

27

parents were somewhat less likely to match up, being identical only 86 percent of the time. But
overall, we …nd the relatively high level of correspondence between child and parent reports to be
a reassuring …nding.43 In addition, we con…rmed that our main results continue to hold when we
restrict ourselves to samples where parent and child responses overlap.

8

Conclusion

This paper examines the e¤ect of access to a home computer on the development of human capital among low-income children and adolescents. Using data that we collected through in-depth
household interviews during 2009, we implement a regression discontinuity design and estimate the
impact of winning a government-funded voucher worth 200 Euros towards the purchase of personal computer in 2008. We …nd that winning such a voucher substantially increases the likelihood
that households own a home computer. As expected, higher rates of computer ownership among
winners also led to increased computer use. But computer use was mostly focused on games and
appeared to displace the time spent doing homework and reading for pleasure. Moreover, the effect on homework appears to have had real consequences for school performance. We …nd that
children in household who won a voucher had signi…cantly lower school grades in Math, English
and Romanian, with most estimates clustered around an e¤ect size of 1/3 of a standard deviation.
On the other hand, we estimate that children in household who won a voucher had signi…cantly
higher scores in a test of computer skills and in self-reported measures of computer ‡uency. There
is also evidence that winning a voucher increased cognitive ability, as measured by the Raven’s
Progressive Matrices test.
These …ndings indicate that providing home computers to low-income children in Romania lowered academic achievement even while it improved their computer skills and cognitive ability. How
do we interpret these …ndings? The Euro 200 program was extremely successful in increasing home
computer ownership and use among low-income children. But despite the e¤orts of the Romanian
43
We also examined whether the rates of match between parent and child reports varied around the discontinuity.
For the most part, there were no signi…cant di¤erences for these outcomes.

28

Ministry of Education to encourage the use of these computers for educational purposes, relatively
few children have educational software installed on their computer, and fewer still report using
their computer for educational purposes. This may have contributed to the decline in academic
achievement. However, the Euro 200 program also led to increased computer skills and cognitive
ability for those children who received a voucher, especially among the young. Thus, our …ndings
suggest that the introduction of home computers have both positive and negative impacts on the
development of children’s human capital.
Our analysis also brings out the important role of parents in shaping the impact of home
computer use on child and adolescent outcomes. We …nd suggestive evidence that the presence of
rules regarding homework help mitigate some of the negative e¤ects of winning a computer voucher.
On the other hand, the presence of rules regarding computer use seem to reduce the positive
impacts of winning a voucher on computer skills without improving academic achievement. Thus,
our …ndings also raise questions about the implementation of recent large-scale e¤orts to increase
computer access for disadvantaged children around the world without paying su¢ cient attention
to how parental oversight a¤ects a child’s computer use.

29

References
Angrist, Joshua, and Victor Lavy (2002) "New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil
Learning," The Economic Journal, 112: 735-65.
Attewell, Paul, and Juan Battle (1999) “Home Computers and School Performance,”The Information Society 15: 1-10.
Banerjee, Abhijit , Shawn Cole , Esther Du‡o Leigh Linden, (2007) “Remedying Education:
Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3):
1235-1264
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe and Leigh L. Linden (2009) “The Use and Misuse of Computers in Education: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Colombia” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 4836
Barrow, Lisa, Markman, Lisa and Rouse, Cecilia E., (2010) “Technology’s Edge: The Educational Bene…ts of Computer-Aided Instruction” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
(forthcoming)
Beltran, Daniel, Das, Kuntal and Fairlie, Robert W. (2010) “Are Computers Good for Children?
The E¤ects of Home Computers on Educational Outcomes” Economic Inquiry (forthcoming)
Bunz, Ulla., Curry, Carey., and William Voon (2007) “Perceived versus actual computer-emailweb ‡uency” Computers in Human Behavior 23: 2321–2344
Bunz, Ulla. (2004) “The computer-email-web (CEW) ‡uency scale –Development and validation”
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 17(4), 477–504.
Burke, H.R. (1958) “Raven’s progressive matrices: A review and critical evaluation” Journal of
Genetic Psychology 93, 199–228
Colom, Roberto , Escorial, Sergio and Irene Rebollo (2004) “Sex di¤erences on the Progressive
Matrices are in‡uenced by sex di¤erences on spatial ability” Personality and Individual Di¤ erences 37, 1289–1293
Comunicatii Mobile (2005) http://www.comunic.ro/article.php/Aproape_jum%C4%83tate
_din_sistemele_v%C3%A2ndute_%C3%AEn_programul_guvernamental_quotEuro_200quot
_au_fost_oferite_de_Flamingo/1459/)
Cuban, Larry (2001) Oversold and Underused: Computers in the Classroom. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman, (2008) “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology
of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation” Journal of Human Resources 43(4):738-782
de Russe, Marina (2009) “Laptop becomes reality for Uruguay’s schoolchildren” AFP
DiNardo, J., and Pischke, J.S. (1997) “The returns to computer use revisited: Have pencils
changed the wage structure too?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 291-304.
Fairlie, Robert W. (2005) “The E¤ects of Home Computers on School Enrollment,” Economics
of Education Review 24: 533–547
30

Fairlie, Robert W. and London, Rebecca A. (2009) “The E¤ects of Home Computers on Educational Outcomes: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Community College Students,”
mimeo
Fan, J. and Gijbels, I., (1996) Local polynomial modeling and its implications, Monographs on
Statistics and Applied Probability 66, Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL
Fuchs, Thomas, and Ludger Woessmann (2004) “Computers and Student Learning: Bivariate
and Multivariate Evidence on the Availability and Use of Computers at Home and at School”
CESIFO Working Paper No. 1321
Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse Shapiro (2008) “Preschool television viewing and adolescent test
scores: Historical evidence from the Coleman study” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1):
279-323
Giacquinta, J.B., Bauer, J., and J.E. Levin (1993) Beyond Technology’s Promise: An Examination of Children’s Educational Computing at Home Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press
Goolsbee, Austan, and Jonathan Guryan (2006) “The Impact of Internet Subsidies in Public
Schools," Review of Economics and Statistics 88(2): 336–347
Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. van der Klaauw (2001) “Identi…cation and Estimation of Treatment
E¤ects with a Regression Discontinuity Design,” Econometrica 69 (1), 201–209
Hunt, E. (1974) “Quote the Raven? nevermore!”In G. W. Gregg (Ed.), Knowledge and cognition.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Imbens, G.W. and Lemieux, T., (2008), “Regression discontinuity designs,” Journal of Econometrics, 142, 615-635
Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman (2009) “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discontinuity Estimator” NBER Working Paper No. 14726
Jensen, Robert and Emily Oster (2009) “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s Status
in India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1057-1094
Katz, Lawrence F., Kling, Je¤rey R. and Je¤rey B. Liebman (2001) “Moving to Opportunity in
Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
116, 607-54
Lee, David and T. Lemieux (2010) “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics”, NBER
Working Paper No. 14723
Ludwig, J. and Miller, D., (2005), “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidence
from a Regression Discontinuity Design,” NBER Working Paper No. 11702
Ludwig, J. and Miller, D., (2007), “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidencefrom a Regression Discontinuity Design,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 159-208
Lynn, R., Allik, J. and P. Irwing (2004) “Sex di¤erences on three factors identi…ed in Raven’s
Standard Progressive Matrices” Intelligence 32(4): 411-424

31

Kirpatrick, H., and L. Cuban (1998) “Computers Make Kids Smarter–Right?”Technos Quarterly
for Education and Technology, 7:2.
Kraut, R. E., Kiesler, S., Boneva, B. & Shklovski, I. (2001) “Examining the impact of Internet
use on TV viewing: Details make a di¤erence” In R. Kraut, M. Brynin, and S. Kiesler (Eds)
Krueger, Alan B. (1993) “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
Microdata, 1984-1989” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (1): 33-60
Ministry of Education (2007) http://portal.edu.ro/index.php/articles/5212
Olken, Benjamin (2009) “Do Television and Radio Destroy Social Capital? Evidence from Indonesian Villages”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4): 1-33
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2005) Are Students Ready
for a Technology-Rich World?What PISA Studies Tell Us (PISA) Paris: OECD
Raven, J.C. (1939) Progressive Matrices: A perceptual test of intelligence, H.K.Lewis, London
Raven, J.C. (1956) Guide to the Coloured Progressive Matrices (Sets A, Ab, B), Lewis, London
Rebelo, P. (2005) “Brazil’s bumpy road to the low-cost PC” CNet News.com
Rouse, Cecilia E., and Alan B. Krueger (2004) “Putting Computerized Instruction to the Test: A
Randomized Evaluation of a "Scienti…cally-Based" Reading Program,” Economics of Education
Review, 23: 323-38
Schmitt, John, and Jonathan Wadsworth (2004) “Is There an Impact of Household Computer
Ownership on Children’s Educational Attainment in Britain?” Economics of Education Review
25: 659-673
Servon, Lisa J., and Robert Kaestner (2008) “Consumer Financial Literacy and the Impact of
Online Banking on the Financial Behavior of Lower-Income Bank Customers,” The Journal of
Consumer A¤ airs, 42(2): 271-305
Stanger, J.D. (1998) Television in the home Philadelphia: Annenberg Public Policy Center,
University of Pennsylvania.
Subrahmanyam, K., and Green…eld, P.M. (1994) “E¤ect of video game practice on spatial skills
in girls and boys” Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 15:13–32
Subrahmanyam, K, R. Kraut, P. Green…eld and E. Gross (2000). “The Impact of Home Computer
Use on Children’s Activities and Development”, The Future of Children –Children and Computer
Technology 10(2)
Subrahmanyam, K., Green…eld, P., Kraut, R., & Gross, E. (2001) “The impact of computer use
on children’s and adolescents’development” Applied Developmental Psychology 22, 7-30
U.S. Census Bureau (2005) “Computer and Internet Use in the United States: 2003” Current
Population Reports P23-208

32

A
A.1

Data Appendix
Computer test (12 multiple-choice questions)

1. Which …le extensions indicate only graphics …les?
a) BMP and DOC
b) JPEG and TXT
c) TXT and STK
d) BMP and GIF
2. If the power suddenly goes out while writing a letter with a word processing program:
a) everything in memory (RAM) is erased
b) the letter will de…nitely not be lost
c) the word processing program will be lost
d) it’s a sign that you don’t need the letter after all
3. Which of the following can be placed in a "folder"?
a) a …le
b) a folder
c) an attachment
d) all of the above
4. If you are entering a paragraph in a word processing program and you get to the end of a line, what is
the best way go on to the next line?
a) press the tab key
b) press the return key
c) just keep typing
d) press the escape key
5. Which of the following special function keys would be used to key the sentence: "Today is Tuesday."?
a) shift
b) return
c) esc
d) tab
6. Which of these disk types can store the most data?
a) A CD-ROM
b) A ‡oppy disk.
c) A DVD disk
d) All disks can store the same amount of data.
7. Which represents the largest storage capacity?
a) 24MB
b) 2400KB
c) 24Gig
d) 240MB
8. All computers must have:
a) Word processing software
b) An operating system
c) A printer attached
d) A virus checking program
9. What is considered the “brains” of a computer?
a) The ‡oppy disk drive
b) The central processing unit
c) The electrical cord
d) The monitor
10. When do you use a modem?
a) When you want to create a presentation
b) When you want to access email or the Internet
c) When you start a program

33

d) All of the above
11. Which one is an email address?
a) http://vianet.com/index.htm
b) D:nnEmailnStandard
c) joesmart@billme.com
d) Chaminade.org/teachers/mailaddresses
12. Which of these is a browser?
a) Windows
b) Microsoft Excel
c) Outlook Express
d) Internet Explorer

A.2

Computer ‡uency (self-reported from “very well” (5) to “not at all” (1))

The following questions are about a variety of computer, email and web-related tasks. Please read each
question carefully and circle the appropriate number according to the scale below:
Operating a computer
I can restart a computer
I can switch a computer on
I can format a ‡oppy disk
I can rename a ‡oppy disk
I can use the hard drive
I can switch between currently open applications
I can create folders/directories
Using applications
I can print a document
I can use “save as” when appropriate
I can open a previously saved …le from any drive/directory
I can begin a new document
I can save a …le in a speci…ed drive/directory
I can rename …les
I can delete unwanted …les
I can copy or move …les between drives and directories
Internet/Web
I can open a web address directly
I can use search engines such as Yahoo or Alta Vista
I can identify the host server from the web address
I can use a Netscape or Explorer to navigate the WWW
I can use “back” and “forward” to move between pages
Email
I can use the “reply” and “forward” features for email
I can read new mail messages
I can delete read email
I can send an email message
I can open an email program
I can open a …le attached to an email
I can save an attached …le
I can attach and send a …le with a message

34

Figure 1: Computer Ownership and Use

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

1

Panel B: Used Voucher

1

Panel A: Winner

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Panel D: Computer Use

0

0

Hours

Proportion

1

10

Panel C: Computer

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

1

Panel F: Education Software

1

Panel E: Games Installed

-70

0
Income

100

-70

0

100

Income

Notes: The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. The open circles plot the residuals from regressions of the
dependent variables on our standard set of controls for 5 RON intervals. The solid lines are fitted values of residuals from
local linear regressions of the dependent variable using a rectangular kernal with a bandwidth of 30. The income variable is
the monthly household income per family member used by the Euro 200 program and is normalized to be 0 at the 62.58
RON cutoff. Source: 2009 Euro 200 Survey

Figure 2: Computer and Time Use Outcomes

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

.4

Panel B: Comp-Homework (everyday)

.4

Panel A: Comp-Games (everyday)

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

.4

Panel D: Comp-Educ.Soft. (everyday)

.4

Panel C: Comp-Email/Web (everyday)

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

1

Panel F: Homework (>1 hr everyday)

1

Panel E: TV (>1 hr everyday)

-70

0
Income

100

-70

0

100

Income

Notes: The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. The open circles plot the residuals from regressions of the
dependent variables on our standard set of controls for 5 RON intervals. The solid lines are fitted values of residuals from
local linear regressions of the dependent variable using a rectangular kernal with a bandwidth of 30. The income variable is
the monthly household income per family member used by the Euro 200 program and is normalized to be 0 at the 62.58
RON cutoff. Source: 2009 Euro 200 Survey.

Figure 3: Academic Outcomes

Raw score

6

6

Raw score

9

Panel B: Math GPA (parent)

9

Panel A: Math GPA (child)

-70

0

100

-70

0

100

Panel C: Romanian GPA (child)

Panel D: Romanian GPA (parent)

Raw score

6

6

Raw score

9

Income

9

Income

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Raw score

6

6

Raw score

9

Panel F: English GPA (parent)

9

Panel E: English GPA (child)

-70

0
Income

100

-70

0

100

Income

Notes: The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. The open circles plot the residuals from regressions of the
dependent variables on our standard set of controls for 5 RON intervals. The solid lines are fitted values of residuals from
local linear regressions of the dependent variable using a rectangular kernal with a bandwidth of 30. The income variable is
the monthly household income per family member used by the Euro 200 program and is normalized to be 0 at the 62.58
RON cutoff. Source: 2009 Euro 200 Survey.

Figure 4: Cognitive and Computer Assessments

0

Standardized score

-1

0
-1

Standardized score

1

Panel B: Computer Test

1

Panel A: Cognitive Test

-70

0

100

-70

Income

1
0
-1

0

Standardized score

1

Panel D: Apps Fluency

-1

Standardized score

100

Income

Panel C: Computer Fluency

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

0
-1

-1

0

Standardized score

1

Panel E: Email Fluency

1

Panel F: Web Fluency

Standardized score

0

-70

0
Income

100

-70

0

100

Income

Notes: The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. The open circles plot the residuals from regressions of the
dependent variables on our standard set of controls for 5 RON intervals. The solid lines are fitted values of residuals from
local linear regressions of the dependent variable using a rectangular kernal with a bandwidth of 30. The income variable is
the monthly household income per family member used by the Euro 200 program and is normalized to be 0 at the 62.58
RON cutoff. Source: 2009 Euro 200 Survey.

Figure 5: Non-Cognitive Outcomes
Panel B: BPI (parent)

Score

0

15

Score

.5

25

Panel A: Rosenberg Index (child)

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Score

0

3

Score

5

Panel D: Sports (parent)

4

Panel C: Health (child)

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Panel F: BMI (parent)

Score

0

15

Score

.5

25

Panel E: Overweight (child)

-70

0
Income

100

-70

0

100

Income

Notes: The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. The open circles plot the residuals from regressions of the
dependent variables on our standard set of controls for 5 RON intervals. The solid lines are fitted values of residuals from
local linear regressions of the dependent variable using a rectangular kernal with a bandwidth of 30. The income variable is
the monthly household income per family member used by the Euro 200 program and is normalized to be 0 at the 62.58
RON cutoff. Source: 2009 Euro 200 Survey.

Appendix Figure 1: Household Covariates
Panel B: HH Age

Proportion

0

30

Proportion

1

50

Panel A: HH Female

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Proportion

0

0

Proportion

1

Panel D: HH Romanian

1

Panel C: HH Secondary

-70

0

100

-70

Income

0

100

Income

Panel F: Child Age

Proportion

5

0

Proportion

1

15

Panel E: Child Female

-70

0
Income

100

-70

0

100

Income

Notes: The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. The open circles plot the residuals from regressions of the
dependent variables on our standard set of controls for 5 RON intervals. The solid lines are fitted values of residuals from
local linear regressions of the dependent variable using a rectangular kernal with a bandwidth of 30. The income variable is
the monthly household income per family member used by the Euro 200 program and is normalized to be 0 at the 62.58
RON cutoff. Source: 2009 Euro 200 Survey.

Appendix Figure 2: Frequency Densities

0

.01

Density

.02

.03

Panel A: Child survey

-70

0

100
Income

0

.01

Density

.02

.03

Panel B: Parent survey

-70

0

100
Income

Notes: The open circles plot the residuals from regressions of density on our standard set of controls for 5 RON
intervals. The solid lines are fitted values of residuals from local linear regressions of density using a rectangular
kernal with a bandwidth of 30. The income variable is the monthly household income per family member used
by the Euro 200 program and is normalized to be 0 at the 62.58 RON cutoff. Source: 2009 Euro 200 Survey.

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Parental Survey
Panel A: Household level
Winner
Income (ven)
Used Voucher
Female HoH
Age of HoH
Ethnicity of HoH
Romanian
Hungarian
Gypsy
Other
Education of HoH
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Computer ownership
Have a computer
Have internet
Have a computer w/ games
Have a computer w/ education software
Hours computer is on (per day)
Panel B: Child level
Gender
Age
Time use
Computer use hours per week
Homework ≥ 1hr everyday
TV ≥ 1hr everyday
Reading ≥ 1hr everyday
Academic outcomes
Math GPA
Romanian GPA
English GPA
Behavior GPA
Non-cognitive outcomes
BPI Index
BMI
Sports (freq)
Service (freq)

Mean

SD

N

0.647
47.614
0.638
0.119
40.666

0.478
50.683
0.481
0.324
8.012

3,356
3,356
3,356
3,376
3,358

0.676
0.149
0.107
0.068

0.468
0.356
0.309
0.253

3,376
3,376
3,376
3,376

0.126
0.857
0.017

0.332
0.350
0.128

3,340
3,340
3,340

0.727
0.144
0.649
0.091
1.453

0.446
0.351
0.477
0.288
1.590

3,350
3,344
2,856
2,507
3,140

0.487
12.225

0.500
3.334

5,936
5,928

5.245
0.661
0.746
0.053

6.510
0.473
0.436
0.224

5,283
5,483
5,498
5,244

7.602
7.762
7.822
9.931

1.474
1.422
1.501
0.388

4,462
4,478
3,536
4,835

0.207
19.783
2.722
1.84

0.235
3.814
1.589
1.00

4,791
4,611
5,392
5,457

Notes: SD is the standard deviation and N is the sample size. Winner is defined as 1 for individuals with an income above the program cutoff
of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. The income variable is the monthly household income per family member used by the Euro 200 program
(normalized to be 0 at the 62.58 RON cutoff in regressions and graphs). Homework, TV, and Reading are indicator variables for daily activites
(more than 1 hour per day). GPAs represent raw scores ranging from 1 to 10. BMI is the body-mass index calculated from reported height and
weight of the child. BPI index ranges from 0 to 1 with higher scores indicating more behavior problems. Sports and Service are frequencies
ranging from 1 to 5. Demographic variables are defined as usual. More details can be found in the Data section of the paper. Source: 2009
Euro 200 survey.

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Child Survey
Gender
Age
Computer and Time use
Computer use hours per week
Computer for games ≥ everyday
Computer for homework ≥ everyday
Computer for ed software ≥ everyday
Computer for web/email ≥ everyday
Homework > 1hr everyday
TV > 1hr everyday
Academic outcomes
Math GPA
Romanian GPA
English GPA
Behavior GPA
Cognitive and Computer Assessments
Raven's Progressive Matrices Test
Computer Test (raw)
Computer operation fluency (raw)
Applications fluency (raw)
Web fluency (raw)
Email fluency (raw)
Non-cognitive outcomes
Rosenberg index (raw)
Health index
Hand pain
Overweight
Underweight
Smoking
Drinking

Mean
0.495
12.187

SD
0.500
3.003

N
4,643
4,637

5.465
0.189
0.015
0.003
0.052
0.682
0.759

6.349
0.391
0.120
0.051
0.221
0.466
0.428

4,384
4,606
4,614
4,611
4,614
4,539
4,512

7.493
7.653
7.717
9.910

1.512
1.471
1.539
0.427

4,279
4,302
3,476
4,367

-0.060
3.157
2.786
2.807
2.218
2.385

0.998
2.838
1.231
1.450
1.454
1.423

4,637
4,646
4,646
4,646
4,646
4,646

19.050
3.401
0.081
0.086
0.177
0.047
0.065

3.750
0.659
0.273
0.281
0.382
0.211
0.247

4,085
4,602
4,546
4,483
4,483
4,597
4,611

Notes: SD is the standard deviation and N is the sample size. Computer use for Games, Homework, Education, and Web/email as well as Homework,
TV, and Reading are indicator variables for daily activites. The Raven's Progressive Matrices test is standardized with a mean of 0 and standard
deviation of 1). The computer test scores shown is a raw score from 1 to 12 but it is normalized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 in the
graphs and regression tables. The fluency scores represent raw responses ranging from 1 (not at all fluent) to 5 (very fluent), again normalized with a
mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 in the graphs and regressiont ables. GPAs represent raw scores ranging from 1 to 10. Rosenberg index is a raw
score ranging from from 1 to 30 with higher scores indicating lower self-esteem (also normalized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 in the
graphs and regression tables). Health status is self-reported health status ranging from 1 (poor) to 5 (very well). Hand pain is an indicator variable 1
for any problems with pain in the hands, and 0 otherwise, Overweight/Underweight are indicators variables with 1for a self-reported perception of bein

Table 3: Effect of the Euro200 program on Computer Ownership and Use

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 60

(1)
0.507***
[0.044]

Panel A: Children Survey
Games
Educational Computer use
Internet
Computer
Installed
software
(child)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.034
0.466***
0.116***
3.478***
0.527***
[0.034]
[0.043]
[0.028]
[0.552]
[0.043]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 30

0.546***
[0.060]

0.011
[0.049]

0.497***
[0.058]

0.117**
[0.046]

3.407***
[0.754]

0.548***
[0.059]

-0.007
[0.049]

0.594***
[0.063]

0.134**
[0.054]

2.397***
[0.778]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 15

0.577***
[0.080]

-0.033
[0.064]

0.566***
[0.077]

0.198***
[0.062]

2.641***
[1.003]

0.615***
[0.075]

-0.008
[0.062]

0.674***
[0.084]

0.238***
[0.075]

1.963*
[1.043]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 7.5

0.675***
[0.116]

0.016
[0.074]

0.707***
[0.113]

0.121
[0.077]

3.797***
[1.347]

0.696***
[0.102]

0.059
[0.075]

0.629***
[0.117]

0.195*
[0.118]

3.199**
[1.328]

Nonparametric
IK Bandwidth

0.699***
[0.119]

0.066
[0.094]

0.751***
[0.109]

0.036
[0.089]

4.093***
[1.227]

0.721***
[0.109]

0.117
[0.108]

0.562***
[0.155]

0.163
[0.146]

2.492**
[1.201]

Nonparametric
CV Bandwidth

0.518***
[0.048]

0.029
[0.060]

0.476***
[0.056]

0.187***
[0.066]

3.352***
[0.725]

0.541***
[0.048]

0.005
[0.052]

0.544***
[0.053]

0.238***
[0.075]

2.219***
[0.640]

Parametric
Linear Spline

0.533***
[0.038]

0.006
[0.030]

0.503***
[0.038]

0.122***
[0.024]

3.146***
[0.478]

0.545***
[0.037]

-0.025
[0.030]

0.546***
[0.041]

0.086***
[0.028]

2.220***
[0.514]

Parametric
Quadratic Spline

0.520***
[0.054]

0.068
[0.044]

0.491***
[0.054]

0.137***
[0.040]

3.851***
[0.709]

0.541***
[0.053]

0.038
[0.045]

0.570***
[0.058]

0.148***
[0.051]

2.313***
[0.771]

Parametric
Cubic Spline

0.561***
[0.071]

0.01
[0.058]

0.525***
[0.070]

0.179***
[0.058]

2.927***
[0.907]

0.586***
[0.068]

0.015
[0.052]

0.650***
[0.076]

0.003
[0.061]

1.154***
[0.324]

dependent
variable

Computer

Panel B: Parent Survey
Games
Educational
Internet
Installed
software
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.009
0.524***
0.095***
[0.035]
[0.046]
[0.034]

Computer
use (child)
(10)
1.934***
[0.610]

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the house\hold level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and
2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All the parametric and non-parametric specifications are
described in further detail in Section 5. All regressions include controls for age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Table 4: Effect of the Euro200 program on Computer and Time Use
Panel A: Children Survey

Panel B: Parent Survey

Computer for
Games

Computer for
Homework

Computer for
Ed Software

Computer for
Internet

Homework

TV use

Homework

TV use

Reading

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 60

(1)
0.126***
[0.037]

(2)
-0.008
[0.008]

(3)
0.006
[0.006]

(4)
0.011
[0.018]

(5)
-0.094**
[0.042]

(6)
-0.065
[0.043]

(7)
-0.052
[0.042]

(8)
-0.061
[0.046]

(9)
-0.054**
[0.023]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 30

0.136**
[0.054]

0.002
[0.009]

0.01
[0.012]

0.019
[0.027]

-0.096
[0.059]

-0.07
[0.064]

-0.013
[0.059]

-0.092
[0.065]

-0.093***
[0.034]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 15

0.145*
[0.076]

-0.009
[0.015]

0.026
[0.021]

0.049
[0.035]

-0.099
[0.083]

-0.164*
[0.090]

-0.006
[0.078]

-0.200**
[0.095]

-0.092**
[0.046]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 7.5

0.173
[0.106]

0.015
[0.021]

0.025
[0.017]

0.081**
[0.039]

-0.194
[0.118]

-0.196*
[0.117]

-0.199*
[0.106]

-0.336***
[0.123]

-0.181***
[0.061]

Nonparametric
IK Bandwidth

0.230*
[0.117]

-0.004
[0.011]

0
[0.000]

0.041
[0.058]

-0.127
[0.137]

-0.230*
[0.124]

-0.201*
[0.116]

-0.341**
[0.136]

-0.135**
[0.064]

Nonparametric
CV Bandwidth

0.134**
[0.053]

0.001
[0.014]

0
[0.000]

0.019
[0.026]

-0.072
[0.057]

-0.084*
[0.049]

-0.049
[0.048]

-0.084*
[0.050]

-0.093*
[0.047]

Parametric
Linear Spline

0.136***
[0.031]

0.001
[0.007]

0.005
[0.005]

0.014
[0.016]

-0.071*
[0.037]

-0.024
[0.037]

-0.033
[0.037]

-0.03
[0.039]

-0.034*
[0.019]

Parametric
Quadratic Spline

0.144***
[0.051]

-0.007
[0.011]

0.014
[0.012]

0.021
[0.025]

-0.085
[0.055]

-0.109*
[0.057]

-0.036
[0.054]

-0.123**
[0.059]

-0.071**
[0.028]

Parametric
Cubic Spline

0.146**
[0.072]

0.009
[0.014]

0.022
[0.022]

0.031
[0.037]

-0.053
[0.073]

-0.099
[0.080]

0.002
[0.071]

-0.13
[0.082]

-0.092**
[0.040]

dependent variable

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1
and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All the parametric and non-parametric specifications
are described in further detail in Section 5. All regressions include controls for age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Table 5: Effect of the Euro200 program on Academic Outcomes
Panel A: Children Survey
Math GPA

Romanian GPA

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 60

(1)
-0.276**
[0.118]

(2)
-0.424***
[0.126]

(3)
-0.362**
[0.153]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 30

-0.435**
[0.171]

-0.562***
[0.181]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 15

-0.261
[0.241]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 7.5

Panel B: Parent Survey
Math GPA

Romanian GPA

(4)
0.049
[0.048]

(5)
-0.375***
[0.123]

(6)
-0.403***
[0.124]

(7)
-0.361**
[0.160]

(8)
-0.027
[0.046]

-0.634***
[0.225]

0.008
[0.070]

-0.415**
[0.180]

-0.370**
[0.176]

-0.534**
[0.231]

-0.059
[0.072]

-0.361
[0.256]

-0.379
[0.324]

-0.087
[0.121]

-0.252
[0.249]

-0.125
[0.241]

0.061
[0.315]

-0.083
[0.116]

-0.758**
[0.327]

-1.118***
[0.332]

-0.778*
[0.452]

-0.117
[0.170]

-0.593*
[0.337]

-0.697**
[0.322]

-0.479
[0.449]

-0.226
[0.182]

Nonparametric
IK Bandwidth

-0.669**
[0.329]

-1.090***
[0.320]

-0.683
[0.449]

-0.229
[0.188]

-0.47
[0.332]

-0.592*
[0.324]

-0.205
[0.491]

-0.360*
[0.206]

Nonparametric
CV Bandwidth

-0.411**
[0.179]

-0.328**
[0.155]

-0.343*
[0.193]

-0.047
[0.081]

-0.418**
[0.185]

-0.311*
[0.163]

-0.306*
[0.186]

-0.063
[0.065]

Parametric
Linear Spline

-0.208**
[0.100]

-0.367***
[0.104]

-0.321**
[0.129]

0.092**
[0.040]

-0.241**
[0.104]

-0.325***
[0.104]

-0.356***
[0.135]

0.013
[0.039]

Parametric
Quadratic Spline

-0.368**
[0.158]

-0.392**
[0.165]

-0.473**
[0.203]

0.014
[0.064]

-0.389**
[0.165]

-0.353**
[0.164]

-0.356*
[0.210]

-0.067
[0.066]

-0.265
[0.219]

-0.325
[0.226]

-0.373
[0.278]

0.01
[0.093]

-0.271
[0.227]

-0.141
[0.221]

-0.198
[0.281]

-0.088
[0.100]

Dependent variable

Parametric
Cubic Spline

English GPA Behavior GPA

English GPA Behavior GPA

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1
and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All the parametric and non-parametric specifications
are described in further detail in Section 5. All regressions include controls for age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Table 6: Effect of the Euro200 program on Cognitive Ability and Computer Skills
Children Survey

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 60

Raven's
Progressive
Matrices Test
(1)
0.275***
[0.092]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 30

0.320**
[0.133]

0.242**
[0.108]

0.328**
[0.165]

0.346**
[0.153]

0.129
[0.155]

0.053
[0.156]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 15

0.214
[0.183]

0.252*
[0.141]

0.409
[0.266]

0.292
[0.243]

0.088
[0.242]

-0.083
[0.240]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 7.5

0.013
[0.291]

0.385*
[0.197]

0.654
[0.471]

0.462
[0.413]

0.186
[0.417]

0.06
[0.417]

Nonparametric
IK Bandwidth

0.027
[0.299]

0.403**
[0.204]

0.738
[0.483]

0.478
[0.418]

0.248
[0.424]

0.12
[0.419]

Nonparametric
CV Bandwidth

0.319***
[0.121]

0.232**
[0.110]

0.329*
[0.170]

0.337*
[0.173]

0.145
[0.178]

0.004
[0.178]

0.146*
[0.079]

0.265***
[0.066]

0.208**
[0.081]

0.201**
[0.079]

0.061
[0.079]

-0.016
[0.080]

Parametric
Quadratic Spline

0.377***
[0.119]

0.321***
[0.096]

0.319**
[0.148]

0.338**
[0.138]

0.174
[0.140]

0.098
[0.141]

Parametric
Cubic Spline

0.343**
[0.164]

0.224*
[0.133]

0.445*
[0.238]

0.445**
[0.219]

0.229
[0.224]

0.063
[0.225]

Dependent variable

Parametric
Linear Spline

Computer Test

Computer
Fluency

Applications
Fluency

Web Fluency

Email Fluency

(2)
0.329***
[0.076]

(3)
0.209**
[0.098]

(4)
0.215**
[0.094]

(5)
0.086
[0.093]

(6)
0.035
[0.094]

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables
are defined in Tables 1 and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All the
parametric and non-parametric specifications are described in further detail in Section 5. All regressions include controls for age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and
gender of the child. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Table 7: Effect of the Euro200 program on Non-Cognitive Outcomes
Panel B: Parent Survey

Panel A: Children Survey
Dependent variable
Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 60

Rosenberg
Overweight
Index
(1)
(2)
0.084
0.039
[0.105]
[0.026]

Smoking

Drinking

Health

Hands

BPI Index

BMI

Sports

Service

(3)
0.007
[0.016]

(4)
0.026
[0.021]

(5)
-0.058
[0.059]

(6)
0.033
[0.024]

(7)
0.059**
[0.025]

(8)
0.32
[0.332]

(9)
0.13
[0.165]

(10)
-0.121
[0.116]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 30

-0.026
[0.151]

0.022
[0.039]

0.022
[0.022]

-0.009
[0.028]

-0.134
[0.083]

0.057*
[0.034]

0.047
[0.034]

0.409
[0.492]

0.056
[0.225]

-0.212
[0.166]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 15

0.153
[0.208]

0.018
[0.059]

0.045*
[0.026]

-0.003
[0.037]

-0.199*
[0.113]

0.047
[0.048]

-0.006
[0.045]

0.135
[0.683]

-0.387
[0.298]

-0.317
[0.229]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 7.5

0.491*
[0.254]

-0.096
[0.087]

0.009
[0.035]

0.027
[0.053]

-0.09
[0.172]

0.022
[0.069]

0.039
[0.054]

-0.78
[0.976]

-1.044**
[0.458]

-0.515*
[0.278]

Nonparametric
IK Bandwidth

0.623**
[0.260]

-0.028
[0.111]

-0.019
[0.069]

0.053
[0.065]

-0.184
[0.185]

-0.006
[0.092]

0.073
[0.066]

-0.823
[0.953]

-0.725
[0.500]

-0.206
[0.361]

Nonparametric
CV Bandwidth

0.045
[0.118]

0.013
[0.040]

0.007
[0.018]

-0.012
[0.023]

-0.096
[0.066]

0.067*
[0.039]

0.044
[0.027]

0.092
[0.382]

0.194
[0.183]

-0.162
[0.156]

Parametric
Linear Spline

0.013
[0.088]

0.033
[0.022]

0.002
[0.014]

0.009
[0.017]

-0.064
[0.051]

0.018
[0.019]

0.02
[0.022]

0.305
[0.291]

0.055
[0.141]

-0.059
[0.098]

Parametric
Quadratic Spline

0.067
[0.133]

0.041
[0.035]

0.017
[0.021]

0.006
[0.026]

-0.102
[0.078]

0.060*
[0.031]

0.071**
[0.031]

0.359
[0.466]

0.244
[0.208]

-0.208
[0.152]

Parametric
Cubic Spline

-0.065
[0.178]

0.025
[0.048]

0.034
[0.026]

-0.022
[0.035]

-0.191*
[0.106]

0.048
[0.041]

0.006
[0.039]

0.289
[0.653]

0.153
[0.271]

-0.148
[0.203]

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined in
Tables 1 and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All the parametric and non-parametric
specifications are described in further detail in Section 5. All regressions include controls for age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. Source: 2009 Euro 200
survey.

Appendix Table 1: Interactions with Parental Rules
Raven's
Romanian
English GPA Progressive
GPA
Matrices
(4)
(5)
(6)

Computer
use

Homework

Math GPA

(1)

(2)

(3)

Winner

3.525***
[0.481]

-0.097**
[0.038]

-0.258**
[0.104]

-0.418***
[0.109]

-0.358***
[0.133]

Parent Has Rules for Computer

4.071***
[0.389]

0.044
[0.028]

0.250***
[0.083]

0.294***
[0.080]

Winner*Computer Rules

-3.231***
[0.471]

0.046
[0.034]

0.003
[0.097]

3.055***
[0.507]

-0.104***
[0.039]

Parent Has Rules for Homework

0.644*
[0.340]

Winner*Homework Rules

0.204
[0.434]

Dependent variable

Computer
Test

Computer Applications
Fluency
Fluency

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.124
[0.081]

0.262***
[0.067]

0.205**
[0.085]

0.174**
[0.082]

0.320***
[0.092]

0.115*
[0.069]

0.323***
[0.057]

0.359***
[0.057]

0.264***
[0.057]

-0.027
[0.095]

-0.064
[0.113]

-0.032
[0.080]

-0.158**
[0.067]

-0.161**
[0.066]

-0.052
[0.067]

-0.251**
[0.107]

-0.443***
[0.111]

-0.418***
[0.137]

0.149*
[0.082]

0.247***
[0.069]

0.229***
[0.086]

0.196**
[0.082]

0.061**
[0.027]

0.061
[0.075]

-0.014
[0.077]

-0.09
[0.092]

0.071
[0.059]

0.078
[0.051]

0.158***
[0.058]

0.103*
[0.056]

0.085***
[0.032]

0.13
[0.090]

0.215**
[0.093]

0.340***
[0.113]

-0.018
[0.072]

0.035
[0.063]

-0.042
[0.068]

0.005
[0.067]

Panel A

Panel B
Winner

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined in Tables 1
and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All regressions include controls for age, gender,
ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. The estimation is based on the linear spline specification using the full sample. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Appendix Table 2: Heterogenous Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Raven's
Progressive
Matrices
(6)

Winner

3.348***
[0.529]

-0.055
[0.040]

-0.15
[0.107]

-0.355***
[0.113]

-0.279**
[0.138]

Female

-1.066***
[0.284]

0.117***
[0.022]

0.357***
[0.067]

0.436***
[0.065]

-0.391
[0.371]

-0.032
[0.028]

-0.11
[0.082]

Winner

2.239**
[0.890]

-0.076
[0.072]

Age

0.344***
[0.052]
0.075
[0.068]

Dependent variable

Computer
use

Homework Math GPA

Romanian
GPA

English
GPA

Computer
Test

Computer Applications
Fluency
Fluency

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.183**
[0.083]

0.238***
[0.071]

0.178**
[0.082]

0.175**
[0.079]

0.512***
[0.078]

0.143***
[0.048]

-0.140***
[0.043]

-0.110**
[0.047]

-0.046
[0.046]

-0.024
[0.082]

-0.082
[0.098]

-0.072
[0.059]

0.052
[0.053]

0.059
[0.058]

0.049
[0.056]

-0.007
[0.191]

-0.271
[0.184]

-0.055
[0.235]

0.432***
[0.152]

0.444***
[0.125]

0.488***
[0.141]

0.514***
[0.135]

-0.016***
[0.004]

-0.253***
[0.011]

-0.211***
[0.011]

-0.166***
[0.014]

0.018**
[0.009]

0.155***
[0.008]

0.147***
[0.008]

0.157***
[0.008]

0.001
[0.005]

-0.016
[0.014]

-0.008
[0.014]

-0.022
[0.017]

-0.023**
[0.011]

-0.015
[0.009]

-0.024**
[0.010]

-0.026***
[0.009]

Panel A

Winner*Female
Panel B

Winner*Age

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined in
Tables 1 and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All regressions include controls for
age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. The estimation is based on the linear spline specification using the full sample. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Appendix Table 3: Long Run Effects
Dependent variable

Winner

Computer

Computer
use

Homework

Math GPA

Romanian
GPA

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.168**
[0.073]

0.238
[1.517]

-0.115
[0.079]

-0.198
[0.240]

-0.1
[0.239]

Raven's
Progressive
English GPA
Matrices
Test
(6)
(7)
-0.128
[0.293]

0.065
[0.161]

Computer
Test

Computer
Fluency

Applications
Fluency

(8)

(9)

(10)

-0.04
[0.146]

0.13
[0.135]

0.067
[0.128]

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner",
defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All regressions include controls for income, age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of
the child. These regressions are restricted to applicants from Covasna and Valcea county who particpated in the 2005 Euro 200 program. The estimation is based on the linear spline specification using the full sample. Source:
2009 Euro 200 survey.

Appendix Table 4: OLS Results
Dependent variable

Computer

Computer
use

Homework

Math GPA

Romanian
GPA

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

6.139***
[0.313]

0.012
[0.027]

0.369***
[0.075]

0.345***
[0.075]

Raven's
Progressive
English GPA
Matrices
Test
(5)
(6)
0.329***
[0.088]

0.187***
[0.058]

Computer
Test

Computer
Fluency

Applications
Fluency

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.480***
[0.050]

0.517***
[0.051]

0.464***
[0.050]

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined
in Tables 1 and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Computer", defined as 1 for individuals with a computer at the time of the survey, 0 otherwise. All regressions include controls for age,
gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. The estimation is based on the linear spline specification, restricted to individuals with an income above the program
cutoff of 62.58 RON. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Appendix Table 5: Naïve 2SLS Results
Dependent variable

Computer

Computer
use

Homework

Math GPA

Romanian
GPA

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

6.157***
[0.826]

-0.120*
[0.071]

-0.411**
[0.202]

-0.715***
[0.216]

Raven's
Progressive
English GPA
Matrices
Test
(5)
(6)
-0.658**
[0.295]

0.278*
[0.148]

Computer
Test

Computer
Fluency

Applications
Fluency

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.476***
[0.120]

0.397***
[0.152]

0.384***
[0.147]

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined
in Tables 1 and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Computer" (defined as 1 for individuals with a computer at the time of the survey, 0 otherwise) instrumented with the variable "Winner
(defined as 1 for individuals with an income above the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise). All regressions include controls for age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age
and gender of the child. The estimation is based on the linear spline specification using the full sample. Source: 2009 Euro 200 survey.

Appendix Table 6: Specification Tests (Effect of the Euro200 program on covariates)
Dependent variable

Gender

Age

Romanian

Hungarian

Roma

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 60

(1)
-0.052
[0.038]

(2)
-0.541
[0.890]

(3)
-0.014
[0.044]

(4)
-0.044
[0.037]

(5)
0.043
[0.039]

(6)
0.021
[0.043]

(7)
-0.032
[0.045]

(8)
0.011
[0.014]

(9)
-0.106**
[0.042]

(10)
-0.256
[0.253]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 30

-0.048
[0.054]

-0.021
[1.243]

-0.046
[0.061]

-0.084
[0.054]

0.099*
[0.054]

0.024
[0.061]

-0.024
[0.063]

0
[0.018]

-0.142**
[0.059]

0.166
[0.366]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 15

-0.001
[0.079]

-0.095
[1.693]

-0.079
[0.084]

-0.091
[0.076]

0.127
[0.078]

-0.011
[0.088]

0.018
[0.090]

-0.007
[0.029]

-0.167**
[0.081]

0.219
[0.489]

Nonparametric
Bandwidth - 7.5

-0.081
[0.111]

2.041
[2.381]

-0.05
[0.126]

-0.108
[0.102]

0.147
[0.105]

0.063
[0.121]

-0.11
[0.122]

0.048
[0.040]

-0.221*
[0.117]

-0.097
[0.655]

Nonparametric
IK Bandwidth

-0.032
[0.146]

1.51
[1.845]

-0.058
[0.160]

-0.119
[0.124]

0.231*
[0.121]

0.232
[0.146]

-0.245*
[0.140]

0.053
[0.050]

-0.193
[0.131]

-0.109
[0.709]

Nonparametric
CV Bandwidth

-0.001
[0.079]

-0.676
[1.078]

-0.061
[0.068]

-0.069
[0.095]

0.066
[0.044]

0.024
[0.061]

-0.015
[0.065]

0.012
[0.027]

-0.136**
[0.056]

-0.346
[0.290]

-0.074**
[0.031]

-0.166
[0.737]

0.052
[0.037]

-0.039
[0.031]

0.003
[0.034]

0.008
[0.036]

-0.002
[0.037]

-0.007
[0.011]

-0.065*
[0.036]

-0.303
[0.222]

Parametric
Quadratic Spline

-0.052
[0.048]

-1.05
[1.139]

-0.084
[0.056]

-0.069
[0.047]

0.106**
[0.051]

0.034
[0.056]

-0.046
[0.058]

0.012
[0.018]

-0.129**
[0.054]

-0.263
[0.332]

Parametric
Cubic Spline

-0.062
[0.067]

0.86
[1.510]

-0.003
[0.074]

-0.085
[0.063]

0.078
[0.067]

-0.016
[0.075]

0.016
[0.078]

0
[0.026]

-0.122*
[0.071]

0.253
[0.444]

Parametric
Linear Spline

Child Gender Child Age

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the household level are in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively. The dependent variables are defined in
Tables 1 and 2. The reported coefficients are for the variable "Winner", defined as 1 for individuals with an income below the program cutoff of 62.58 RON, 0 otherwise. All the parametric and non-parametric
specifications are described in further detail in Section 5. All regressions include controls for age, gender, ethnicity and education of the head of household, age and gender of the child. Source: 2009 Euro 200
survey.

