NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE TAXATION OF PRIVATE TRANSFERS
Louis Kaplow
Working Paper 15818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15818

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

Finn M.W. Caspersen and Household International Professor of Law and Economics, Harvard Law
School, and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Wojciech
Kopczuk for extensive discussions pertaining to the final topic addressed in subsection III.B.4 and
to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at Harvard Law School for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Louis Kaplow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

On the Taxation of Private Transfers
Louis Kaplow
NBER Working Paper No. 15818
March 2010
JEL No. H21,H23,H24,K34
ABSTRACT
This essay considers the appropriate conceptual framework for assessing the taxation of private transfers
to individuals. Although it is conventional to emphasize the role of estate and gift taxation or inheritance
taxation in redistributing income from the rich to the poor, the revenue effects of transfer taxation,
and its distortionary effect on labor supply and savings, it is suggested in line with some recent work
that the dominant focus should be on positive and negative externalities attributable to giving. The
fundamental reason is that transfer tax reform can be combined with adjustments to other aspects of
the fiscal system, notably the income tax, so as to keep constant most effects other than externalities.

Louis Kaplow
Harvard University
Hauser 322
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
meskridge@law.harvard.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
This essay revisits the question of the appropriate conceptual framework for assessing the
taxation of private transfers to individuals.1 Much analysis of transfer taxation emphasizes its
role in redistributing income from the rich to the poor, its revenue effects, and its distortionary
effects on labor supply and savings. The approach here instead follows some recent work2
suggesting that the primary focus should be on externalities attributable to giving.3 One might
view these as distinctive effects of transfer taxation. To see why, any reform of the transfer tax
system—including expansion, repeal, and replacing an estate and gift tax with an inheritance
tax—may be combined with adjustments to other aspects of the fiscal system, notably to the
income tax, that largely hold constant these other effects (redistribution, revenue, other margins
of distortion). When this is done, what remains are the effects of the reform on the extent of
giving and thus on the externalities attributable thereto. Many readers will recognize this
conclusion as an application of the general principle of targeting, which suggests that various
policy instruments are usually best focused on the objectives to which they most directly relate,
leaving other objectives to other instruments.
In Part II, this general analytical approach is elaborated, including discussion of how this
framework applies with regard to policies involving externalities. In Part III, this framework is

1

Given the conceptual focus of this essay, no distinction will be made among various
forms of transfer taxation, such as estate and gift taxation, inheritance taxation, and accessions
taxation, although the form may matter for some objectives, including administrative
considerations. Likewise, no separate attention (except for the brief discussion of exchangemotivated transfers in Section IV.A) is devoted to the treatment of private transfers in the rest of
the tax system, for example, whether an income tax provides deductions to donors or requires
inclusion by donees. Rather, focus is on the net tax or subsidy applied to a transfer, whatever
form that may take. See Louis Kaplow, The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics 249–50,
264 (2008) [hereinafter Theory of Taxation]; Louis Kaplow, A Framework for Assessing Estate
and Gift Taxation, in Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation 164, 167, 179–80, 190–91 (William G.
Gale, James R. Hines, Jr., & Joel Slemrod, eds., 2001) [hereinafter Framework]. Also, no
attention is given to administrative concerns, especially pertaining to avoidance as well as the
possibility that a transfer tax may in certain respects serve to backstop an income tax (although it
can also reduce income tax receipts by heightening the benefits of schemes that reduce both
taxes). See Kaplow, Framework, at 186–88, 189–90, and, for differing views on the magnitude
of the revenue loss in the income tax due to estate tax planning, see B. Douglas Bernheim, Does
the Estate Tax Raise Revenue?, in 1 Tax Policy and the Economy 113 (Lawrence H. Summers
ed., 1987), and James R. Repetti, The Case for the Estate and Gift Tax, Tax Notes 1493 (March
13, 2000). Symbolic effects and other political considerations are likewise largely ignored (they
receive some attention in subsection II.C and in Kaplow, Framework, at 193-94, 203).
2
I developed this approach in Louis Kaplow, Tax Policy and Gifts, 88 Am. Econ. Rev.
(Papers & Proc.) 283 (1998); Kaplow, Framework, note 1; and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation,
note 1, ch. 10.
3
Throughout, the terms “giving” and “gifts” are used to refer generically to private
transfers to other individuals, without regard to whether the transfer is inter vivos or via bequest.
-1-

applied to transfer taxation. This discussion emphasizes the underlying logic and why it implies
that considerations unrelated to gift externalities can be addressed separately. It also examines
particular gift externalities— a positive externality on donees, a negative externality on the
public fisc, and an externality involving the concentration of wealth and power—and notes some
important qualifications. Part IV addresses the relevance of certain additional factors, including
different possible motives for private transfers, subtle redistributive considerations, transfers of
human capital, equality of starting points, savings incentives, and charitable contributions.

II. ANALYTICAL APPROACH
In a series of articles and a recent book, The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics, I
have advanced a general framework for analyzing the optimal use of various fiscal instruments
when other instruments are also available—notably the income tax and income transfer (welfare)
system (hereinafter collectively referred to as the income tax). Because this approach greatly
illuminates analytical discussions and also has direct practical relevance for those designing and
advocating for particular policy proposals, including specifically regarding transfer taxation, this
Part offers a brief outline of the most relevant features. Some patience is asked of the reader, for
the application of this analysis, which may seem abstract at times, to transfer taxation does not
begin until Part III.4
To begin, Section A contains the backbone of this framework, an analysis of what
economists refer to as the problem of commodity taxation in the presence of an income tax.
Commodities are taken as a shorthand for various ways consumers may spend their disposable
income, and thus they can be interpreted to include various forms of gifts. Section B extends the
analysis to account for the possibility of externalities. As will be seen, in a basic case, the
general Pigouvian prescription that externalities should fully be internalized continues to hold
true even when there are concerns for income redistribution, revenue raising, and minimizing
tax-induced distortion. Thus, if an activity generates net negative externalities, that activity
should face a relative tax rate (or equivalent regulation) that equals the net marginal harm.
Likewise, if there is a net positive externality, there should be a relative subsidy at a
corresponding level. Section C notes some practical political considerations.

4

The current presentation aims to be concise and broadly accessible, avoiding technical
language and, more problematically, complete statements of qualifications. Interested readers
should consult Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, and Louis Kaplow, On the Undesirability of
Commodity Taxation Even When Income Taxation Is Not Optimal, 90 J. Pub. Econ. 1235 (2006)
[hereinafter Commodity Taxation], and for the application to externalities, Louis Kaplow, On the
(Ir)Relevance of Distribution and Labor Supply Distortion to Government Policy, 18 J. Econ.
Perspectives 159 (Fall 2004) [hereinafter Government Policy], and Louis Kaplow, Optimal
Control of Externalities in the Presence of Income Taxation, NBER Working Paper 12339
(2006) [hereinafter Externalities].

-2-

A. Income and Commodity Taxation
The income tax will be taken to be the chief tool for redistributing income.5 The familiar
problem with income taxation is that redistribution involves distortion; in a pure labor income
tax, labor effort is inefficiently discouraged. This distortionary cost makes the socially optimal
and politically demanded degree of redistribution less than it might otherwise be. Accordingly,
it is natural to ask whether other fiscal instruments might help take up some of the slack,
allowing a given degree of redistribution to be achieved at less cost or, relatedly, a greater degree
of redistribution to be feasible at a given cost.
Suppose that the government also has the ability to impose differential commodity
taxation. Specifically, it may tax or subsidize particular sorts of expenditures on goods and
services at different rates. Perhaps luxuries might be taxed. Or, in an otherwise uniform system
such as a value-added tax (VAT), preferential rates (including the possibility of exemption)
might be employed for some commodities, a frequent practice regarding expenditures on food
(as distinguished from restaurant meals). Would differential taxation, such as through higher
taxes on luxuries or preferential treatment for necessities, be desirable?
In a basic, benchmark case, Anthony Atkinson and Joseph Stiglitz gave a negative
answer.6 Specifically, they showed that, when the income tax is set optimally, it is best not to
impose any differential taxation. Subsequent work, some utilizing the sort of approach
elaborated here, has offered extensions, including importantly to settings in which the income
tax has not been set optimally.7
Why is it that luxury taxes, for example, are not a good idea when we would like to
redistribute more from the rich to the poor in order to make up for the limitations of the income
tax, notably, concerning the disincentive to earn more income? To oversimplify, suppose that
the rich spend 2% of their income on the luxuries, which in turn are taxed under the hypothetical
scheme at 50%. Thus, they pay 1% of their income in luxury taxes—in addition to their income
tax payments of, say, 35%. Notice that their ability to consume goods is reduced by the
combination of the luxury tax and income tax to essentially the same extent as would be the case
without a luxury tax but an income tax of 36%. Thus, the disincentive to earn income is the
same under the two schemes.
But there is a difference: with the luxury tax, the consumption allocations of the rich are
5

As mentioned, references here to the income tax are taken to include government-funded
transfers, notably, to aid lower-income individuals. For present purposes, no distinction is made
between forms of income taxation or the differences between an income tax and a consumption
tax. For further discussion, see Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, chs. 4, 7, 9.
6
Anthony B. Atkinson & Joseph E. Stiglitz, The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus
Indirect Taxation, 6 J. Pub. Econ. 55 (1976).
7
See, for example, Kaplow, Commodity Taxation, note 4; Guy Laroque, Indirect
Taxation Is Superfluous under Separability and Taste Homogeneity: A Simple Proof, 87 Econ.
Letters 141 (2005).

-3-

distorted (they are induced to spend less on designated luxuries, more on other goods). This
makes them worse off, a loss with no offsetting gain. Note that, if one wished, one could slightly
increase the income tax a bit more, say to 36.1%, making the rich no worse off than under the
50% luxury tax plus the 35% income tax. This alternative—using just the income tax—would
raise more revenue to fund public projects or redistribute to the poor. In sum, by relying solely
on the income tax, one is able to make members of society better off.8
It is not true, however, that we should never introduce a tax, subsidy, or other
government policy that involves an additional distortion. The familiar principle of second best
teaches that an additional wrong can help set things right. Thus, if the luxury tax (or subsidy, for
that matter) somehow helped to offset the downward distortion of income-generating effort
caused by the income tax, some degree of luxury taxation (or subsidization) might be desirable.
One long-recognized qualification is that it tends to be efficient to tax leisure
complements and subsidize leisure substitutes on this ground.9 For example, taxing beach
attendance might make leisure less attractive, and subsidizing central city amenities might make
work more attractive. Both policies would involve their own distortions, but because they would
help induce individuals to work more, thus partly reducing the downward distortion of labor
effort, there would be an offsetting gain. This possibility is considered further in Section III.A
with regard to gifts.
Another qualification arises when individuals’ consumption or other behavior depends on
their type (earning ability) or their identity.10 Suppose, for example, that higher-ability
individuals at a given income level have a greater relative preference for classical music than do
lower-ability individuals. In that case, taxing the consumption of classical music would enable
greater redistribution with less distortion of the labor-leisure choice. This logic critically
depends on the preference being due to higher income-earning ability at a given income level
rather than to greater demand on account of simply having more income, such as is the case with
luxury goods in general. As we have seen, taxing goods preferred because of higher income
directly distorts the choice to earn more income; the point here is that taxing goods related to the
ability to earn income rather than the choice to earn more income can help to reduce labor supply
8

This idea entered the legal academic literature in Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell,
Why the Legal System Is Less Efficient than the Income Tax in Redistributing Income, 23 J.
Leg. Stud. 667 (1994); it drew upon Aanund Hylland and Richard Zeckhauser, Distributional
Objectives Should Affect Taxes But Not Program Choice or Design, 81 Scand. J. Econ. 264
(1979), and Steven Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal
Rulemaking: Should Distributional Equity Matter Given Optimal Income Taxation?, 71 Am.
Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proc.) 414 (1981).
9
This point derives from W.J. Corlett and D. C. Hague, Complementarity and the Excess
Burden of Taxation, 21 Rev. Econ. Stud. 21 (1953). Analysis that takes account of the income
tax traces to Atkinson and Stiglitz, note 6, at 67–68, and is further discussed in Louis Kaplow,
Taxing Leisure Complements, Econ. Inquiry (forthcoming 2010).
10
The seminal discussion of this qualification is James A. Mirrlees, Optimal Tax Theory:
A Synthesis, 6 J. Pub. Econ. 327, 345–47 (1976).

-4-

distortion. A variation on this subtle idea is examined further in subsection III.B.4.
Another particularly important qualification in the present context is that the taxed or
subsidized activity might directly involve an externality; perhaps luxury goods produce high
levels of pollution. This consideration is the subject of the next Section.
B. Externalities
A central maxim of economics is that, in a free market, activities involving negative
externalities will tend to be overproduced and those generating positive externalities
underproduced. For example, a tax on gasoline may be optimal because driving causes wear on
roads, pollution, congestion, and not-fully-compensated accident risk to others.11 And a subsidy
to the purchase of flowers might be desirable because of benefits to passers-by.
Importantly, such policies to correct (internalize) externalities tend to be desirable
regardless of the distributive incidence of the taxes or subsidies themselves, for the same reason
that the undesirability of luxury taxes (in the absence of externalities or other considerations) is
independent of their distributive incidence. The reason is that the income tax can simultaneously
be adjusted in a distributively offsetting manner.12
Suppose that there is an uncorrected externality involving some good. In particular,
suppose that the externality is a negative one, and that the aggregate social harm per unit
consumption of the good is h. The simple (so-called “first-best”) economic prescription is to
levy a tax on the good of h per unit.13 Accordingly, individuals would only purchase an
additional unit of the good if its value to them exceeded the production cost (reflected in the
pretax price) plus the external cost, which together constitute the full social cost of the good. A
higher tax would excessively discourage purchases of the good (individuals with values in
excess of the total social cost but below the producers’ price plus the tax would be inefficiently
deterred from purchasing the good). Likewise, a lower tax would insufficiently discourage
purchases. The reasoning for positive externalities, optimally responded to with a subsidy equal
11

One might add that gasoline use creates energy dependence that can also have high
social costs. Regarding a gasoline tax, other policy instruments may be more effective in
addressing many of the stated objectives; however, the central point here is not which precise tax
base or other mode of regulation is optimal but rather whether correction is appropriate.
12
The discussion to follow in the text is heuristic, but precise statements, demonstrations,
and discussion of qualifications can be found in Kaplow, Externalities, note 4; for nontechnical
but more complete elaboration, see Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at 211–17, and Kaplow,
Government Policy, note 4. For other perspectives on optimal taxation and externalities, see, for
example, Helmuth Cremer, Firouz Gahvari, and Norbert Ladoux, Externalities and Optimal
Taxation, 70 J. Pub. Econ. 343 (1998); Wojciech Kopczuk, A Note on Optimal Taxation in the
Presence of Externalities, 80 Econ. Letters 81 (2003); and Jukka Pirttilä and Matti Tuomala,
Income Tax, Commodity Tax and Environmental Policy, 4 Intl. Tax & Pub. Fin. 379 (1997).
13
Importantly, this is a relative tax. Thus, if there is a preexisting uniform VAT of t, the
total tax on this good would be h + t.

-5-

to the marginal social benefit per unit, is analogous.
Now, consider the distributive effects of this corrective tax combined with a distributively
offsetting adjustment to the income tax schedule. Perhaps the corrective tax is regressive. In that
case, the distributively offsetting adjustment would involve a sufficiently large cut at the lower
end of the income distribution to make up the difference. If the corrective tax had a proportional
incidence overall, so would the corresponding income tax cut. This overall incidence, to be a bit
more precise, is meant to be encompassing. That is, the incidence of the hypothesized offsetting
income tax adjustment takes into account all effects of the corrective tax, including the cost of
paying the tax and, notably, the distributive incidence of the benefit from correcting the
externality. Accordingly, the distributive incidence of the latter is also rendered moot.
Consider now the policy package as a whole. It is distribution neutral; this is true by
construction. Regarding revenue, the corrective tax raises additional funds whereas the income
tax adjustment is a tax cut; these components are also designed to be offsetting. What’s left?
The correction of the externality. If indeed the reform is an efficient one, here, internalizing the
externality, then there is a net gain from this component. Indeed, in a basic model of this
problem, the gain can be distributed, say, pro rata, so as to make everyone better off. Full
internalization of externalities then is indeed a sound policy. And this is so regardless of the
distributive effects of the externality and regardless of revenue effects (when one views the
corrective tax or subsidy in isolation from the offsetting income tax schedule adjustment).
C. Political Practicality
It is hoped that the foregoing analysis is analytically clarifying, allowing one to isolate
the distinctive effects of a corrective tax from other matters—concerning distribution, revenue,
and labor supply distortion—that normally are the focus of analysis of the income tax system.
There remains the question whether this sort of analysis is realistic. Although not the focus of
this essay, it is worth noting how the present framework helps to illuminate these sorts of
questions as well.14
First, observe that it is roughly possible to enact distributively offsetting adjustments to
the income tax, and, moreover, such policy combinations have been observed. For example, one
could increase the gasoline tax and adjust the incidence of the income tax in a distributively
offsetting fashion. This was an aspect of the U.S. tax reform in 1993.15 On a broader scale, the
U.S. tax reform in 1986 bundled myriad changes, with the package as a whole designed to be

14

For further elaboration, see Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at 29–34, and Kaplow,
Government Policy, note 4, at 172–74.
15
That reform was neither distribution- nor revenue-neutral. However, it was designed to
increase redistribution and also to raise the tax on gasoline, which was seen as regressive. The
higher gas tax was packaged with an expansion of the earned income tax credit and an increase
in top income tax rates.
-6-

revenue- and distribution-neutral.16
Second, explicit packaging of reforms can be politically attractive. As explained in the
previous Section, it is possible to combine a policy that raises efficiency by better regulating
externalities with a distributively offsetting income tax adjustment that together generates gains
for everyone. (Outside the world of the model, this result would not literally arise, but such a
package would make individuals at each level of income better off on average.) Relatedly,
groups objecting to the distributive incidence of an efficient reform can be bought off in such a
fashion. By contrast, one cannot buy off all losers from an inefficient reform since overall losses
exceed total gains.
Third, the foregoing analytical approach helps to illuminate reform packages that are not
distribution neutral. Such packages, in principle, can be decomposed into two-step reforms:
(1) implement the core policy change in a distribution-neutral fashion, as described above;
(2) then immediately amend the package to shift the distribution to that of the actual reform
under contemplation. Step 1 is to be analyzed as before. Step 2, by construction, holds the
underlying core policy (say, the reform to internalize the externality) constant, leaving only the
purely redistributive effect.17
Related to this last point, note that these two steps are severable. That is, if for political
or other reasons, the distributive effects are undesirable whereas the step 1 efficiency effects are
positive, one could enact just step 1. Likewise, if the step 2 distributive effects are really
desirable but the step 1 efficiency effects are adverse, one could enact just step 2. Moreover, as
explained, if step 1 is inefficient, by foregoing that step there is a larger pie that could be sliced
so as to make all better off.
The foregoing discussion is obviously Panglossian, naive, or . . . choose your preferred
adjective. No suggestion is made that reality operates so predictably or efficiently. The only
claim in this Section is that the analytical approach involving a distributively offsetting
adjustment to the income tax schedule is helpful in thinking about political feasibility.

III. TRANSFER TAXATION
This Part applies the general analytical approach sketched in Part II to individuals’
expenditures on gifts, where transfer taxation is viewed as a differential commodity tax on

16

It is unlikely that a legislature will tweak the income tax in response to each and every
tax, expenditure, and regulatory program. If, however, there is a desire to maintain some given
distribution of income, the income tax system is flexible enough and is adjusted frequently
enough that one could, on average and over time, accomplish such an objective.
17
One could add revenue effects as well, although in the long run deficits must be paid
off, by the same individuals, with interest, or by future generations, in which case revenue
effects can be seen as a species of distributive effects.
-7-

giving.18 Section A begins by viewing gifts as ordinary expenditures, simply one of many
choices available to individuals. Section B then extends the analysis to externalities. First, a
number of particular externalities plausibly associated with giving are considered, and, second,
the implications for the optimal taxation of private transfers are examined.
A. Gifts as Ordinary Expenditures
An individual might purchase pizza, a hair cut, or golf clubs for him- or herself. Or such
goods and services might be purchased for another individual, say, a child. As an abstract
matter, there is no difficulty in viewing purchases for others—or the giving of cash or other
items of value to be used by others to choose their own purchases—as additional commodities
from which one chooses. When economists describe individuals’ options for expending their
disposable income, it is conventional to suppose that all of their resources are expended on one
of various commodities. By allowing such commodities to be in the future, one can incorporate
savings, and by allowing transfers to other individuals, one can address gifts and bequests.
This seemingly mild abstract statement turns out to be a very powerful device for
facilitating analysis because economists have devoted so much effort to understanding the
problem of optimal commodity taxation, including importantly in the presence of an income tax.
As described in Section II.A, a central result is that, in a simple baseline case, it is not optimal to
engage in any differential commodity taxation. Hence, viewing gifts as just another commodity,
it is not optimal to subject them to any relative tax (or subsidy). Moreover, as explained
previously, this conclusion holds regardless of the distributive incidence of giving and thus of
any tax (or subsidy) on giving and regardless of the revenue raised (or, in the case of a subsidy,
expended) in doing so. Accordingly, the proper view of optimal transfer taxation appears to be
radically different from what is commonly supposed.
The central question that will occupy most of the remainder of this essay is: How, if at
all, are gifts different? Relatedly, what are the implications of these differences for the
formulation of ideal tax policy?
As mentioned in Section II.A, one qualification to the uniformity result arises when a
form of expenditure interacts with the labor–leisure tradeoff, which is distorted due to income
taxation. On one hand, suppose that individuals who give more to others, thereby having fewer
resources to spend on themselves, now find leisure less attractive than otherwise. (Even with
1000 channels, television eventually gets boring, whereas long ski weekends are no longer
affordable.) In this case, it would be optimal to subsidize giving. If individuals give more, they
will be inclined to work more, which will reduce the labor–leisure distortion. On the other hand,
suppose that if one gives more it becomes more pleasant to spend additional time with the
recipients, perhaps children or grandchildren. In this case, it would be optimal to tax giving.

18

As noted in the introduction, this program is pursued in Kaplow, note 2; Kaplow,
Framework, note 1; and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, ch. 10, in many respects with more
depth and breadth. This Part both highlights key points, including some that are often
overlooked even in work that adopts the same basic approach, and further develops certain ideas.
-8-

(Bequests would seem to be neutral on this dimension.19)
The relative importance of these and related competing factors is an empirical question,
one that does not seem to have been explored directly. This issue (and others pertinent to
different, more subtle qualifications20) suggests the need for some redirection in empirical work.
There is substantial empirical investigation of private transfers and the effects of transfer
taxation; yet, this central policy-relevant question does not seem to be on the radar screen of
researchers.
B. Externalities from Giving
Perhaps the most straightforward justification for differential taxation (including the
possibility of subsidization) involves externalities. Externalities are central to optimal transfer
tax policy because much giving involves significant externalities.21 This Section examines some
important ones and their implications for policy.
1. Positive Externality on Donees
Private transfers ordinarily benefit donors; else, they would not choose to make them.22
If a donor chooses between spending an additional dollar on more pizza or giving that dollar to
his or her child, and ultimately makes the latter choice, the result reflects the fact that the donor
valued making the gift by a greater amount than having more pizza. This benefit corresponds to
the benefit of ordinary consumption expenditures and forms the core that lies behind the
preceding analysis of commodity taxation. The donor’s benefit to him- or herself is
quintessentially not an externality.
However, donees are people too. No matter how large is the donor’s benefit, altruistic or
otherwise, from giving to a donee, that benefit to the donor is, well, a benefit to the donor and
thus is part of the donor’s utility. Society, in general, cares (or should care) about all people,
including donees.23 The benefit to the donee per se—that is, as an independent individual, and

19

The same may also be true of gifts when the donor is already retired, although the
anticipation of giving could render earlier retirement more attractive.
20
For a nontechnical discussion of many of the more important qualifications to the
uniformity result and further references, see Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at 135–45.
21
This point is emphasized in Louis Kaplow, A Note on Subsidizing Gifts, 58 J. Pub.
Econ. 469 (1995), which focuses on the positive externality on donees, and it is substantially
developed in the sources cited in note 18, which elaborate that externality and also examine the
negative externality on the treasury. It has become more common to assess the relevance of this
positive externality, but the negative revenue externality is not mentioned as often.
22
Qualifications involving accidental bequests, nonmaximizing behavior, and other
matters are considered in Section IV.A.
23
It is sometimes suggested that taking into account the positive externality on donees
entails double counting. See, e.g., Peter Diamond, “Optimal Tax Treatment of Private
Contributions for Public Goods with and Without Warm Glow Preferences,” 90 J. Pub. Econ.
-9-

thus a benefit above and beyond the benefit in terms of the donor’s utility—is external to the
donor.24
The existence of this external benefit to donees thus provides a general basis for
subsidizing gifts. The optimal subsidy depends on the magnitude of this externality, which in
turn will relate to transferor’s motives, as discussed in Section IV.A. (This connection may not
strike the reader as immediately obvious, and for good reason, since the benefit of a dollar to a
donee is typically one dollar, regardless of the donor’s motive; yet, as will be seen, there are
indeed important modifications in some cases.) Subtle but possibly important qualifications
concerning optimal correction of this externality are elaborated in subsection 4 and also in
Section IV.B.
2. Negative Externality on Public Fisc
When a donee receives a transfer, the donee’s income (or, viewed long term, wealth)
rises. This produces all manner of income (wealth) effects, as is familiar. For example, richer
individuals may purchase more fine wine and less pizza. Such effects in themselves, however,
tend not to have direct policy relevance. The reason is that, whatever is the resulting set of
choices that individuals make, such choices are optimal given their new, higher income. There
are, however, exceptions, specifically when there are uncorrected externalities regarding such
choices.
A central externality of sorts25 involves the income effect on labor supply, because labor
supply affects the public fisc. Ordinarily, when individuals’ incomes rise from external sources,
they find it optimal to work less.26 (In economics parlance, they generally choose to purchase

897, 917 (2006). It is only double counting, however, if the same thing is counted twice, and as
the text explains this is not the case. Specifically, if it were double counting, then it must either
be the case that the donor’s utility from giving should not be viewed as utility when computing
social welfare (although all manner of selfish own-consumption, which the donor prefers less, is
counted) or that the donee’s utility is not part of social welfare, which is tantamount to not
counting donees as members of society. It is not clear which point proponents of the doublecounting view implicitly have in mind. In any case, failure to include both sources of welfare
would also conflict with welfarism and thus can be shown to entail violation of the Pareto
principle. See Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, Any Non-welfarist Method of Policy
Assessment Violates the Pareto Principle, 109 J. Pol. Econ. 281 (2001).
24
See Kaplow, note 21, at 474, for a discussion of how this is not a conventional
externality in all respects; specifically, its distributive nature means that it is not susceptible to
correction via bargaining, as per the Coase theorem.
25
External effects on the treasury due to policies’ indirect effects on labor supply are not
generally discussed using the rubric of externalities, although the term is analytically
appropriate.
26
For evidence on the magnitude of this effect, see, for example, Douglas Holtz-Eakin,
David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, The Carnegie Conjecture: Some Empirical Evidence, 108
Q. J. Econ. 413 (1993); Guido W. Imbens, Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote, Estimating
- 10 -

more of what are referred to as “normal” goods, and leisure is taken to be such a good.) If this
were the entire story, it would be unremarkable. In an otherwise undistorted economy, it is
efficient to increase leisure as one’s available resources increase. However, as mentioned
numerous times thus far, there is a central preexisting distortion, namely, the income tax’s
depression of labor effort. Since labor effort is already inefficiently low, this indirect reduction
of labor supply is costly. In particular, when an individual chooses to work an hour less, the
individual only forgoes 1!J of his or her hourly earnings, where J refers to the individual’s
marginal tax rate. The other fraction, J, is forgone by the treasury. Thus, to the extent that
receiving gifts depresses labor supply, there is a revenue loss to the treasury, a loss that the
individual donor does not take into account.27
The tax revenue externality need not be negative. For example, consider gifts that
enhance young individuals’ human capital or relax liquidity constraints that enable
entrepreneurship.28 To the extent that donees’ earnings will ultimately rise as a consequence,
there is a positive externality to the fisc. In the discussion to follow, however, the tax revenue
externality is discussed on the assumption that it is ordinarily and overall negative (but no
empirical basis for this view is offered here, it being taken for expositional convenience).
3. Externality Involving Concentration of Wealth and Power 29
Transfer taxation is often rationalized as a partial correction to the undesirable effects of
the concentration of wealth and power. The first and most important point to note is that the
logical structure of this argument suggests its immediate relevance. That is, the argument
typically hypothesizes negative externalities. One suggestion is that concentrations of wealth
lead to undue political influence. Perhaps the very rich can tilt government policies to their
liking, use their might to limit redistribution, or take control for the sheer enjoyment of wielding
power over others. On the other hand, private concentrations of wealth can also provide useful
countervailing power against abusive government. It may be difficult to unseat entrenched
incumbents without private wealth. Ownership of media outlets by various rich individuals may

the Effect of Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a
Survey of Lottery Players, 91 Am. Econ. Rev. 778 (2001); David Joulfaian and Mark O.
Wilhelm, Inheritance and Labor Supply, 29 J. Hum. Resources 1205 (1994).
27
Observe that this one aspect of the externality is easy to quantify in that the external
cost per unit reduction in donee labor earnings is simply J. It remains to determine the extent of
reduction in labor earnings per dollar transferred, but economic theory suggests that the
reduction in earnings will be less than the amount of the gift; hence, the externality per dollar
given (rather than per dollar reduction in earnings) is strictly less than J.
28
See, e.g., David G. Blanchflower & Andrew J. Oswald, What Makes an Entrepreneur?,
16 J. Lab. Econ. 26 (1998); Donald Cox, Intergenerational Transfers and Liquidity Constraints,
105 Q.J. Econ. 187 (1990); Douglas Holtz-Eakin, David Joulfaian, & Harvey S. Rosen, Sticking
It Out: Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints, 102 J. Pol. Econ. 53 (1994); Douglas
Holtz-Eakin, David Joulfaian, & Harvey S. Rosen, Entrepreneurial Decisions and Liquidity
Constraints, 25 Rand J. Econ. 334 (1994).
29
See Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 191–93.
- 11 -

better enable them to resist government interference. Which effects are more important, and
under what political conditions, is a complex question that does not seem adequately explored.
In any case, it would be helpful to understand better the direction of the net external effect and
its magnitude.
Suppose for sake of argument that there exists a significant negative net externality of
this sort. How does this relate to transfer taxation? As an initial matter, most arguments about
undue effects seem to relate to concentrations of wealth, not transfers per se. Hence, it would
seem that wealth taxation rather than wealth transfer taxation would be a better suited
instrument.30 In addition, for certain means of influence, direct regulation of problematic uses of
wealth (campaign contributions and lobbying) may be better targeted than generalized wealth
taxation.31
Finally, one must consider the likely effects of transfer taxation, a point emphasized by
Edward McCaffery.32 Higher transfer taxation tends to induce lower transfers, which in turn
implies greater expenditures by donors, who are likely to be wealthier than their more dispersed
group of donees. Consider the extreme policy of confiscatory transfer taxation. Since it would
no longer be possible to “take it with you” (in a sense), wealthy donors might more often attempt
to use their fortunes to buy their way into high political office or otherwise attain power in the
present.

30

See also id. at 192 n. 59 (discussing respects in which wealth and wealth transfer
taxation differ with regard to concentration of wealth). A rather different point is that heirs are
often less effective at running businesses than were the founders, so a wealth transfer tax (in
particular, one sufficient to disrupt passing on control of family businesses) may be efficient in
avoiding waste. This argument is incomplete, for if founders are aware of limitations in their
heirs’ likely efficacy, then their decisions will take this into account. Keeping the business in the
family thus may be viewed more as a matter of providing for intangible consumption in the
family (perhaps by both donors, in anticipation for the case of bequests, and donees) rather than
maximizing investment returns.
31
A related question concerns the magnitudes of various effects and their relationship to
the level and distribution of wealth. For example, in 2006, all of the U.S. Forbes 400 had a net
worth over $1 billion, North America had nearly 40,000 households with a net worth in excess of
$30 million (presumably mostly in the United States), and the United States had more than a
million households with net worth over $5 million. See Jeff Daley, More Than a Million $5
Million-Dollar Households, PRWeb Press Release Newswire (July 13, 2007)
(http://www.prweb.com/releases/2007/07/prweb539152.htm, accessed on September 29, 2008);
Capgemini, World Wealth Report 2007, 3 Fig.1, 6 Fig.5 (2007). Are such numbers and levels
more suggestive of abuse or of countervailing power? Would the matter be better if there were
fewer such households but some held even greater wealth? Or vice versa? Regardless, absent
tight restrictions regarding campaigns, lobbying, and so forth, would even substantial changes in
these figures have a nontrivial effect?
32
Edward J. McCaffery, The Uneasy Case for Wealth Transfer Taxation, 104 Yale L.J.
283, 312 (1994).

- 12 -

4. Implications
The foregoing three externalities and perhaps others suggest that it may well be optimal
to have some system of transfer taxation or subsidization. The optimal direction of the
correction depends on whether net externalities are negative, favoring taxation, or positive,
favoring subsidization. And the optimal magnitude of tax or subsidy rates depends in turn on the
actual magnitude of the net externality. According to the analysis in Section II.B, this would be
the entirety of the story. Specifically, the distributive effects of transfer taxation and revenue
considerations would be irrelevant. As noted in Section II.A, however, there are other
potentially significant considerations, and some additional ones are mentioned in Part IV. These
factors are largely set to the side in this subsection, although some are considered at the end with
regard to the positive externality on donees.
It is useful to restate the underlying logic more concretely. Suppose that it turned out to
be true that the only significant gift externalities were negative so that a tax was optimal.33
Perhaps the negative externality on the public fisc is most important. Furthermore, imagine that
the optimal tax was positive at even low levels of transfers and that the optimal tax rate was not
very high even for huge transfers. Implementing this scheme may involve making the transfer
tax scheme significantly less progressive (applying positive tax rates on many now exempted
and lower tax rates on the wealthy). Furthermore, if the optimal tax rates were sufficiently low,
this transfer tax reform would also generate less revenue. Do these consequences render the
reform unattractive?
By this point, it should be apparent that neither effect is relevant in principle.
Specifically, consider implementing such a reform packaged with a distribution-neutral
adjustment to the income tax. This would entail raising income tax rates on the rich and
lowering income tax rates on those formerly exempt from transfer taxation. The same revenue
would be raised. And the same distribution would obtain (roughly; see Section IV.B for further

33

If it turned out that a subsidy was optimal, one might worry that, just as there is the
problem with favorable income tax treatment of charitable gifts that private consumption may
masquerade as a charitable transfer, so too might individuals feign private gifts to collect
subsidies. It may well be that, as a consequence, subsidies could not be implemented in many
contexts, in which case a hands-off regime, with neither tax nor subsidy, would be optimal in
practice. Of course, it is well known that attempts to impose transfer taxation, even with large
exclusions (larger than is generally appreciated, as discussed in Section IV.C), are subject to
substantial avoidance, so much so that some consider this to be an important factor in the basic
design of any such tax and in determining whether an otherwise desirable transfer tax ultimately
makes sense. See, e.g.,, George Cooper, A Voluntary Tax? New Perspectives on Sophisticated
Estate Tax Avoidance (1979); Wojciech Kopczuk & Joel Slemrod, The Impact of the Estate Tax
on Wealth Accumulation and Avoidance Behavior, in Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation 299
(William G. Gale, James R. Hines, Jr., & Joel Slemrod, eds., 2001); Richard Schmalbeck,
Avoiding Federal Wealth Transfer Taxes, in Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation 113 (William
G. Gale, James R. Hines, Jr., & Joel Slemrod, eds., 2001); Bernheim, note 1; Repetti, note 1.

- 13 -

discussion). Thus, whether this reform package would be desirable will have nothing to do with
the direct revenue effects of the transfer tax reform and its distributive incidence. Instead, it will
have entirely to do with externalities.
Put another way, if such a reform package were implemented, the only effect would be to
change the desirability, at the margin, of making gifts. Furthermore, if there are net negative
externalities of the form postulated, this effect would be desirable. And, importantly, this would
be the only effect.
An additional perspective is provided by contemplating who is paying, say, for the
reduction in transfer tax rates on the rich. The answer is: the rich themselves. At any income
level, income taxes are adjusted to cover the revenue effects (at that income level) of the transfer
tax reform. Likewise, suppose instead that we wanted to significantly raise transfer tax rates on
the rich, perhaps because there is thought to exist a large negative externality regarding the
concentration of wealth and power. Where would the additional transfer tax revenue go? The
answer again is: to the rich themselves. Under a distribution-neutral income tax approach,
whatever the direction or magnitude of the reform, all the money is kept in the same place. After
all, that is what “distribution neutral” means.34 Accordingly, with a distribution-neutral income
tax adjustment, we are left with the question: As between two donors with identical income,
should we tax or subsidize (and by how much) the one who spends an additional $1 on gifts
rather than on own-consumption? Similarly, how much more or less should we tax a donor at a
given level of income compared to the situation in which an additional dollar is given to another
rather than spent on own-consumption?35
Unable to resist yet further restatement (because this point seems to be quite elusive), it is
quite useful to pose the question: taking as given some amount of revenue that we wish to extract
from a given well-to-do slice of the income distribution, what is the best way to accomplish this?
This question can meaningfully be asked whatever that amount is and whatever is the slice in the
income distribution. As a first, crude approximation, the answer to this question will not affect
revenue or distribution, for both are by hypothesis held constant. What it will effect is
efficiency. And efficiency, as explained, depends on the direction and magnitude of net

34

Combining this point with the discussion in Section II.C on political feasibility, note the
following: If transfer tax opponents urge repeal and insist that the reason is not the desire to
shrink government or to reduce taxes on the rich for its own sake, but rather because transfer
taxation is a bad tax, then they should favor repeal funded by such a tax increase on the rich.
(This may not be a first choice, but if it were the only choice, it should be attractive.) Likewise,
for those believing that transfer taxes are a particularly good form of taxation, not just another
way to tax the rich, they should willingly favor a transfer tax increase, with the proceeds used to
finance an income tax cut on those same rich people. (Again, this need not be a first choice, but
it should be viewed positively if it were the only choice.) Finally, if either or both groups balk,
have we not then learned that their positions on transfer taxation really are about redistribution or
revenue more broadly, and not about transfer taxation per se?
35
Almost identical questions are posed in Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 166, 182.

- 14 -

externalities associated with giving.
The irrelevance, in the basic case, of standard distributive effects to the desirability of
transfer taxation (or subsidization) should also open our minds to considering forms of taxation
that differ greatly from what is observed or usually proposed. Notably, most transfer taxation
schemes apply only to fairly wealthy individuals. If the primary rationale is to correct an
externality due to the concentration of wealth and power (and, moreover, transfer taxation is a
sensible means), then limiting the regime to this group might make sense. However, the first two
externalities mentioned, the positive externality on donees and the negative externality on the
fisc, presumptively apply at all levels of the income distribution. It is, of course, possible that
their magnitudes vary (perhaps greatly) as a function of income. Whether and the extent to
which this is so (and, if so, in what direction) are empirical questions. But, a priori, it is entirely
possible that careful study of the pertinent externalities could indicate the optimality of a very
different regime: one involving taxes or subsidies, one with a much lower exemption (perhaps
none at all, save for administrative considerations), and one with rates that rise or fall with
income or with the magnitude of the transfer.
Before proceeding, more should be said about some distinctive features of the positive
externality on donees.36 It has been mentioned but not emphasized that the contemplated
distribution-neutral income tax adjustment is designed to hold distribution constant for donors,
but this would not ordinarily achieve distribution neutrality for donees. Relatedly, as will be
mentioned in Section IV.B, donees’ benefits from the receipt of gifts raises their utility and
reduces their marginal utility of consumption, both of which affect the social desirability of
redistributing to and from them. In particular, as the gifts a particular donee receives become
large, the donee’s utility will rise and marginal utility of consumption will fall, making the donee
an attractive target for taxation. Furthermore, this point should be joined with an atypical feature
of this gift externality: to a substantial extent, the gifts an individual receives depend on the
individual’s personal identity rather than on disposable income. This feature is due to the fact
that most gifts are to relatives, the largest being from parents to children.37 Accordingly, the
discussion in Section II.A regarding type- or identity-specific differences is applicable and
implies that the benchmark of uniformity needs to be modified in this case. These amendments

36

As mentioned in the opening footnote, I am indebted to Wojciech Kopczuk for
extensive discussions pertaining to the ideas in this paragraph, which modify my prior thinking
on the subject.
37
If instead gifts were primarily to peers, who in turn tended to be individuals with similar
earnings (think of contributions to a country club or other organization that primarily benefit
others at roughly the same income level), then prospective beneficiaries’ earnings would affect
expected gift receipts directly, and the analysis would turn out to be similar to that of more
standard externalities. To suggest part of the reasoning, suppose that giving rises with income;
then, the prospect of receiving higher gifts from peers would induce individuals to earn more.
Note that if parents were perceived by their children to give less if they underperformed relative
to their abilities (the opposite of the behavior associated with the Samaritan’s dilemma), then
similar logic would apply to such gifts.

- 15 -

to the analysis of more familiar externalities lessen the degree to which the positive externality
on donees ultimately justifies a subsidy or, in offsetting negative gift externalities, a lower rate of
tax.

IV. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
Part II articulates a general approach for analyzing various fiscal instruments, and Part III
applies this framework to the taxation (or subsidization) of private transfers. Although
seemingly complete on its face, transfer taxation involves a number of further considerations that
bear on the appropriate analysis, or at least that are sometimes perceived as relevant. Making no
attempt to be comprehensive in scope or depth of treatment,38 this Part briefly examines a
number of additional issues, including the relevance of donors’ motives for making gifts, some
additional subtle factors bearing on the assessment of redistribution, the importance of human
capital in private transfers, notions favoring equality of starting points, the bearing of transfer
taxation on incentives for savings, and gifts that are to charitable institutions rather than to
identified individuals.
A. Transfer Motives
In much economic analysis, individuals’ motives are largely irrelevant. Whether an
individual purchases a lamp because it fits nicely in a particular room, looks appealing, or
illuminates well, or some combination thereof, is immaterial. All that matters is the individual’s
total valuation, which determines whether the lamp will be purchased and the amount of
consumer surplus from doing so.
It turns out, however, that variations in donors’ motives for giving often do matter, both
for predicting behavior and for performing welfare analysis.39 In the prior discussion of the
positive externality on donees, for example, it was supposed that donors’ gifts bring them
pleasure. But such pleasure could come in different ways. One possibility is that donors are to
an extent altruistic, which is to say that raising the utility of their donees increases their own
utility. Altruism seems to be evidenced, for example, by parents’ hard work aimed to improve
their children’s prospects in life.
Another motivation is that donors obtain pleasure not from the enhancement in their
donees’ well-being but rather from the fact that they, the donors themselves, have made the gift.
That is, they get utility from giving per se.40 In many respects, the implications of this

38

Additional factors are addressed in Kaplow, Framework, note 1, and Kaplow, Theory of
Taxation, note 1, ch. 10.
39
The importance of transfer motives was advanced in Kaplow, note 2, and developed
further in Kaplow, Framework, note 1, and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, ch. 10.
40
This motivation is sometimes called “warm glow” giving, following James Andreoni,
Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow Giving?, 100 Econ.

- 16 -

motivation are similar to those of altruism: gifts continue to benefit both donors and donees.
There are, however, differences in behavior, notably, altruists will give more as their prospective
donees’ situations worsen (and less as they improve) whereas those whose utility comes from
their own giving may not. (In reality, one may suppose that many individuals’ actual
motivations are a mix of these two, as well as others.) Also, the literature has noted an important
distinction within this latter motive concerning whether donors care about their gross or net
gifts.41 Notably, if a donor gives $100, but $30 is taxed so that only $70 reaches the donee, is the
donor’s utility based on the sacrifice of $100 or the effective transfer of $70? This question is
obviously important to the behavioral and welfare effects of taxing or subsidizing gifts, but
empirical research has not focused on which characterization is more apt.
Another important possibility is that transfers are not true gifts but really only one side of
an exchange transaction. For example, parents may give more to children as implicit or explicit
compensation for services, such as in providing care and attention. (Also, significant private
transfers that appear to be gifts may be components of loans or insurance arrangements, again
implicit or explicit.) Since these transfers are not gifts but something else, the optimal tax
treatment generally will reflect the actual nature of the transaction. For example, purchases of
labor services that provide consumption to the purchaser should not give rise to any income tax
deduction to the payor, should be subject to prevailing consumption taxation (such as a VAT),
and generate taxable labor income to the recipient.42 Presumably, many but not nearly all private
transfers—especially inter vivos transfers—actually involve payments for services (or loans and
the like) rather than true gifts, although the differences may be difficult both for researchers and
tax authorities to detect.
Transfers in the form of bequests might in a sense be accidental, a possibility not present
for most other forms of expenditure. After all, bequests consist of resources not expended during
one’s lifetime, so they can arise from inaction. An important source of such bequests is believed
to be due to incomplete annuitization, which in turn may reflect imperfections in annuity markets
or donors’ failure to appreciate the value of such financial transactions. In a world lacking any
possibility of annuitization, bequests would to an extent be random windfalls and thus might be
subjected to confiscatory taxation and redistribution, the former not having any behavioral effect.
With mixed motives (notably, if such donors also care about their descendants, which is implied
by careful tax planning), this conclusion need not follow. Also, the most direct response would

J. 464 (1990), or utility from the “joy of giving.” These livelier descriptions, however, can be
misleading. Someone may give to relieve guilt or to be viewed more highly by others without
experiencing a warm glow or sense of joy. Moreover, one suspects that altruists do feel a warm
glow and experience joy as a result of their gifts even though the point of designating this
separate category is to distinguish altruism.
41
This distinction and its implications are presented and developed in Kaplow, note 2, at
286–87; Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 178–79; and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at
261–63.
42
Some readers will note that this outcome with regard to income taxation corresponds to
the view associated with Henry C. Simons, Personal Income Taxation, ch. 6 (1938).

- 17 -

be to address the market imperfections responsible for such incomplete annuitization. In
addition, it should be noted that donees who receive larger accidental bequests due to the earlier
death of their parents are not obviously better off, suggesting the possibility of an insurance
function.43
A related explanation for bequests is that individuals may accumulate and hold wealth for
its own sake, that is, because they obtain utility from doing so, independent of utility from its
subsequent consumption value or from the bequest that ultimately results.44 Once again, if this
motivation is present in a pure, extreme form, confiscatory taxation of bequests would have no
behavioral effects. Many of the points made with regard to accidental bequests are applicable,
including those pertaining to imperfections in financial markets.45 This motivation may be quite
significant for some individuals; its importance and nature warrant further empirical study.46
Finally, it is important to consider the possibility that individuals’ giving decisions are

43

For further discussion of these issues, see Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at
264–66, and Wojciech Kopczuk, The Trick Is to Live: Is the Estate Tax Social Security for the
Rich?, 111 J. Pol. Econ. 1318 (2003).
44
See Kaplow, “Utility from Accumulation,” National Tax Association, Proceedings of
the 102nd Annual Conference (forthcoming 2010).
45
To explain, consider an individual who obtains utility from holding wealth and nothing
else. (Suppose that consumption utility is financed separately by an annuity.) If there was no
asymmetric information on longevity, such an individual could enter into a contract with a
financial institution wherein the individual would receive wealth while alive but give all wealth
(that borrowed, in a sense, and the initial wealth) to the financial institution on death. This
possibility and others raise questions about the actual nature of utility from wealth, notably
concerning what counts as wealth in individuals’ utility functions. For example, if annuities
count (and at current market value or in some other fashion), if trusts controlled (directly or
indirectly) count, and so forth, behavioral implications and, in particular, the likely responses to
transfer taxation, would differ. To consider another variation, suppose that those who enjoy
holding wealth while alive also relish the prospect of immortality, in the sense that they value
their empires (perhaps intact companies, perhaps descendants, perhaps self-named foundations)
continuing in some fashion into the future. In that case, transfer taxation may have effects on
behavior more like those associated with other transfer motives, although the positive externality
on donees may not be equally present in all such cases.
46
In exploring this motivation empirically, it is worth noting that some common, intuitive
explanations for this motive have difficulty. For example, wealth is termed a measure of
success, but it is not clear why income would not be viewed as a better measure. (Sports and
entertainment superstars are usually measured by what they are paid, not the size of their
portfolios; likewise, jealous co-workers tend to focus on compensation, one suspects.)
Furthermore, for outward perceptions of one’s position in society, it might seem that
consumption, particularly conspicuous consumption, would be better than wealth holdings, often
in passive forms.

- 18 -

not purely the product of cogent maximizing decisions.47 Individuals generally have difficulty
with complex, long-run financial decisionmaking. Myopia or a heightened anxiety involved
with contemplating one’s death may infect such decisions. Or they may reflect inertia or social
convention (although in the long run these may change in response to significant reforms in
transfer taxation). The difficulty of obtaining clear, consistent explanations of giving behavior48
may in part reflect such limitations and possible inconsistencies in individuals’ behavior.
Accordingly, transfer tax policy may be particularly illuminated by further research in this
realm.49
Transfer motives and explanations vary. Many individuals no doubt have mixed motives
that may explain particular gifts or different gifts to different individuals at different times.
Furthermore, there is undoubtedly heterogeneity across individuals that may depend on
underlying preferences or aspects of their situations (such as the number of children and the
quality of their relationships with them).50 Likewise, the degree of rationality in giving may vary
across contexts, time, and individuals. If it were possible for a tax authority to identify the
motivations underlying particular gifts, then quite different tax consequences would optimally be
associated with different gifts. But such is not possible. It is feasible, however, to condition
treatment on observable dimensions that may well be correlated with underlying motivations,

47

See, e.g., Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 201–03; Wojceich Kopczuk & Joel Slemrod,
Denial of Death and Economic Behavior, 5 Advances in Theoretical Economics, art. 5 (2005);
David I. Laibson, Andrea Repetto, & Jeremy Tobacman, Self-Control and Saving for
Retirement, 1998 Brookings Papers Econ. Activity 91; James Poterba, Estate and Gift Taxes and
Incentives for Inter Vivos Giving in the US, 79 J. Pub. Econ. 237 (2001).
48
For empirical evidence on transfer motives, see, for example, Luc Arrondel & André
Masson, Altruism, Exchange or Indirect Reciprocity: What Do the Data on Family Transfers
Show?, in 2 Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity 971 (SergeChristophe Kolm & Jean Mercier Ythier eds., 2006); James B. Davies, Explaining
Intergenerational Transfers, in Household and Family Economics 47 (Paul L. Menchik ed.,
1996); Oded Stark, Altruism and Beyond: An Economic Analysis of Transfers and Exchanges
within Families and Groups (1995).
49
One would speculate that such infirmities are less likely to afflict the wealthiest
individuals; indeed, their success at complex, long-range financial decisions may have
contributed greatly to their wealth. Moreover, to the extent that such individuals do engage in
active tax planning, one suspects that calculation plays a great role, although it is still possible
that sentiments such as a reluctance to admit mortality may significantly influence the decisions
made.
50
Optimal redistribution in the presence of heterogeneous preferences is a complex and
subtle problem, and optimal policy responses depend importantly on whether differences are
observable (for example, numbers of children are observable, but the quality of familial relations
usually are not). See Louis Kaplow, Optimal Policy with Heterogeneous Preferences, 8 B.E. J.
Econ. Anal. & Pol., iss. 1 (Advances), art. 40 (2008).

- 19 -

such as the relationship of the donor and donee,51 the timing of the gift (inter vivos versus
bequest, age of donor and recipient), the wealth of the donor (the mix of motives may vary
significantly with income), and the form of the gift (see, for example, Section C on human
capital). Transfer tax systems, actual and proposed, often make significant distinctions along
such dimensions, but query whether they can be rationalized in light of the foregoing analysis.
B. Additional Redistributive Factors 52
The analytical approach in this essay indicates that to a substantial extent redistributive
considerations are irrelevant to transfer taxation because income tax adjustments can essentially
hold distribution constant, making it optimal to design transfer taxation solely with regard to the
efficiency consequences of its effects on transfers. There remain, however, a number of
potentially important yet subtle complications.
First, transfer taxation has effects across generations. If one wished to hold distribution
constant, would the target be the current donor generation, the subsequent donee generation(s),
or a combination? The latter is normatively most compelling but also more complex. Note that
one could to a substantial extent hold distribution constant in multiple generations by allowing
the income tax to be age dependent, which would tend to be optimal on other grounds as well.
Second, gifts affect donors’ and donees’ utility levels and marginal utilities of
consumption, which are relevant to setting optimal income tax rates. More specifically, the
making of private transfers tends to raise donors’ and donees’ utilities (as explained in
subsection III.B.1), to lower donees’ marginal utilities of consumption (which explains the effect
on labor effort mentioned in subsection III.B.2 and the point at the conclusion of subsection
III.B.4), and also to raise donors’ marginal utilities of consumption (for example, if gifts were
prohibited, own-consumption would be higher so marginal utility would be lower). In addition,
different levels of giving may signal different situations. (A donee might receive more because
of higher need.) Finally, as mentioned at the conclusion of Section A, there is undoubtedly great
heterogeneity among donors, suggesting possible differences in how they optimally should be
taxed (see note 50). In all, a more complete analysis of optimal taxation as a whole (that is, both
income taxation and transfer taxation) would be a daunting task—one that, with regard to many
of the factors highlighted here, has not really been attempted.

51

The importance of this point is great, for most existing and proposed systems treat quite
differently transfers between spouses (often treated as if they are not transfers at all) and
transfers to descendants, and sometimes transfers to later generations are treated differently (for
example, under the generation-skipping transfer tax, I.R.C. §2601). More broadly, there is a
close relationship between transfer taxation and taxation of the family since most transfers are
among family members. See generally Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, ch. 12; Louis
Kaplow, Optimal Distribution and the Family, 98 Scand. J. Econ. 75 (1996).
52
For further, although still highly preliminary, discussion, see Kaplow, note 2, at
285–86; Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 174 n. 16, 181–84; and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation,
note 1, at 256–58.

- 20 -

C. Human Capital 53
There is an important sense in which much analysis of transfer taxation focuses on the tip
of an iceberg, and, worse, a portion that is highly unrepresentative of that which lies beneath.
For the vast majority of the population—all but the very wealthy—the overwhelming portion of
their wealth and of the value of the transfers they receive from parents consists of human capital,
broadly construed.54 Most important, individuals’ earning abilities are significantly determined
by genetic inheritance, home environment, role models, schooling (influenced by neighborhood
choice and private expenditures), and contacts. These factors, in turn, are very much a product
of individuals’ parents, directly or indirectly.55
If transfer taxation or subsidization is, upon analysis, important, one might have
imagined that it would focus on these dominant forms of transfer. Yet this is not the case
analytically: human capital is largely ignored. Nor is it true in the world: human capital transfers
are largely exempt, implicitly or explicitly. Perhaps this practice can be rationalized because it
may be impractical to reach many of these types of transfers and because such transfers may
have positive externalities on the treasury (see subsection III.B.2), in which case subsidization
may even be optimal.56 Even if existing treatment ultimately makes sense and thus the omission
of human capital from reform proposals is likewise justified, it is difficult to defend human
capital’s exclusion from analysis that is motivated to determine the optimal form of transfer
taxation in the first instance.
D. Equality of Starting Points 57
The omission of human capital is not only central to the welfare analytic framework

53

See Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 194–96, and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at

269–70.
54

See, e.g., David Bradford, Untangling the Income Tax 173 (1986) (indicating that if a
90 percentile male received at age forty the 90th percentile inheritance, his lifetime wealth
would increase by only 4.2 percent); James B. Davies, The Relative Impact of Inheritance and
Other Factors on Economic Inequality, 97 Q.J. Econ. 471 (1982).
55
See, e.g., Paul Taubman, The Roles of the Family in the Formation of Offsprings’
Earnings and Income Capacity, in Household and Family Economics 5 (Paul L. Menchik ed.,
1996).
56
Note, importantly, that through public schools, including higher education, and some
other programs including forms of welfare assistance, there are significant public subsidies to the
development of human capital. (And, due to the deductibility in the U.S. income tax of some
state and local taxes that fund much public education, parents’ choices in this regard are
subsidized, although haphazardly in light of limits on deductibility, that not all itemize, and that
the alternative minimum tax currently eliminates the value of deductibility for many individuals.
See I.R.C. §§ 55, 63, 164.)
57
See Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 184–86, and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at
266-68.
th

- 21 -

employed throughout this essay, but it is also critical for evaluating some purported nonwelfarist
objectives of transfer taxation, including those concerned with equality of opportunity, often
framed as equality of starting points.58 The idea is that individuals at the start of their lives
should be in equal positions to realize their potential, which in turn is taken to be something
internal to the individual rather than determined by one’s parents, social caste, or otherwise.
Inheritance is seen as interfering with this equality, giving luckier members of the next
generation a head start. Accordingly, this view is often invoked in favor of transfer taxation,
possibly in aggressive, even confiscatory forms.
It should be obvious from Section C that, if inheritance taxation is substantially justified
by this concern, taxation of human capital transfers should be the core of the tax base rather than
almost universally exempted. After all, it is differential human capital inheritance that largely
creates inequalities in starting points.59 Instead transfer taxation and most proposals for reform
(including radical expansion) tend to focus on large financial transfers, typically bequests, that
are received by donees rather late in life, say, in their fifties. These may greatly influence
equality of opportunity with regard to retirement consumption, such as expensive travel, but they
do not significantly influence starting points, indeed, not even the third generation’s starting
points (for they will often be in their twenties or thirties by then).60
A final question concerning the objective of equal starting points concerns the nexus
between it and various forms of transfer taxation. Because equal starting points focus on the

58

The welfarist focus of this essay is common among economists and many other policy
analysts, but it is not universally shared and is highly controversial. For competing views, see,
for example, Richard M. Hare, Moral Thinking: Its Levels, Method, and Point (1981); Louis
Kaplow and Steven Shavell, Fairness versus Welfare (2002); Kaplow and Shavell, note 23; and
Amartya Sen and Bernard Williams, Utilitarianism and Beyond (1982). Note, however, that
there may well be welfarist implications for inequality in starting points, although they are not
usually the focus of those who advance this objective. Specifically, especially large inequality
may cause unrest, and even lesser inequality may deaden initiative (particularly if mobility is
perceived to be low) and reduce individuals’ benefits from broader social and economic
interaction and from a positive sense derived from living in a society seen as just. From a
welfarist perspective, the importance of these considerations (like others) is an empirical
question, not one to be determined through a priori philosophical reasoning.
59
Social institutions, such as caste systems or other forms of discrimination, could also be
significant, but they are not intergenerational transfers that may be subject to taxation (or, to the
extent that they are, they are probably largely in the form of human capital in any event).
60
The anticipation of large transfers may help, but individuals generally cannot borrow at
age twenty against a likely inheritance at age sixty. (Individuals can, however, choose to save
less for retirement in anticipation of an inheritance.) Also, as suggested in subsection III.B.2,
inheritance—and by logical extension, the prospect of inheritance—may reduce labor effort, the
familiar idea that inheritance deadens initiative. To this extent, those not anticipating large
inheritances may better be able to catch up to their privileged competitors who are less
motivated.

- 22 -

position of donees, it is common to associate this objective with the desirability of an inheritance
or accessions tax rather than an estate and gift tax. Relatedly, the use of graduated rates
(including generous exemptions, which create a zero rate on an initial, substantial degree of
inheritance) tends to encourage donors to spread their giving more widely. However, it is not
obvious from the equality-of-starting-points perspective whether such an effect is beneficial or
detrimental. Is it better (much better? or worse?) to be surrounded, say, by one hundred
millionaires rather than ninety normally endowed individuals and ten hyper-millionaires?
E. Savings Incentives 61
Little thus far has been said about the possible effects of transfer taxation on savings,
even though much analysis of and concern about transfer taxation focuses on this subject. The
reason for the present lack of emphasis is that savings is largely a separate dimension that may
be treated separately. First, savings are neither necessary nor sufficient for transfers. As just
explored in Section C, many of the most important transfers are actually made by parents to
young children (expenditures on schooling and neighborhoods; devoting time, which involves
forgone earnings), and much of this expenditure is out of current (including currently forgone)
earnings.62 Likewise, one can save significant amounts to fund expenditures on ownconsumption in retirement, and this motivation explains much of private savings by individuals
who are not very wealthy. To be sure, if one focuses on bequests and only on the rich, then it
does happen to be true that the transfers are from savings and, accordingly, that transfer taxation
may well significantly affect savings.
Second, just as income distribution and revenue can largely be held constant in analyzing
and enacting transfer tax reform by employing adjustments to the income tax, so too can one
hold roughly constant the taxation of savings by adjusting capital taxation accordingly.63 For
example, if a higher transfer tax on the very rich tended to burden savings, one could package
such a reform with a corresponding reduction on capital taxation of those in the same income
group. Then the incentive to save would be largely the same, leaving the effect on the transfers
themselves.

61

See Kaplow, Framework, note 1, at 188–89.
Indeed, additional amounts may be financed by borrowing rather than saving. This is
also partly true in a sense with forgone earnings; for example, if a spouse stays home with young
children and works part time until they are significantly older, not only are current wages
sacrificed but the failure to develop human capital at a high rate depresses future earnings as
well. In that respect, current transfers are funded by borrowing from potential future earnings.
63
For this reason, questions bearing on the efficiency of capital taxation and savings are
not addressed further here. For additional discussion, see Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1,
ch. 9. (For readers particularly interested in the application of the analysis of Atkinson and
Stiglitz, note 6, to capital taxation, with the implication that a zero tax rate is optimal, see Theory
of Taxation, at 222–25; on the different argument associated with the work of Chamley and
Judd, among others, see id. at 224–25, 242–45; regarding numerous qualifications to the
optimality of a zero tax rate, see id. at 225–30.)
62

- 23 -

F. Charitable Contributions 64
The present analysis focuses on private transfers to particular individuals. Most
mentioned and most practically significant are transfers to other members of one’s family. The
other major type of transfer is to charitable organizations. Furthermore, charitable transfers
often receive special treatment. In the United States (and in many other jurisdictions), charitable
contributions are favored over current own-consumption and inter vivos gifts by an income tax
deduction, and charitable bequests are favored over bequests to individuals by an estate tax
exclusion.65
It remains to be asked: What is the optimal transfer taxation (or subsidization) of
charitable gifts? The analytical framework developed in Parts II and III is highly informative.
To begin, one can view charitable gifts, just as noncharitable gifts, as another form of
expenditure on a commodity. The factors discussed in Section III.A would be relevant here as
well, although the relative empirical importance could differ, perhaps significantly.
Regarding gift externalities, the subject of Section III.B, it is useful to view charitable
entities as intermediaries or conduits. A gift to a soup kitchen or to an international relief and
development organization can be seen as an indirect gift to numerous, anonymous, poor
recipients. A gift to a hospital or university for medical research is an indirect gift to the
ultimate beneficiaries of such research, and so forth. Accordingly, the general analytical
approach of assessing gift externalities is in order, but with possibly important differences
regarding the particular effects. For example, positive externalities may apply not just to donees
but also to myriad other donors; labor effort of poor ultimate beneficiaries may be suppressed but
that of beneficiaries of medical advances may increase; and concentration of wealth may be

64

For further exploration of charitable giving along the lines explored here, see Kaplow,
Framework, note 1, at 199–201, and Kaplow, Theory of Taxation, note 1, at 270–74. For
evidence on estate taxation and charitable giving, see Gerald E. Auten, Charles T. Clotfelter, and
Richard L. Schmalbeck, Taxes and Philanthropy Among the Wealthy, in Does Atlas Shrug? The
Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich 392 (Joel Slemrod ed., 2000), and David Joulfaian,
Charitable Giving in Life and at Death, in Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation 350 (William G.
Gale, James R. Hines, Jr., & Joel Slemrod, eds., 2001). On the economics of charitable giving
generally, see James Andreoni, Philanthropy, in 2 Handbook of the Economics of Giving,
Altruism and Reciprocity 1201 (Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier eds., 2006);
and B. Douglas Bernheim and Antonio Rangel, Behavioral Public Economics: Welfare and
Policy Analysis with Nonstandard Decision-Makers, in Behavioral Economics and Its
Applications 7 (Peter Diamond and Hannu Vartiainen eds., 2007).
65
Note that inter vivos charitable gifts are tax preferred to charitable bequests because the
former benefit from the income tax deduction and an implicit estate tax exclusion (because the
funds were previously given, they are not part of the estate and thus not subject to estate
taxation), whereas the latter only receive (explicit) estate tax exclusion. Furthermore, earlier
charitable gifts may be invested by the recipient and grow tax free, whereas investment earnings
on assets that continue to be held by prospective donors are taxed, even if at preferential rates.

- 24 -

irrelevant or at least have a different character if the concern is with powerful nonprofit
institutions. Transfer motives may differ as well. Charitable gifts, including bequests, would not
be purely accidental, but exchange may be involved, such as when a donor in essence purchases
a personal monument, attention, or prestige from a nonprofit organization.
Suffice it to say for present purposes that charitable giving is significant and may be
greatly influenced by transfer taxation. Effects can also arise indirectly. For example, some
oppose repeal or significant reduction of transfer taxation because the subsidy for charitable
giving via exemption would thereby be eliminated. Of course, in principle, if it was indeed
optimal to subsidize charitable giving but not optimal to tax transfers to individuals, one could
retain a direct subsidy. Relatedly, if a subsidy is optimal, it is probably optimal for individuals
below the fairly high thresholds for current (and often proposed reforms of) transfer taxation.

V. CONCLUSION
The central theme of this essay is that transfer taxation is best examined by making use of
a general analytical framework that has been developed to assess taxation and related fiscal
instruments. Individuals’ expenditures on private transfers are in some respects like other
private expenditures on goods and services and thus can benefit from the extensive existing
analysis of that subject. An important feature of gifts is that they systematically involve
externalities, including a positive externality on donees and (often) a negative externality on the
public fisc. Typically, optimal taxation of particular forms of expenditure starts from a neutral
(no tax/no subsidy) benchmark and makes adjustments, such as are necessary to internalize
externalities. Net negative externalities favor taxation, and net positive externalities a subsidy,
the magnitude of the tax or subsidy corresponding in certain basic cases to that of the net
externality. Various qualifications to these conclusions were noted.
By contrast, many analyses of transfer taxation focus on its redistributive effects, the
revenue it raises, and possible distortions, including of savings decisions. These effects are not
emphasized here because they are not distinctive to transfer taxation. More precisely, reforms of
transfer taxation—whether expansions or repeal—can be combined with adjustments to the
income tax schedule such that the entire reform package is essentially distribution-neutral and
also neutral with regard to revenue and savings. That is, at any level of income, we can ask
whether it is better to extract a given amount of revenue (whatever that amount may be) through
income taxation—maintaining neutrality toward giving—or in a manner that encourages or
discourages giving. Whether expenditures on gifts should be treated differently from
expenditures on own-consumption depends on the distinct features of gifts, notably, the
externalities they entail.
This essay also explored a number of additional considerations bearing on the optimal
treatment of gifts, including different transfer motives, certain subtle distributive consequences
for donors and donees, human capital (the lion’s share of intergenerational transfers for all but
the wealthiest individuals), equality of starting points, and how charitable giving can be
assimilated into the present framework. The more one analyzes various distinctive features of

- 25 -

private transfers, the more complex the picture that emerges. But it should be kept in mind that,
both conceptually and perhaps practically, the most relevant features of gifts for purposes of
transfer tax policy are features that distinguish them from other expenditures by individuals,
notably, on themselves. There is much empirical work to be done if the many open questions are
to be resolved. Moreover, the present analysis suggests that the pertinent list of empirical
questions is rather different from those that have received the most attention to date.

- 26 -

