                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CONSTRAINED JOB MATCHING:
     DOES TEACHER JOB SEARCH HARM DISADVANTAGED URBAN SCHOOLS?

                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                          Steven G. Rivkin

                                        Working Paper 15816
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15816


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




We thank Dan O’Brien for help with the data development and early analytical work. Greg Branch
provide superb research assistance. This research has received support from the Spencer Foundation,
the Hewlett Foundation, and the Packard Humanities Institute. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Eric A. Hanushek and Steven G. Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Constrained Job Matching: Does Teacher Job Search Harm Disadvantaged Urban Schools?
Eric A. Hanushek and Steven G. Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 15816
March 2010
JEL No. H4,I2,J2,J3

                                              ABSTRACT

Search theory suggests that early career job changes on balance lead to better matches that benefit
both workers and firms, but this may not hold in teacher labor markets characterized by salary rigidities,
barriers to entry, and substantial differences in working conditions that are difficult for institutions
to alter. Of particular concern to education policy makers is the possibility that teacher turnover adversely
affects the quality of instruction in schools serving predominantly disadvantaged children. Although
such schools experience higher turnover on average than others, the impact on the quality of instruction
depends crucially on whether it is the more productive teachers who are more likely to depart. The
absence of direct measures of productivity typically hinders efforts to measure the effect of turnover
on worker quality. In the case of teachers, however, the availability of matched panel data of students
and teachers, enables the isolation of the contributions of teachers to achievement despite the complications
of purposeful choices of families, teachers, and administrators. The empirical analysis reveals that
teachers who remain in their school tend to outperform those who leave, particularly those who exit
the Texas public schools entirely. Moreover, this gap appears to be larger for schools serving predominantly
low income students, evidence that high turnover is not nearly as damaging as many suggest.


Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu

Steven G. Rivkin
Amherst College
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 5000
Amherst, MA 01002-5000
and NBER
sgrivkin@amherst.edu
    Constrained Job Matching: Does Teacher Job Search Harm
                 Disadvantaged Urban Schools?
                               By Eric A. Hanushek and Steven G. Rivkin
       Policy discussions of teacher quality typically highlight the institution of tenure, barriers

to entry into the profession, salary rigidities, seniority rules, and the importance of working

conditions associated with school location and demographic composition to distinguish teacher

labor markets from other occupations with fewer labor market rigidities. The unique structure of

teacher labor markets is often thought to contribute to high early career turnover in schools

serving disadvantaged populations and to impede efforts to raise the quality of education. Quite

generally, turnover per se is thought to be bad, and exiting teachers are thought to be the more

productive. These concerns stand in stark contrast to much of labor search theory, where early

career turnover provides a mechanism for improving job matches that benefits both workers and

firms. It may be that teacher labor markets lead to different outcomes, but it may also be the case

that the concerns regarding turnover are misplaced. This paper provides direct evidence about

the impacts of school job matching on productivity and student achievement.

       Although teacher labor markets may be structured differently from other occupations,

high turnover is certainly not a distinguishing feature. The data suggest that exit rates from

teaching mirror those in non-teaching occupations (Stinebrickner (2002), Ballou and Podgursky

(2002)). Consequently, disproportionate harm from the turnover of teachers must come from the

character of that turnover rather than simply the level, and there remains little evidence on

productivity differences between teachers who transition out of a school and those that remain.

       In this paper we investigate the effects of turnover on the quality of instruction in a large

urban district in Texas. The absence of direct measures of productivity typically hinders efforts

to measure the effect of turnover on worker quality apart from the use of wage changes as an
indirect proxy for changes in productivity. However, the availability of matched panel data of

students and teachers enables the estimation of teacher quality based on the impact on student

achievement. This outcome-based productivity measure provides important information on the

effects of turnover and the desirability of particular public policies designed to improve the

quality of instruction in public schools broadly and more specifically in low achieving schools

with high concentrations of disadvantaged and minority students.

        The next section briefly reviews theories of job turnover and empirical evidence on

turnover and wage changes and then considers ways in which the unique aspects of teacher labor

markets may or may not lead teacher turnover to be particularly costly to schools. Section II

develops the empirical model used to measure teacher productivity based on test scores that

provide imprecise measures of achievement. This section highlights the difficulties introduced

by the purposeful choices of families, teachers, and administrators and develops an approach to

overcoming these impediments to identification.

        The subsequent two sections present the results of the empirical analyses. Section III

reports a series of estimates of the variation in productivity for a large urban school district in

Texas based on specifications that progressively take more and more steps to protect against bias

introduced by matching of students and teachers in classrooms. 1 The potentially unique aspects

of teacher labor markets are easiest to see by tracking the job transitions of teachers, and Section

IV investigates productivity differences between stayers and those in distinct mobility streams:

moving to a new school in the same district, switching districts, and exiting the public schools

entirely. This section also examines differences by average student achievement or demographic

composition in the origin and destination schools, both because policy is concerned with the

1
 For other estimates of teacher value-added, see Hanushek (1971, 1992), Armor et al. (1976),Murnane (1975),
Murnane and Phillips (1981), Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2007),Rockoff (2004), Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain
(2005), Boyd et al. (2006), and Kane, Rockoff, and Staiger (2008).


                                                                                                              2
impacts of turnover on specific demographic groups and because the school population has

implications for working conditions and the job demands on teachers. Finally, we also

investigate whether teacher performance immediately prior to the transition could reflect

temporary shocks in productivity rather than more permanent differences in quality.

            Section V summarizes the findings and discusses implications for public policy given the

institutional structures within which public schools currently operate. Even though the employer

is a public agency with considerable latitude for action on its own, it is generally concluded that

new public policy interventions are required to improve educational outcomes. The correct

policy, however, requires a clearer understanding of teacher labor markets in general and the

dynamics associated with teacher turnover.


       I.    Employee Turnover and Firm Matching

            Economists have done considerable work on job search and mobility, and on first blush

the public school teacher turnover appears to be similar to that of the typical young U.S. worker

who changes jobs frequently early in the career. Most matching models posit that this turnover

constitutes a productive component of the job search process. Topel and Ward (1992) show that

job changes account for a substantial share of early career wage growth, which is consistent with

the belief that job changes tend to lead to better matches that enhance worker productivity. 2

Indeed, the flexibility and fluidity of American labor markets is often cited as one of the

strengths of the U.S. economy as distinct from, say, European economies. These arguments raise

the question of whether teacher turnover actually imposes substantial costs on schools in general

and those serving disadvantaged children in particular.

            Turnover can exact a cost to firms in the form of additional hiring expenses or the loss of

2
    Burdett (1978) and Jovanovic (1979a, 1979b) offer alternative conceptions of the job search process.


                                                                                                           3
job specific human capital. But, it is not clear that elementary and secondary school teaching fits

the description of a job characterized by particularly high turnover costs. Direct hiring costs for

teachers appear to be modest. It could be that coordination among teachers in terms of

curriculum and other factors requires substantial investment in school specific knowledge,

though that also seems unlikely.

        Two structural differences between teacher labor markets and other markets for

professionals may raise the costs of teacher turnover. First, rigidities in district salary and job

promotion scales typically prevent efforts to reward more productive teachers. These rigidities

would appear to be magnified by limited salary differences among districts. In contrast, private

firms tend to use much more flexible job categorization and salary determination processes.

Second, because of early determination of tenure in many districts – sometimes by the end of the

first or second year of employment, teachers exert substantial control over whether job matches

persist. 3 Third, collectively bargained contracts for teachers frequently govern within district

mobility and employment rights, granting mobility options based on seniority.

        These features of public schools may generate substantial turnover costs for schools

serving disadvantage populations. If such schools have difficulty attracting teachers with prior

experience, they may have difficulty replacing the general human capital acquired through initial

experience. Contract provisions in many large urban districts specify that experience moves a

teacher up the queue for vacant jobs, and this often leads to a concentration of rookie teachers in

the highest poverty schools. A high share of teachers with little or no experience may hinder

efforts to improve and align curriculum, mentor new teachers, and advocate for the school. In

addition, more appealing outside job opportunities for highly skilled teachers may lead to the


3
 In 2008, ten states granted teacher tenure in one or two years of employment; only seven states had probationary
periods greater than three years (National Council on Teacher Quality (2008)).


                                                                                                                    4
disproportionate departure of more effective teachers.

        Existing evidence shows that teachers who switch schools tend to move to schools with

higher achieving, higher income, and fewer minority students than their previous schools, and

those changing districts tend to get slightly higher wages on average once the wages are adjusted

for changes in student demographic composition. 4 Since demographic composition is likely to be

related to working conditions, these findings suggest that non-pecuniary considerations tend to

outweigh salary in job decisions of teachers. Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff (2005) also

find that teacher labor markets tend to be highly localized, which further disadvantages high

poverty, lower achieving schools located in urban centers and rural areas that tend to produce

few college graduates. Moreover, evidence that teacher exit probabilities are higher for those

with better alternative earning opportunities or more education (Dolton and van der Klaauw

(1995, 1999)) supports the belief that leavers are drawn from higher up the quality distribution.

        The generalizability of these findings about mobility patterns is unclear, however.

Podgursky, Monroe, and Watson (2004) and Scafidi, Sjoquist, and Stinebrickner (2006) find that

the majority of exiting teachers from public schools do not move to higher paying jobs outside of

teaching but instead are more likely either to exit the labor market entirely or switch to a lower

paying job in a private school. This pattern is consistent with the observation by Stinebrickner

(2002) that much of the occupational movement by teachers is related to family circumstances –

something that bears no clear relationship to job effectiveness.

        The overall implications of observed teacher movements on the distribution of teacher

quality are nonetheless difficult to infer. Although salary changes provide indirect information


4
 Lankford, Loeb, and Wyckoff (2002), Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004), and Scafidi, Sjoquist, and
Stinebrickner (2007) find that working conditions as measured by student demographic composition tends to be a
more important determinant of school choice than salaries. Average salary changes following a move adjusted for
working conditions are positive but small.


                                                                                                                  5
on productivity in fluid labor markets, they likely provide little information in more rigid teacher

labor markets. Moreover, individual salaries provide little information about differences in

teacher productivity given the rigid salary structures, whose typical determinants – teacher

education, teacher experience, or certification status – appear to explain little of the observed

differences in effectiveness (Hanushek and Rivkin (2006)).

       Given the absence of direct information on the effectiveness of school leavers, the

conflicting elements of existing research makes it far from clear how high turnover affects the

quality of instruction in high poverty, low achieving schools. In fact teaching jobs appear to fit

the description of “experience goods” (Jovanovic (1979b)) in that neither teachers nor schools

have good information about teacher quality prior to arrival at the school. If knowledge acquired

about productivity in the first years at a school disproportionately leads to separations of less

effective teachers – either because they are counseled out or because they find low performance

personally unsatisfying, then negative selection out of high poverty schools may partially, fully,

or even more than fully offset any costs of turnover. Since the match response of principals and

districts is muted, the decision making of individual teachers is likely to dominate the transition

process, and the resulting distribution of teacher quality is uncertain.


   II. Measurement of Teacher Effectiveness

       By necessity, understanding the character and implications of teacher job mobility begins

with the development of measures of teacher quality, a requirement sidestepped when

competitive forces are presumed to make salaries a sufficient statistic for quality.

       The primary analytical tasks are the separation of teacher contributions to achievement

from other student, family, school, and community factors and the mitigation of sampling error

introduced by the imperfections of the achievement measures. In terms of the separation of


                                                                                                      6
teacher contributions to achievement from those of other factors, we focus on accounting for

student heterogeneity and differences in school factors in a specification built on a cumulative

model of learning. Within this context, we discuss the advantages and drawbacks of specific

methods for accounting for student and school differences.

       A number of studies highlight the fact that random test measurement error inflates

estimates of the variance of teacher value-added in addition to introducing noise into the

estimation of teacher contributions to learning (e.g., Gordon, Kane, and Staiger (2006),

McCaffrey, Lockwood, Louis, and Hamilton (2004), and McCaffrey, Sass, Lockwood, and

Mihaly (2009a)). Other work focuses on the effects of nonrandom aspects of measurement error

including problems introduced by attempts to compare students in different parts of the

achievement distribution. Hanushek, Kain, O'Brien, and Rivkin (2005) show that transformation

of the value-added measure such that it captures value-added relative to other students from the

same portion of the achievement distribution has little impact on estimates of the variance in

teacher quality; we therefore focus on the mitigation of random test error.

A. Cumulative Model of Learning

       Equation (1) models achievement of student i in grade G and year y (suppressed in the

equation since year is unique to grade G for student i) as a function of initial student skill at entry

to grade G (αiG), of family background and other influences outside of schools (X), of peer

composition (P), of school factors – including resources, principal quality, and school or district

determined curriculum (S), teacher quality ( τ ), and of a random error (e).

(1)                       AiG = α iG + β X iG + λ PiG + δ SiG + τ jy + eiG

Teacher productivity may vary over time and is estimated in a semi-parametric manner by

netting out the contributions of αiG, X, P, and S from the achievement of students taught by a



                                                                                                      7
teacher in a given year.

         In the absence of random assignment, unobserved peer and school factors for a given

class could confound estimates of the quality of the teacher assigned to that class. The problems

can come from a variety of behavioral outcomes including: principal assignment of better

teachers to classrooms with less disruptive students (or more disruptive students, if seeking to

equalize the quality of education across classes); the gravitation of better teachers toward higher

resource schools; the movement of families with strong educational investment motivation to

school districts with the best teachers and most extensive school programs. All complicate the

estimation of teacher value-added to achievement, as teacher quality becomes intertwined with

characteristics of students or schools.

         Accounting for student heterogeneity is a crucial component of the identification of

teacher quality. We model α in a one dimensional framework in which differences in cognitive

skills are assumed to evolve over time with experiences at home, in school, and in the

community in a manner consistent with Equation (1). Equation (2) describes a reasonably

general formulation of this cumulative process,

                 G −1              G −1              G −1            G −1                 G −1
 =
(2) α iG β
    =g 1
                 ∑θ G − g X iG + λ ∑θ G − g PiG + δ ∑θ G − g SiG + ∑θ G − gτ jy + (γ i + ∑θ G − g γ i )
                        =g 1              =g 1=g 1                            =g 1



where γ i is “innate ability”, which is assumed to affect learning in each period. 5

         A good teacher likely raises achievement in the current year and subsequent years by

increasing the stock of knowledge, and a supportive parent does the same. In a very general way,

we allow historical effects (and knowledge) to depreciate at a geometric rate (1- θ) meaning that

a teacher or peer’s effect on test scores diminishes with time such that a good 4th grade teacher


5
 Innate ability here simply refers to student differences set before entry to school that affect student learning growth
and could arise from any combination of health, nutrition, genetic, or family factors.


                                                                                                                       8
has a larger effect on 4th grade score than on 5th grade score. 6 If θ=1, the effects of prior

experiences persist fully into the future, while, if θ=0, prior experiences and knowledge have no

effect on current achievement. In the estimation, however, we do not constrain the knowledge

depreciation rate to a specific value but instead directly estimate it. 7

         A value-added regression of achievement in grade G on achievement in grade G-1 along

with contemporaneous family, school, and peer characteristics and a fixed effect for each teacher

in each year provides a natural way to account for prior influences while estimating teacher

effects on achievement. 8 Rewriting equations (1) and (2) for grade G-1 illustrates how the

inclusion of AiG-1 as an explanatory variable with parameter θ in a regression with achievement in

grade G as dependent variable potentially controls for the full set of historical factors.

(3)      A=
          iG θ AiG −1 + γ i + β X iG + λ PiG + δ SiG + τ jy + (γ i + eiG )

The estimation presumes that there are at least two observations of achievement for each student

and that there are multiple students with each teacher.

B. Estimation of Teacher Value-added

         Whether the model generates unbiased estimates of the τ jy and the variance in teacher

quality depends importantly on whether the empirical specification accounts for relevant factors

affecting schools that are also correlated with the teachers or other inputs. The inclusion of prior

achievement mitigates bias from omitted family, neighborhood, and school influences. Yet this


6
  This does not exhaust the possibilities that have been used, since using the difference in scores between grades G
and G-1 as the dependent variable (i.e., imposing the assumption of θ=1) is sometimes accompanied by including
student fixed effects. As Rivkin (2005) demonstrates, when θ<1, the gains specification will tend to bias downward
differences among teachers in the absence of student fixed effects and bias upward differences among teachers if
student fixed effects are included.
7
  For ease of estimation, we do constrain knowledge to depreciate at the same rate regardless of source. In other
words, past knowledge has the same impact on the accumulation of new knowledge, regardless of the source of this
past knowledge. Implicitly, this formulation does not allow for the “one special teacher” who has a lasting effect on
student learning over and above the contemporaneous effect on achievement. Jacob, Lefgren, and Sims (2008)
consider alternative specifications of the dynamics with attention to varying persistence of teacher effects.
8
  See Hanushek (1979, 1986) for a discussion of value-added models.


                                                                                                                    9
is generally insufficient because dynamic behavioral choices by families, teachers, and school

authorities may induce correlations with teacher quality and thus may introduce bias even to

value-added models. Moreover, when achievement is captured by standardized tests, test

measurement error will inflate estimates of the teacher quality variance, even in the case where

the teacher quality estimates are unbiased.

         Equation (4), in which the estimated fixed effect for teacher j is interpreted as the sum of

the persistent component of teacher quality and an error term, ν jy , provides a simple framework

for examination of these issues and the assumptions that must be satisfied to produce unbiased

estimates of both individual teacher fixed effects and the variance in teacher value-added.

(4) τˆ jy =τ jy +ν jy

In general terms, the error term incorporates:

         ν jy = f (unmeasured student , classroom composition, and school factors,
(5)
                   nonpersistent teacher effects, and test measurement error )

Note that the test measurement error incorporates both elements of test reliability (consistency

across time) and test validity (accuracy of measurement of desired dimensions).

         Consider first the case where the correlation between persistent teacher quality and the

error components (including nonpersistent teacher effects) equals zero. 9 In this case the estimates

of teacher value-added, τ jy , are unbiased, while the sample variance of the teacher fixed effects

equals the sum of the true variance and the variance of the other terms. Therefore an estimate of

the variance in teacher value-added must be adjusted for these error components.

         Many researchers have used an empirical Bayes shrinkage estimator to produce a
9
  We generally focus on persistent differences in teacher quality, but for some purposes it is appropriate to consider
both persistent and nonpersistent quality. The sum is, for example, a reflection of the quality faced by students in
any particular year. Evidence suggests that teachers improve substantially in the first few years of their careers, and
personal difficulties, the birth of children, and experimentation with new pedagogies all lead to variation over time
in effectiveness.


                                                                                                                    10
consistent estimate of the true variance in teacher quality, while an alternative approach is to use

the adjacent year correlation among the teacher-by-year fixed effects for the same teacher to

estimate the true variance. 10 Equation 6 is the simple correlation of estimated teacher fixed

effects for adjacent years y and y-1.


                                                         (                           )
                                                                                     1/2
        (6)                   r12 = cov(τ y ,τ y −1 ) / var(τ y ) var(τ y −1 )



        If the errors in equation 4 are orthogonal across years, the covariance between adjacent

year fixed effects equals the variance of true value-added. In addition, if the variance in

estimated value-added is constant over time, the expected correlation, E( r12 ), reduces to:

                                                          var(τ )
        (7)                              E (r12 ) =
                                                      var(τ ) + var(ν )


Therefore, multiplication of the estimated sample variance of τ by the year-to-year correlation

produces a direct estimate of the variance in true teacher quality that accounts for test error and

nonpersistent differences in classroom average student quality, either purposeful or random.

        Now consider the case where the correlation between the error components and persistent

teacher quality does not equal zero. Violation of the assumption that value-added is orthogonal to

the remaining error components may introduce positive or negative bias depending upon the

nature of both student and teacher sorting among schools and classroom assignment. In this case

the covariance across adjacent years equals the sum of the variance in quality, the variance in the

persistent components of the error term such as unobserved peer quality, principal effectiveness,

or student skill, plus the relevant covariance terms. The methods described above would not

10
  Empirical Bayes or shrinkage estimators move the separate estimates toward the mean according to the variance
of the estimated parameter (e.g., Sanders and Horn (1994), Gordon, Kane, and Staiger (2006)). Aaronson, Barrow,
and Sander (2007), Rockoff (2004), and others use estimates of the error variance for the teacher fixed effects to
adjust raw fixed effect estimates.


                                                                                                                 11
purge the estimates of these latter variance and covariance terms.

        Because available data typically have limited controls for differences in the quality of

administration and other subtle aspects of schools such as the degree to which the curriculum and

state standards align, it is quite difficult to separate teacher and school effects in specifications

that produce teacher fixed effects relative to all other teachers in the district. Therefore, it is

appealing to include school or even school-by-grade-by-year fixed effects in order to account for

both observed and unobserved grade–by-year specific differences among schools and districts,

recognizing though that this approach prohibits comparisons of teacher quality among schools.

        Yet even value-added estimates of teacher effectiveness based solely on within school

variation could suffer from omitted variables bias if classroom assignments are not random.

Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2006) and Rothstein (2010) document the existence of extensive

within-school sorting on the basis of student characteristics and prior performance in North

Carolina. Whether such sorting introduces substantial bias in commonly used value-added

models is a topic of considerable debate. In an influential article, Rothstein (2010) argues that

much of the sorting occurs on the basis of time varying student heterogeneity, and therefore

lagged test scores and even student fixed effects may fail to capture important determinants of

classroom allocation. 11 To provide an estimate of the potential importance of such selection,

Kane and Staiger (2008) develop a specification test of the validity of non-experimental

estimates for a small sample of Los Angeles teachers and cannot reject unbiasedness of various

standard estimators. However, a lack of power inherent in such specification tests and potentially

select nature of the sample introduce questions about the generalizability of the findings.


11
  Some specification issues do raise questions about the strength of this critique. The evidence that time varying
classroom heterogeneity is important is based on findings from models with student fixed effects and test score gain
as the dependent variable. If the assumption of no knowledge depreciation is incorrect, it could appear that much
student heterogeneity was time varying even if that were not the case.


                                                                                                                 12
            Given the difficulty of quantifying all relevant student and school variables related to the

matching of students and teachers both within and between schools and the limitations of the

specification tests employed, we adopt an alternative approach to circumvent bias introduced by

purposeful sorting into classrooms. We begin by dividing school, grade, and year cells into

“sorted” and “not-sorted” categories on the basis of two different dimensions of the classroom

allocation process. Specifically, we examine whether there are either 1) significant differences in

mean prior test score among classrooms based on an F- test 12; or 2) whether the allocation of

students across classrooms in grade g is independent of the allocation in grade g-1 based on a

chi-squared test of the transition matrix. All classrooms in the school-grade-year cell are placed

in the “purposefully sorted” category based on the particular test if the hypothesis of no

significant differences (in the case of method 1) or independence (in the case of method 2) is

rejected at the five percent level. Otherwise they are placed in the “not-sorted” category.

            These tests are weak in the sense that the failure to reject the hypotheses of independence

or no significant difference in mean prior test score at the five percent level does not provide

strong evidence that a school randomly assigns students. Therefore, we augment these tests with

falsification tests of the effects of future teachers on current achievement and specification tests

related to assumptions about the rate of learning depreciation that we apply below. We believe

that the combined evidence supports the conclusion that the sample of schools for which

common selection mechanisms are not obviously employed provides estimates of teacher effects

that are not significantly contaminated by classroom composition.

III. Texas Schools Project Data

            The stacked panel datasets constructed by the Texas Schools Project contain

administrative records collected by the Texas Education Agency (TEA) from the 1989-1990
12
     This test is similar in spirit to that used by Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2006).


                                                                                                      13
through the 2001-2002 school years. 13 The data permit the linkage of students over time and of

students and teachers in the same school, grade, and year. The statewide data do not match

students and classroom teachers, but such matches have been provided for a single large Texas

urban district, known henceforth as “Lone Star” District. Typically this match identifies a subject

specialist in middle school (a mathematics teacher here) and a general teacher in elementary

school. Only regular classroom teachers are included in the analysis.

        The student background data contain a number of student, family, and program

characteristics including race, ethnicity, gender, and eligibility for a free- or reduced-price lunch

(the measure of economic disadvantage), classification as special needs, and classification as

limited English proficient. Students are annually tested in a number of subjects using the Texas

Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS), which was administered each spring to eligible students

enrolled in grades three through eight. These criterion referenced tests evaluate student mastery

of grade-specific subject matter, and this paper presents results for mathematics. Test scores are

converted to z-scores using the mean and standard deviation for the entire state separately for

each grade and year to account for effects of test score inflation and other changes to the tests.

        In this paper we study students and teachers in grades 4 through 8 for the school years

1995-1996 to 2000-2001. We eliminate any student without valid test scores or other missing

data and classrooms with fewer than five students with non-missing data.


IV. Estimation of the variance in teacher quality


        A basic starting point for the analysis of teacher transitions and related policies is the

magnitude of variation in teacher quality. If variation is limited, concerns about turnover and its


13
  The underlying data were developed at the Texas Schools Project at the University of Texas at Dallas. For more
detail, see http://www.utdallas.edu/research/tsp-erc/.


                                                                                                               14
impact on the distribution of teacher quality become less relevant.

       Our estimates of the variation in teacher quality are based on alternative specifications of

equation (3). We compare teachers both to all teachers in the Lone Star district and, because of

concerns about the selection of schools by both parents and teachers, to just the set of teachers in

their own school, grade and year. To investigate the implications of any nonrandom sorting of

students across classrooms, we compute separate estimates for “sorted” and “not-sorted” samples

based on the statistical tests described above.

A. Basic Estimates of the Variance of Teacher Quality

       Table 1 reports a series of estimates of the variance of teacher-by-year fixed effects, the

adjacent year correlation of estimated fixed effects for the same teacher, and the measurement

error adjusted estimate of the variance in teacher quality. The first and second columns use both

within- and between-school variation (i.e., compare teachers across the entire district), while the

third and fourth use only within-school-grade-year variation, thus restricting comparisons to

colleagues in the same school, grade, and year. In addition, the second and fourth specifications

regression-adjust for differences in observable student characteristics including eligibility for

free or reduced lunch, gender, race and ethnicity, grade level, limited English proficiency, special

education, student mobility status, and year dummy variables.

       A comparison of the estimated variance across columns indicates the potential

importance of factors correlated with classroom differences in achievement. Controlling for

observable student characteristics and using only the variation within school, grade, and year

noticeably reduces the estimated variance in teacher value-added from the least restrictive

specification. As expected given that most sorting occurs among schools, the included student

characteristics have a much larger effect in specifications not restricted to within-school-grade-




                                                                                                    15
year comparisons (columns 1 and 2 versus columns 3 and 4).

         The second row reports the adjacent year correlations in estimated teacher value-added.

The magnitudes range from 0.24 to 0.35, indicating that roughly a fourth of the overall variance

and slightly more than one third of the within-grade variance is persistent. These year-to-year

correlations are similar to those found by others. 14 Again the controls for student heterogeneity

reduce the correlations less in the within-school-and-year specifications. Note that this does not

have to be the case since some of the year-to-year variation in student gains comes from random

differences in student characteristics, meaning that the inclusion of controls for student

heterogeneity could potentially increase the adjacent year correlation.

         The final two rows report estimates of the variance and standard deviation ( σ τ ) of true

teacher value-added (based on equation (7)). Because the student test scores are normalized to

mean zero and standard deviation one, the standard deviation in teacher quality has the natural

interpretation of the bonus in annual student growth obtained for a teacher at the 84th percentile

of teachers compared to an average teacher (or the detriment of having a teacher at the 16th

percentile compared to the average). The district wide estimate of the overall standard deviation

in teacher effectiveness, even when regression adjusted for student demographic characteristics,

equals 0.17. Note also that this is fifty percent larger than the regression adjusted within-school-

grade-year standard deviation estimate of 0.11. The estimate of 0.11 is in line with existing

estimates in the literature of within-school differences in effectiveness. 15 We tend to emphasize

the more conservative within-school estimates, because they guard against unmeasured selection

into schools by students, teachers, and administrators. But, if there are distinct quality

14
   McCaffrey, Sass, Lockwood, and Mihaly (2009b) analyze the intertemporal stability of teacher effects in detail
and show that the estimates become even more consistent if additional years are added.
15
   Recent reports of estimated effects of a one standard deviation change in teacher quality on achievement include
0.11 (Rockoff (2004)), 0.13 (Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2007)), and 0.22 (Kane and Staiger (2008)). See the
summary and interpretation of results in Hanushek and Rivkin (2010).


                                                                                                                  16
differences in teachers across schools – say, because of a set of principals that is adept at staffing

their schools with high quality teachers – the within-school estimator will neglect an important

component of the teacher quality variance. 16 It is interesting that the measured selection factors

found in the inclusion of student demographic characteristics leads to relatively small changes in

the estimated variation of teacher effectiveness.

B. Sorting Among Classrooms

         Despite the elimination of any between school variation in teacher quality and of changes

over time in the quality of instruction for a given teacher and of influences of random shocks or

error, the within-school-grade-year estimates may be biased. On the one hand, if principals

assign more cooperative or more engaged students to better teachers, the differential could

conflate true differences in quality with any student influences for which the empirical model

does not account fully. On the other hand, compensatory assignment of better students to less

effective teachers would bias downward estimates of the within-school-grade-year variance.

         We account more fully for any such biases introduced by sorting through the

identification of two samples of school-grade-year combinations for which the hypotheses either

of no significant differences among teachers’ classes in average prior year achievement or of

independence between prior year and current year teacher assignments cannot be rejected at the

five percent level. The first approach follows in the spirit of Clotfelter, Ladd, and Vigdor (2006)

and is based on an F-test of the equality of mean prior year test score; the second approach uses a

chi-square test to examine the transitions of students who remain in the same school from grade

g-1 to grade g. The schools observations where we reject the null hypothesis are considered

observations affected by purposeful sorting (“sorted”,) and all other schools are classified as “not


16
  These estimates all come from a single urban district. If there are important teacher quality differences across
districts, the overall variation in teacher quality would be commensurately larger.


                                                                                                                     17
sorted”. 17

         The top panel of Table 2 reports estimates for two different samples determined by tests

of differences among classrooms in mean pretest score. Estimates in Columns 2 and 4 are

generated from the sample of school-grade-year combinations in which “not-sorted” allocation

of students among teachers was not be rejected at the 5 percent level; estimates in Columns 1 and

3 are generated from the sample of school-grade-year combinations for which the hypothesis of

equal classroom pretest means is rejected. All estimates include the demographic measures

listed in Table 1. For the “not-sorted” sample, the within-school-grade-year estimated variance

of teacher quality equals 0.011 which means that a one standard deviation difference in teacher

quality translates to a 0.103 standard deviation gain in achievement. This is roughly 10 percent

smaller than the full sample estimate of 0.113 reported in Table 1.

         The bottom panel repeats the estimation for samples determined by chi-square tests of the

independence of the current and prior allocation of students to teachers within each school. 18

The estimated within school-grade-year standard deviation of teacher quality for the “not sorted”

sample equals 0.098 standard deviations of achievement, essentially identical to the estimate

reported in the top panel. Thus, these two alternative ways of defining samples where student

sorting seems less important yield estimates of the within school-grade-year variance in teacher

quality that are very similar to those found in the full sample.

         The “not sorted” sample results provide a prima facie case for the existence of substantial

within-school variation in teacher value-added that is not an artifact of classroom sorting. But, at

17
   Appendix Table a1 describes the joint distribution of the distribution of schools into “sorted” and “not sorted”
categories on the basis of these two criteria and illustrates that there is substantial but incomplete agreement in the
divisions. Approximately three-quarters of the common schools fall into the same category of sorted or not-sorted,
but, because of the sample loss from the tests of placements across years, only one-quarter of the schools are found
at the intersection of the two criteria.
18
   Doing this test requires three consecutive grades – years 1 and 2 for estimation of the teacher-by-year fixed effects
and a prior year that is used to test for sorting of students. Therefore, the samples for estimation under this sample
stratification are just 38-45 percent as large as those used in the top portion.


                                                                                                                     18
the same time they do not rule out the possibility that unobserved factors confound the estimates.

In order to provide additional evidence we conduct falsification tests similar to those suggested

by Rothstein (2010). The underlying idea is to estimate basic teacher value-added models such

as those in Table 2 except to apply information about the subsequent year’s teacher for each

student rather than the current year’s teacher. The intuition is that a future teacher cannot affect

current year performance, so finding a similar distribution of teacher value-added for future

teachers would raise serious doubts about the estimation strategy. 19

        Importantly, evidence of systematic differences among future teachers in prior year

value-added is evidence of sorting on the basis of prior grade achievement but not evidence that

the fixed effect estimates are biased since they explicitly hold prior year achievement constant.

Nevertheless, if we divide the sample into “sorted” and “not sorted” schools on the basis of

classroom allocation in the subsequent year, we would expect the subsequent year teacher to

explain little variation in current year achievement for schools in the “not sorted” category.

        Table 3 presents estimates of the variance and standard deviation of teacher value-added

for both the actual and subsequent year teacher. For both ways of defining the sample of “not-

sorted schools”, the within-school-grade-year variance estimates and adjacent year correlations

for future teachers are much smaller than those for current teachers. Based on the differences in

lagged achievement sorting test (top panel), the estimated within school variance of future

teacher quality is roughly half as large as the estimated variance of actual teacher quality (0.0026

versus 0.012). With the test based on year-to-year transitions, in the not-sorted schools there is a

much smaller unadjusted variance for effectiveness based on future teachers compared to actual

19
  Finding that future teachers are correlated with current performance does not establish bias, because a policy of
sorting on entry achievement would produce exactly this. Assume that each year students are placed into classes
based on their beginning of the year achievement. Then student in an effective grade G class would tend to be
placed together in grade G+1, and it would look like the grade G+1 teacher is effective. The same would hold for an
ineffective grade G class.


                                                                                                                19
teachers and a small negative correlation for adjacent year performance of these teachers. Not

surprisingly, in the “sorted” sample the within-school variance estimates for future teachers

range from 40 to 70 percent as large as the estimates using the actual teachers. 20

         Interestingly, our preferred within-school estimates for the not-sorted sample are quite

similar to those reported in Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005), a study that used grade level

aggregate data to circumvent the problem of within-school sorting. This consistency across very

different estimation methods despite the challenges of directly measuring teacher productivity

provides strong support for the belief that there is significant variation in productivity.

V. Teacher Transitions and Productivity

         The finding of sizeable variation in teacher effectiveness is consistent with the belief that

teacher transitions substantially alter the distribution of teacher quality from what it would be in

the absence of such turnover. Given that teachers initiate the vast majority of job separations,

teacher movement would arguably improve the well-being of most school leavers, even those

who choose to leave the profession entirely. Yet the implications for schools are uncertain and

depend upon the factors that induce departures and ultimately on the productivity of school

leavers and their replacements. As noted earlier, the constrained labor markets for teachers –

with strict district salary schedules that vary only modestly across districts – may lead the

dynamics of the teacher labor market to diverge sharply from those of less fettered markets. The

fact that much of the movement involves changes across the “establishments” of a single firm

(district) in a context in which teachers typically maintain significant control over assignment to

open positions introduces another dimension through which the choice process can lead to


20
  The analysis in Rothstein (2010) was more dramatic, where the variance in “future teacher quality” looked very
close to the variance of actual teacher quality. A significant portion of this, however, results from not correcting for
measurement error in the value-added estimates.


                                                                                                                     20
substantial inequality in teacher effectiveness among both districts and schools.

          In this section we describe differences in teacher effectiveness by transition status and

other school and teacher factors. We rely on similar specifications to those estimated in the prior

section except that transition dummies replace the teacher fixed effects. Again we estimate a

range of specifications in order to address potential problems introduced by purposeful sorting.

In addition, we compare estimates based on achievement in the year immediately preceding the

move with estimates based on achievement in the previous year in order to distinguish between

temporary and longer term differences in teacher effectiveness. Finally, the pattern of teacher

transitions is permitted to differ by average student achievement in the school and by the

proportion of students who are black – factors previously identified as related to the likelihood of

teacher exits and the degree of harm caused by teacher departures.

         Teacher movement is substantial within the Lone Star district. As shown in Table 4,

among new teachers (0-1 years of experience), the annual exit rate from Texas public schools is

12 percent. Another 11 percent change campuses, and 7 percent move to another Texas district.

Even among more experienced teachers, however, some 18 percent still leave their current

school each year. The key issue is not, however, the magnitude of the movement per se but

instead how teacher quality is related to these transitions. 21

A. Overall Differences by Transition

         Table 5 reports regression estimates of mean differences in value-added to mathematics

achievement by transition (compared to teachers who stay in the same school). These estimates

provide little or no evidence that more effective teachers have higher probabilities of exiting the

Lone Star District regardless of their destination. In fact those who exit the Texas public schools

21
  It might be plausible to think that the quality of a school is linked to the stability of its teaching force. The limited
direct evidence on this, however, does not suggest this is the case after allowing for other factors correlated with the
rate of teacher turnover; see Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005).


                                                                                                                        21
entirely are significantly less effective on average than those who stay regardless of whether they

are compared to all stayers in the district or only those in the same school, grade, and year. In the

school year immediately prior to leaving the Texas Public Schools, the average value-added of a

teacher who exited the Texas public schools entirely was 0.06 standard deviations below the

average for a teacher remaining in the same school. Moreover, those who switched campuses

within the same district were also significantly less effective than stayers, though the deficit is

smaller than that observed for those exiting the Texas public schools. In contrast, those switching

to another Texas school district were not significantly different on average from teachers who

remained in the same school. 22

         The mean differences, however, offer a limited view of the character of transitions,

because there is substantial quality variation in the all streams. Figures 1 and 2 provide kernel

density plots of teacher value-added that illustrate both the mean differences and dispersion of

each of the streams in terms of teacher quality. Although non-persistent factors certainly inflate

the dispersion for all streams, the magnitude of the observed variation clearly indicates

substantial productivity differences among stayers, school changers and those who exit the

public schools.

         The transition estimates presented do not allow for any possible interaction with student

sorting (and thus potential biases in the teacher quality estimates). Table 6 divides schools into

sorted and not-sorted based on the two approaches described earlier. In general, the quality

differences of teachers switching to a different campus and teachers exiting from Texas public

schools are clearer and more significant in the not-sorted samples where any possible biases are


22
  Another sensitivity check we examined was whether the relationship with prior achievement was linear. A series
of indicator variables for different levels of prior achievement, which allow a very flexible relationship, produced
virtually indistinguishable estimates of effectiveness for the different transition groups – leading us to continue with
the linear specification in the analyses below.


                                                                                                                     22
lessened. The lower effectiveness of those exiting teaching is particularly noticeable in the not-

sorted samples, being always estimated as having value-added of 0.1-0.15 standard deviations of

student achievement below those who stay. These estimates are statistically significant

regardless of the comparison group or of the method of defining sorted schools. It is also

interesting to compare these estimates to the average lower performance on first year teachers,

typically estimated at about 0.10 (Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005)). If these exiting teachers

are replaced with rookie teachers, the expected net effect is close to zero.

       The high transition rate of teachers early in the career magnifies the importance of the

pattern of movement for this group, and we now focus on teachers with fewer than four years of

experience. Table 7 reports mean value-added differences by transition type and single year of

experience for teachers with one, two, and three years of experience. The much smaller numbers

of teachers at each experience level lead to quite imprecise estimates, particularly for teachers

with two and three years of experience. Nonetheless, the results suggest some marked

differences between first year teachers who remain in teaching and those with more than one

year of prior experience. Specifically, the first year teachers who change schools are significantly

more effective on average than stayers, regardless of whether the destination school is located in

the same district or a different district. In contrast, those with more experience who switch

schools or districts are uniformly less effective than those who stay in the school, although many

of the point estimates are not statistically different from zero and the hypothesis of no difference

between the coefficients for teachers in their first year and others is not rejected at conventional

significance levels for any of the three transition types.

       In contrast, there appears to be relatively little variation across all experience categories,

including new teachers, in the average effectiveness of teachers who exit the public schools: on




                                                                                                    23
average they are less effective than those staying. Note that we cannot ascertain which of these

exits result from the decision to pursue other opportunities, which result from the realization that

one is ineffective, or which result from administrator pressure. Nonetheless, the evidence does

not support the belief that such turnover adversely affects the composition of teachers.

B. Differences by Student Demographic Composition

        Despite the absence of evidence that more productive teachers are more likely to leave

schools on average, it remains possible that such job adjustments adversely affect lower

performing schools serving high concentrations of disadvantaged students. As noted, past

research has shown that schools serving disadvantaged populations have higher turnover. By

implication, these schools will have more inexperienced teachers because teachers who leave

tend to be replaced by new teachers and that by itself would potentially signal lower quality.

Beyond that, differential reactions to uncompensated working conditions could also affect the

overall quality distribution of teachers in schools serving disadvantaged populations.

         To address whether the transition patterns differ by school characteristics, we divide the

schools into two equal sized categories on the basis first of initial achievement and second of the

proportion of students who are nonblack. 23 We then examine quality differences by transition

and student characteristics for all teachers and separately by initial years of experience.

        The estimates in Table 8 provide little support for the view that turnover exerts a higher

cost on schools with lower performing students or higher black enrollment. To the contrary, the

estimates indicate that teachers who depart low achieving or low proportion nonblack schools are

less effective on average relative to stayers than those who depart higher achieving or higher


23
  Information on eligibility for a subsidized lunch provides a crude measure of income, and our earlier work on
teacher mobility suggested that black concentration and not overall minority concentration was most salient for
teacher moves (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004)). Therefore, we concentrate on proportion black, and classify
schools by proportion nonblackin order to align this and the achievement variables.


                                                                                                                  24
proportion nonblack schools. This pattern holds for all transitions, though the difference across

school categories is statistically significant only for those moving to another school within the

district. Notice that this pattern holds regardless of whether the comparison group of teachers is

defined by the district or the specific school, grade, and year.

       Table 9 reports the same coefficients for first year teachers, and, if anything, the

estimates provide even less evidence of disproportionate harm to low achieving or high

proportion black schools. (Estimates for second, third, and fourth year teachers show little

pattern and are rarely significant). The value-added differential between campus switchers and

stayers relative to other teachers in the same grade, year, and school equals 0.133 for higher

achievement schools and 0.018 for lower achievement schools; the same pattern holds if schools

are divided by proportion non-black.

       In the case of exits there appears to be little average difference in productivity between

those who exit and stayers in higher achieving schools, while in lower achieving schools those

who exit are significantly less effective teachers on average (the coefficient is -0.12 in both

specifications). A qualitatively similar but far smaller and insignificant differential appears if

schools are divided by proportion black.

       In contrast to the other transitions, little consistent pattern emerges for district switchers.

If effectiveness is measured relative to teachers in the same school, grade, and year, there

appears to be stronger positive selection out of higher achieving schools. However, the

differential by school achievement reverses if productivity is measured relative to teachers

throughout the district, and none of these differences are significant at any conventional level.

Finally, if schools are ranked by proportion non-black, the differences are small and insignificant

       A related question considers the destination of within district campus switchers: are more




                                                                                                     25
effective teachers more likely to gravitate toward higher achieving schools? Classifying

transitions by both origin and destination school characteristics (not shown) reveals little or no

evidence of significant differences by destination school type regardless of the characteristics of

the origin school and the method of identifying any sorting into classrooms.

        The basic results about the relative effectiveness of movers paint a clear picture that

schools with low achievement or by high black concentrations – often the schools that evoke

particular concern about the adverse consequences of turnover – are not systematically losing

their best teachers. This holds for new teachers as well as experienced teachers despite some

differences by experience in the productivity distributions of school leavers. Perhaps most

important, teachers who leave the Texas public schools tend to be noticeably less effective than

the average teacher who does not move, and this holds independent of being a new or

experienced teacher. Nonetheless, the average quality of movers masks the very significant

heterogeneity of quality among stayers and among all streams of job and occupational movers.

C. Sensitivity Analyses

        The final issue revolves around questions of quality measurement and specifically,

whether the observed flows are an artifact of measurement problems with teacher quality. We

focus first on the possibility of selection bias due to nonrandom allocation to classrooms and

then consider the question of whether the measured quality differences appear to be persistent or

transitory. Table 10 reports differences in teacher effectiveness relative to others in the same

school, grade, and year by transition, student achievement and racial composition, and student

assignment mechanism; we report results when schools are divided into “sorted” and “not

sorted” groups on the basis of the anova test of differences by mean classroom pretest scores. 24


24
  Division by the Chi-squared test of independent transitions produces a qualitatively similar pattern by much
noisier estimates, not surprising given the much smaller sample.


                                                                                                                 26
These results indicate that student sorting on unobservables does not produce the observed

transition patterns. For both the divisions by achievement and proportion nonblack, all

coefficients are negative for the “not sorted” samples. As above, the results are stronger for the

lower achievement schools, where teachers exiting the Texas public schools and those moving to

another district are significantly less productive than stayers.

       To this point estimates of teacher effectiveness are based on the academic year

immediately prior to any transition, but this chronology potentially complicates interpretation of

the results. Are movers less effective in their transition year because they are less skilled

teachers? Or, because of a negative shock such as an unruly class or bad relationship with a new

principal that both induces a transition and degrades instructional effectiveness? Or because they

put forth less effort once they have decided to leave the school?

       In order to isolate persistent productivity differences, we generate estimates based on

value-added in the year prior to the transition year and compare those with estimates based on

the transition year (immediately preceding the move). For example, we describe the distribution

of quality for transitions following the 1999 school year with value-added based on average

student achievement during the 1998 school year, implying that any shocks or change in effort

related to the transition do not affect the estimates of teacher effectiveness. This approach does

introduce analytical difficulties, however, because the sample size is significantly reduced by

eliminating student performance information on the final year taught for each teacher and for all

who teach only a single year in Lone Star district.

       Table 11 reports within-school estimates of the effectiveness of departing teachers that

are based on achievement in both the transition year and the previous year (disaggregated by




                                                                                                     27
school demographic characteristics). 25 Two findings stand out in the comparison of performance

in the exit year and the year prior. First, for those who leave the Texas public schools, the results

for assessments based on teacher performance in the penultimate year tend to exceed in

magnitude estimates based on the transitions year though they follow a similar pattern in that the

differentials are larger for teachers in low achievement and low proportion nonblack schools. In

the case of lower achievement schools, the exit-stayer differential is -0.094 based on the

penultimate year and. -0.061 based on the transition year; in the lower proportion

nonblackschools the corresponding differences are -0.084 and -0.078.

         Second, for those who move to another school in the district, the estimated lower

performance in comparison to stayers does not show up in specifications based on the value-

added in the penultimate year. There appears to be little difference in average teacher

effectiveness between within-district movers and stayers when assessed by earlier performance,

suggesting the possibility that negative shocks or changes in effort account for the apparent

lower average effectiveness observed in the transition year.

         These overall findings would be consistent with the notion that self-recognition of not

being a very effective teacher precipitates exit from the profession, while a temporary negative

shock precipitates a transition to another school. But it is also consistent simply with principal

pressure on ineffective teachers to leave, a possibility that has not been well-analyzed or

documented. These alternative explanations clearly point to different potential policy actions,

but within our current data it is impossible to distinguish between them.

         If the difference in estimated effectiveness based for transition year and prior year

assessments are the result of adverse shocks in the transition year, one might expect average


25
  Note that, although the point estimates for the current scores in comparisons across the district (not shown) differ
some from the comparable estimates in Table 8 that use the entire sample, the patterns are qualitatively the same.


                                                                                                                   28
improvements in effectiveness following a move to a new school. For example, in surveys

teachers often cite school leader quality as an important determinant of working conditions; if

teachers move within the district to find a better match with leadership, teacher effectiveness

might be expected to rise following a move.

       Table 12 provides estimates of the average change in estimated effectiveness for those

staying in their prior school and those who switch schools within the Lone Star District. The

pattern across all teachers indicates that the change in effectiveness of switchers relative to others

in the district or to others in the same school-grade-year is roughly zero. The effectiveness of

stayers declines by -0.073 standard deviations relative to others in the district (not significantly

different from zero) but remains stable relative to others in the same school. Moreover, the

pattern across new teachers reveals little difference between switchers and stayers and no

evidence that switchers improve more than stayers relative to either the district or teachers in the

same school-grade-year. Taken together, the table provides little evidence in support of the view

that a change of school leads to substantial improvement for many teachers and suggests that job

switches do not typically lead to more productive matches.


VI. Conclusions

       Schools with high concentrations of low income, low achieving, and heavily minority

populations often experience a great deal of teacher turnover, but the evidence in this paper does

not support the view that teacher exits adversely affect the quality of education in such schools.

Rather the pattern of estimates supports the conception of jobs as experience goods in which

workers learn about their productivity. Less productive teachers appear to be more likely to leave

lower-achievement, urban schools, either by transitioning to another school in the district or

exiting the Texas public schools entirely.



                                                                                                       29
    A. Methodological Issues

        The results depend fundamentally on the validity of the measurement of productivity.

The constraints of teacher contracts imply that price information is uninformative about quality

movements, leading us directly to estimate teacher effectiveness based on growth in achievement

of each teacher’s students. This estimation is complicated, however, by the myriad choices made

by families, teachers, and administrators that determine the matching of teachers and students in

classrooms. In addition, the tests provide noisy measures of achievement, and the measurement

error can inflate estimates of the variance in teacher effectiveness.

         The fundamental empirical specification for productivity measurement employs models

with lagged achievement that implicitly incorporate past influences on learning, while also

permitting estimation of the importance of depreciation of prior knowledge. We then use the

time pattern of student placement across classrooms to separate a sample of schools where

sorting appears significant versus those were it does not. Although measurement error from the

underlying achievement tests will propagate into the value-added measures of teachers, we focus

on the persistent impacts across years to give the stable part of teacher quality differences.

Importantly, the estimates of teacher quality from the “not-sorted” samples show significant

variations in the quality of instruction that are quite consistent with estimates obtained from a

very different approach not susceptible to bias introduced by sorting into classrooms on

unobservables or test measurement error. Falsification tests that compare actual teacher value-

added to an estimate based on the students’ future teachers reinforce the validity of the estimates.

        The measures of teacher effectiveness are employed to trace the impacts of mobility on

school quality, but the impact could be misstated for reasons related to the move. A school

transition could itself be the result of a particularly difficult class, or the performance of the




                                                                                                     30
teacher could be atypically poor because of a lack of effort by the teacher after deciding to move.

In either case, classroom outcomes in the year prior to a move may not be indicative of the true

underlying quality of the teacher. Average quality estimates for teachers exiting Texas schools

are, however, unaffected by basing the estimate quality from the year before the year of a move

decision, an estimate that is less prone to reflecting such temporary circumstances.

   B. Policy Implications

       Many policy discussions are based on the belief that low achieving schools tend to lose

many of their best teachers to other schools and professions. In combination with a high level of

turnover which leads to large numbers of inexperienced teachers in such schools, such teacher

transitions would imply that the job matching process hinders improving low achieving schools.

       Our estimates, however, provide little or no support for the belief that those who

transition out of Lone Star schools in general and out of the lower achieving subset of schools in

particular are more effective on average than stayers. In fact teachers in low achievement schools

who exit teaching altogether tend to be far less effective on average than stayers, and the average

quality difference is quite similar to the return to the first year of experience. Thus the increase in

average quality of instruction resulting from the departure of less effective teachers roughly

offsets the decrease resulting from disproportionate reliance on inexperienced teachers.

Moreover, these conclusions do not appear to be driven by biases in teacher quality estimates

caused by the pattern of student sorting among classrooms.

       The entire market appears to be one where employer choices are highly constrained.

Salaries are effectively not used to induce desirable moves; there are generally weak

performance evaluations before tenure, which is frequently awarded very quickly in a career;

employers have often bargained away their ability to assign teachers to specific schools; and




                                                                                                    31
mobility does not on average lead to more productive job matches. These elements of the

teacher labor market suggest that the preferences for job location by the teacher are key to

determining the outcomes of mobility. This set of observations and conclusions suggests that the

mobility that occurs in teacher labor markets does not lead to efficiency improvements that

parallel those in more general labor markets in the economy. Moreover, the opposite is also

true. Simply lessening the aggregate flows of teachers, as is frequently suggested, would not

yield large improvements in the quality of teachers in schools predominantly serving

disadvantaged populations.

       This leads back to the wide variation in effectiveness of teachers both staying and leaving

schools. The relatively small average differences in average effectiveness by mobility stream

compared to the wide differences in quality found among both stayers and leavers indicates that

changing the effectiveness of teachers in schools serving disadvantaged populations will likely

require more direct actions related to the actual effectiveness of teachers.

       These findings do not resolve all of the interpretive or policy questions, because we

cannot distinguish among alternative underlying mechanisms that are consistent with these

patterns of teacher transition. For example, our estimates of the average effectiveness of teachers

exiting from Texas public schools could combine exits resulting from the identification and

removal of poor performing teachers by principals with voluntary choices of teachers who

recognize that they are not effective in the classroom. But, more importantly, the lower average

effectiveness of leavers could combine the effects of some better than average teachers who

choose to leave for other jobs with another group of ineffective teachers who are forced to leave.

In the absence of information on the circumstances of the separation it is not possible to quantify

the relative quality of voluntary leavers versus existing active policies.




                                                                                                 32
References

Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. 2007. "Teachers and Student Achievement
      in the Chicago Public High Schools." Journal of Labor Economics 25,no.1 (January):95–
      135.

Armor, David J., Patricia Conry-Oseguera, Millicent Cox, Niceima King, Lorraine McDonnell,
      Anthony Pascal, Edward Pauly, and Gail Zellman. 1976. Analysis of the school preferred
      reading program in selected Los Angeles minority schools. Santa Monica, CA: Rand
      Corp.

Ballou, Dale, and Michael Podgursky. 2002. "Returns to seniority among public school
       teachers." Journal of Human Resources 37,no.4 (Fall):892-912.

Boyd, Don, Pam Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2006.
      "How changes in entry requirements alter the teacher workforce and affect student
      achievement." Education Finance and Policy 1,no.2 (Spring):176-216.

Boyd, Don, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2005. "The draw of home:
      How teachers' preferences for proximity disadvantage urban schools." Journal of Policy
      Analysis and Management 24,no.1 (Winter):113-132.

Burdett, Kenneth. 1978. "A Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates." The American
       Economic Review 68,no.1 (March):212-220.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob l. Vigdor. 2006. "Teacher-Student Matching and
        the Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness." Journal of Human Resources 41,no.4
        (Fall):778-820.

Dolton, Peter J., and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 1995. "Leaving teaching in the UK: A duration
       analysis." The Economic Journal 105(March):431-444.

———. 1999. "The turnover of teachers: A competing risks explanation." Review of Economics
   and Statistics 81,no.3 (August):543-552.

Gordon, Robert, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2006. "Identifying effective teachers
      using performance on the job." Washington, Hamilton Project Brookings Institution
      (April).

Hanushek, Eric A. 1971. "Teacher characteristics and gains in student achievement: Estimation
      using micro data." American Economic Review 60,no.2 (May):280-288.

———. 1979. "Conceptual and empirical issues in the estimation of educational production
   functions." Journal of Human Resources 14,no.3 (Summer):351-388.

———. 1986. "The economics of schooling: Production and efficiency in public schools."
   Journal of Economic Literature 24,no.3 (September):1141-1177.



                                                                                              33
———. 1992. "The trade-off between child quantity and quality." Journal of Political Economy
   100,no.1 (February):84-117.

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Daniel M. O'Brien, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2005. "The market for
      teacher quality." Working Paper No. 11154, National Bureau of Economic Research
      (February).

Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2004. "Why public schools lose
      teachers." Journal of Human Resources 39,no.2:326-354.

Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2006. "Teacher quality." In Handbook of the
      Economics of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam:
      North Holland:1051-1078.

———. 2010. "Generalizations about Using Value-Added Measures of Teacher Quality."
   American Economic Revew 100,no.2 (May).

Jacob, Brian A., Lars Lefgren, and David Sims. 2008. "The persistence of teacher-induced
       learning gains." Cambridge, MA, NBER W14065, National Bureau of Economic
       Research (June).

Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979a. "Firm-specific Capital and Turnover." The Journal of Political
      Economy 87,no.6 (December):1246-1260.

———. 1979b. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover." The Journal of Political Economy
   87,no.5 (October):972-990.

Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. "What does certification tell
       us about teacher effectiveness? Evidence from New York City." Economics of Education
       Review 27,no.6 (December):615-631.

Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. "Are Teacher-Level Value-Added Estimates
       Biased? An Experimental Validation of Non-Experimental Estimates." Harvard
       University, (mimeo).

Lankford, Hamilton, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. 2002. "Teacher sorting and the plight
      of urban schools: A descriptive analysis." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
      24,no.1 (Spring):37-62.

McCaffrey, Dan, Tim R. Sass, J. R. Lockwood, and Kata Mihaly. 2009a. "The Intertemporal
      Variability of Teacher Effect Estimates." Education Finance and Policy 4,no.4
      (Fall):572-606.

McCaffrey, Daniel F., J.R. Lockwood, Thomas A. Louis, and Laura Hamilton. 2004. "Models
      for value-add modeling of teacher effects." Journal of Educational and Behavioral
      Statistics 29,no.1:67-101.




                                                                                              34
McCaffrey, Daniel F., Tim R. Sass, J. R. Lockwood, and Kata Mihaly. 2009b. "The
      Intertemporal Variability of Teacher Effect Estimates." Education Finance and Policy
      4,no.4 (Fall):572-606.

Murnane, Richard J. 1975. Impact of school resources on the learning of inner city children.
      Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.

Murnane, Richard J., and Barbara Phillips. 1981. "What do effective teachers of inner-city
      children have in common?" Social Science Research 10,no.1 (March):83-100.

National Council on Teacher Quality. 2008. State teacher policy yearbook, 2008. Washington:
       National Council on Teacher Quality

Podgursky, Michael, Ryan Monroe, and Donald Watson. 2004. "The academic quality of public
      school teachers: an analysis of entry and exit behavior." Economics of Education Review
      23,no.5 (October):507-518.

Rivkin, Steven G. 2005. "Cumulative nature of learning and specification bias in education
       research." mimeo, Amherst College (

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. "Teachers, schools, and academic
       achievement." Econometrica 73,no.2 (March):417-458.

Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. "The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence
      from panel data." American Economic Review 94,no.2 (May):247-252.

Rothstein, Jesse. 2010. "Teacher quality in educational production: Tracking, decay, and student
       achievement." Quarterly Journal of Economics 25,no.1.

Sanders, William L., and Sandra P. Horn. 1994. "The Tennessee value-added assessment system
       (TVAAS): Mixed-model methodology in educational assessment." Journal of Personnel
       Evaluation in Education 8:299-311.

Scafidi, Benjamin, David L. Sjoquist, and Todd R. Stinebrickner. 2006. "Do Teachers Really
        Leave for Higher Paying Jobs in Alternative Occupations? ." Advances in Economic
        Analysis & Policy 6,no.1.

———. 2007. "Race, poverty, and teacher mobility." Economics of Education Review 26,no.2
   (April):145-159.

Stinebrickner, Todd R. 2002. "An analysis of occupational change and departure from the labor
       force." Journal of Human Resources 37,no.1 (Winter):192-216.

Topel, Robert H., and Michael P. Ward. 1992. "Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men."
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,no.2 (May):439-479.




                                                                                               35
Table 1. Estimated Variance in Teacher Quality


                                               within district     within school and grade
                                           without         with     without        with
                                        demographic demographic demographic demographic
                                          variables      variables variables     variables


variance in fixed effects – var( τ )      0.120        0.111         0.040         0.038
adjacent year correlation – r12            0.269        0.244         0.348         0.339
variance in teacher quality – var(τ )      0.032        0.027         0.014         0.013
stnd. dev. in teacher quality – σ τ        0.180        0.165         0.118         0.113

Note: Teacher fixed effects are produced from regressions of math score on lagged math score.
       Specifications with demographic characteristics also include indicators for female, race-
       ethnicity, low income, limited English proficient, special needs, first year in middle
       school, and family initiated school change. Number of observations is 254,046.
Table 2. Estimated Variance in Teacher Quality by Alternative Tests of
Significant Classroom Sorting


                                                within district           within school and grade
                                            sorted        not-sorted       sorted        not-sorted
1. Sorting Tested by Pretest Mean
Achievement
variance in fixed effects – var( τ )       0.092           0.146          0.040           0.042
adjacent year correlation – r12             0.425           0.283          0.496           0.254
variance in teacher quality – var(τ )       0.039           0.041          0.020           0.011
stnd. dev. in teacher quality – σ τ         0.198           0.203          0.141           0.103


Observations                               161,990          79,047        161,990         79,047


2. Sorting Tested by Classroom Assignment Patterns
variance in fixed effects – var( τ )  0.081                0.116          0.034           0.036
adjacent year correlation – r12             0.411           0.274          0.422           0.265
variance in teacher quality – var(τ )       0.033           0.032          0.014           0.010
stnd. dev. in teacher quality – σ τ         0.182           0.178          0.120           0.098


Observations                               56,656           24,010         56,656         24,010


Note: Fixed effects derived from regressions that include lagged test score and the demographic
       variables listed in Table 1.
Table 3. Estimated Variance in Teacher Quality for Actual and Subsequent Grade Teachers and Alternative
Tests of Classroom Sorting


                                                       within district                             within school and grade
                                                Sorted                not-sorted                 sorted                not-sorted
                                         actual     subsequent    actual    subsequent    actual     subsequent    actual    subsequent
                                        teacher       teacher    teacher      teacher    teacher       teacher    teacher      teacher

1. Sorting Tested by Pretest Mean Achievement
variance in fixed effects – var( τ ) 0.098          0.093        0.170      0.135       0.042        0.038       0.053       0.023
adjacent year correlation – r12         0.264        0.180        0.151      0.078       0.440        0.174       0.219       0.111
variance in teacher quality – var(τ )   0.026        0.017        0.026      0.011       0.018       0.0066       0.012       0.0026
stnd. dev. in teacher quality – σ τ     0.161        0.129        0.160      0.103       0.136        0.081       0.108       0.051


Observations                            56,051      56,051       23,172      23,172      56,051      56,051       23,172      23,172


2. Sorting Tested by Classroom Assignment Patterns
variance in fixed effects – var( τ ) 0.096    0.088              0.169      0.146       0.044        0.036       0.049       0.025
adjacent year correlation – r12         0.343        0.372        0.157      0.114       0.443        0.382       0.325       -0.083
variance in teacher quality – var(τ )   0.033        0.033        0.027      0.017       0.019        0.014       0.016
stnd. dev. in teacher quality – σ τ     0.181        0.181        0.163      0.129       0.140        0.117       0.126


Observations                            55,418      55,418       23,485      23,485      55,418      55,418       23,485      23,485
Table 4 . Transition Shares for Teacher Movements



                                       All                New Teachers
Stay at same campus                    0.81                  0.70
Change campus                          0.09                  0.11
Change district                        0.04                  0.07
Exit Texas public schools              0.06                  0.12

Observations (Teacher/Years)           7589                     801




Table 5. Average Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition Compared to
Teachers Who Do Not Move

               Teacher mobility                     within district    within school and grade
               change campus                           -0.048                  -0.027
                                                       (3.64)                   (2.49)
               change district                          0.019                  -0.019
                                                       (0.99)                   (1.26)
               exit Texas public schools               -0.058                  -0.061
                                                       (3.79)                   (5.24)

Note: Coefficients on teacher transition variables come from regressions of math score on the
       transition variables plus lagged score, indicators for female, race-ethnicity, low income, special
       needs, limited English proficient, first year in middle school, family initiated move, shares of
       students in campus, grade, and year who are black, Hispanic, Asian, low income, special needs,
       limited English proficient, movers, peer average lagged achievement, a full set of teacher
       experience dummies, and a full set of year-by-grade dummies. No move is omitted category;
       254,046 observations; absolute value of t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by
       teacher-year in parentheses.
Table 6. Average Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition Compared to
Teachers Who Do Not Move by Sorting of Students across Classrooms

                                             within district      within school and grade
                                         sorted      not-sorted    sorted      not-sorted
1. Sorting Tested by Pretest Mean Achievement
change campus                            -0.043          -0.06     -0.031       -0.015
                                         (2.60)         (2.64)     (2.25)       (0.88)
change district                           0.006          0.005     -0.015       -0.034
                                         (0.26)         (0.14)     (0.88)       (1.11)
exit                                     -0.053         -0.101     -0.045       -0.098
                                         (3.05)         (3.84)     (3.16)       (4.93)

Observations                             160,939      78,498       160,939      78,498



2. Sorting Tested by Classroom Assignment Patterns
change campus                            -0.031       -0.044       -0.014       -0.085
                                          (1.17)      (1.01)       (0.65)       (2.50)
change district                            0.06        0.018        0.024       -0.133
                                          (1.43)      (0.27)       (0.82)       (3.97)
exit                                     -0.052       -0.154       -0.033       -0.136
                                          (2.26)      (3.44)       (1.61)       (3.83)

Observations                             56,166       24,461       56,166       24,461




                                                                                            2
Table 7. Average Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition Type and
Experience at Time of Move


                                 change                    change                  exit public
Experience at Move               campus                    district                 schools


following 1st year                0.062                     0.067                    -0.049
                                 (1.97)                    (1.79)                    (1.66)
following 2nd year               -0.019                    -0.057                    -0.020
                                 (0.45)                    (1.46)                    (0.58)
following 3rd year               -0.048                    -0.032                    -0.057
                                 (1.57)                    (0.89)                    (1.68)
following 4th+ years             -0.040                    -0.031                    -0.070
                                 (3.23)                    (1.66)                    (4.89)


Note: Within school comparisons; no move is omitted category; regressions from same sample and
use same specifications as those in Table 4; absolute value of t-statistics based on robust standard
errors clustered by teacher-year in parentheses.
Table 8. Average Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition Type and Student
Characteristics in Schoola

                                         School demographics based on School demographics based on
                                             average achievement      proportion of students nonblack
                                            within          within        within           within
                                            district     school/grade     district      school/grade
                                          comparisons comparisons comparisons comparisons
change campus
 from low value school                        -0.081             -0.062             -0.070              -0.055
                                              (4.51)             (4.35)              (3.89)             (3.40)
 from high value school                       -0.013              0.006             -0.027              -0.003
                                              (0.72)             (0.40)              (1.48)             (0.22)
                   b
  Difference (F)                               7.24               10.63               3.01               5.38
change district
 from low value school                        -0.003             -0.033              0.010              -0.028
                                              (0.09)             (1.53)              (0.17)             (1.16)
 from high value school                       0.041              -0.008              0.028              -0.015
                                              (1.66)             (0.41)              (1.14)             (0.80)
                   b
  Difference (F)                               1.38               0.76                0.34               0.19
exit public schools
 from low value school                        -0.081             -0.086             -0.066              -0.082
                                              (3.76)             (5.25)              (2.62)             (4.16)
 from high value school                       -0.037             -0.043             -0.055              -0.051
                                              (1.80)             (2.79)              (3.05)             (3.75)
                   b
  Difference (F)                               2.18               3.68                0.12               1.69


Notes:
a. Schools divided by being above or below district average for student achievement or percent black; no move is omitted
category; no move is omitted category; 251,943 observations; same variables as in Table 4 specifications; absolute value of
t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by teacher-year in parentheses.
b. F-statistic for difference between high and low value school. Degrees of freedom for achievement are F(1,7588) and for
Proportion Black are F(1,7588). Difference that are significant at the 5 percent level in bold.
Table 9. Average Differences in First Year Teacher Quality by Transition Type and
Student Characteristics in School

                                         School demographics based on School demographics based on
                                             average achievement      proportion of students nonblack
                                            within          within        within           within
                                            district     school/grade     district      school/grade
                                          comparisons    comparisons   comparisons      comparisons
change campus
 from low value school                       -0.038              0.018              -0.033              0.008
                                              (0.78)             (0.51)              (0.56)             (0.19)
 from high value school                       0.036              0.133              -0.001              0.106
                                              (0.42)             (2.28)              (0.01)             (2.79)
                   b
  Difference (F)                               0.59               2.95                0.17               2.94
change district
 from low value school                        0.107              0.034               0.082              0.073
                                              (2.06)             (0.67)              (1.39)             (1.23)
 from high value school                       0.064              0.114               0.098              0.051
                                              (1.00)             (2.37)              (1.93)             (1.73)
                   b
  Difference (F)                               0.29               1.35                0.05               0.11
exit public schools
 from low value school                       -0.127              -0.120             -0.084              -0.061
                                              (2.99)             (3.49)              (1.58)             (1.47)
 from high value school                      -0.010              0.033              -0.077              -0.050
                                              (0.22)             (0.97)              (2.20)             (1.51)
  Difference (F)b                              4.00              10.87                0.01               0.05

Notes:
    a. Schools divided by being above or below district average for student achievement or percent black; no move is
       omitted category; no move is omitted category; 251,943 observations; same variables as in Table 4 specifications;
       absolute value of t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by teacher-year in parentheses.
    b. F-statistic for difference between high and low value schools for first year teachers. Degrees of freedom for
       achievement are F(1,7588) and for Proportion Black are F(1,7588). Difference that are significant at the 5 percent
       level in bold.




                                                                                                                        2
Table 10. Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition and Distribution of
Students Among Classrooms

                                      Average achievement           Proportion nonblack students
                                      sorted         not-sorted         sorted        not-sorted
change campus
 from low value school                -0.076          -0.028           -0.064           -0.036
                                      (4.36)           (1.12)           (3.00)          (1.50)
 from high value school               0.012           -0.004           -0.010            0.021
                                      (0.58)           (0.18)           (0.56)          (0.87)
change district
 from low value school                -0.022          -0.087           -0.023           -0.057
                                      (0.92)           (1.98)           (0.86)          (0.96)
 from high value school               -0.011           0.003            -0.012          -0.023
                                      (0.51)           (0.08)           (0.56)          (0.69)
exit public schools
 from low value school                -0.065          -0.139           -0.072           -0.108
                                      (3.28)           (4.76)           (2.97)          (3.22)
 from high value school               -0.035          -0.054           -0.035           -0.085
                                      (1.83)           (2.09)           (2.11)          (3.63)


Observations                         159,569          77,939           159,569          77,939

Note: Within-school comparisons; no move is omitted category; classification of classroom allocation
       mechanism based on classroom differences in prior achievement; same variables as regression
       specifications used in Table 4; absolute value of t-statistics based on robust standard errors
       clustered by teacher-year in parentheses.
Table 11. Differences in Teacher Quality by Transition, School Characteristics,
and Timing of Quality Estimate

                                       Average achievement         Proportion nonblack students
                                     Prior year   Current year      Prior year    Current year
                                      estimate      estimate         estimate       estimate
change campus
 from low value school                 0.002           -0.064          0.014          -0.059
                                       (0.08)          (3.13)          (0.70)         (2.79)
 from high value school                0.003           -0.026         -0.010          -0.029
                                       (0.15)          (1.34)          (0.43)         (1.47)
change district
 from low value school                 -0.014          -0.008         -0.005          0.008
                                       (0.47)          (0.22)          (0.16)         (0.24)
 from high value school                -0.001          0.012          -0.010          -0.003
                                       (0.06)          (0.43)          (0.44)         (0.10)
exit public schools
 from low value school                 -0.094          -0.061         -0.084          -0.078
                                       (3.76)          (2.61)          (3.34)         (3.03)
 from high value school                -0.014          -0.054         -0.025          -0.043
                                       (0.75)          (2.90)          (1.34)         (2.35)

Note: Within-school comparisons; no move is omitted category; classification of classroom allocation
       mechanism based on classroom differences in prior achievement; same variables as regression
       specifications used in Table 4; 162,060 observations; absolute value of t-statistics based on
       robust standard errors clustered by teacher-year in parentheses.
Table 12. Average year to year change in value-added over adjacent year for
stayers and campus switchers within Lone Star District, by Transition and
Experience

                                                             within
                                    within district       school/grade
                                    comparisons           comparisons    observations
all teachers
 same campus                            -0.073               0.006          4,305
 new campus                             0.003*               -0.002          205


0 or 1 yr experience
 same campus                            0.022                0.056           517
 new campus                             0.015                0.023           31


*reject hypothesis of no difference by transition status at 0.05 level
Figure 1




Figure 2
Appendix Table a1. Correspondence Between Assignment into Sorted and Not-
sorted categories by Test Statistic


                                                            F Test of Mean Pretest Score Difference
Chi Squared Test of Transitions                      sorted         unsorted        missing         Total
    a. Proportions
Sorted                                                0.71              0.29              0.00              0.13
Unsorted                                              0.27              0.73              0.00              0.10
missing                                               0.37              0.38              0.25              0.77

Total                                                 0.40              0.40              0.19              1.0

    b. Numbers (School/grade/year)                   sorted          unsorted           missing            Total
Sorted                                                290              116                 0               406
Unsorted                                               86              235                 0               321
missing                                               879              899               600               2378

Total                                                1255              1250               600              3105


Note: The Chi Square test of the independence of transitions across grades requires an additional year of data with at least
two teachers in the grade, leading to the classification of missing for a number of observations.
