                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INSURING CONSUMPTION USING INCOME-LINKED ASSETS

                                           Andreas Fuster
                                           Paul S. Willen

                                        Working Paper 15829
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15829


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




We are grateful to John Campbell, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, Rustom Irani, María Luengo-Prado, Claudio
Michelacci, Ali Ozdagli, Julio Rotemberg, and seminar participants at Harvard, the First Annual Workshop
of the Zurich Center for Computational Financial Economics, and the Household Finance and Macroeconomics
conference at the Banco de España for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed in
this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Andreas Fuster and Paul S. Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Insuring Consumption Using Income-Linked Assets
Andreas Fuster and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 15829
March 2010
JEL No. D91,E21,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

Shiller (2003) and others have argued for the creation of financial instruments that allow individuals
to insure risks associated with their lifetime labor income. In this paper, we argue that while the purpose
of such assets is to smooth consumption across states of nature, one must also consider the assets' effects
on households' ability to smooth consumption over time. We show that consumers in a realistically
calibrated life-cycle model would generally prefer income-linked loans (with a rate positively correlated
with income shocks) to an income-hedging instrument (a limited liability asset whose returns correlate
negatively with income shocks) even though the assets offer identical opportunities to smooth consumption
across states. While for some parameterizations of our model the welfare gains from the presence of
income-linked assets can be substantial (above 1% of certainty-equivalent consumption), the assets
we consider can only mitigate a relatively small part of the welfare costs of labor income risk over
the life cycle.


Andreas Fuster
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
afuster@fas.harvard.edu

Paul S. Willen
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
P.O. Box 55882
Boston, MA 02210
and NBER
willen968@yahoo.com
1. Introduction

   The problem of smoothing household consumption fluctuations lies at the heart of much public
policy. A wide range of government programs and institutions, from central banks to unemploy-
ment insurance to Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, ultimately owe their existence to the
goal of reducing household consumption volatility. In spite of these efforts, household consump-
tion volatility remains significant.
   In this paper, we analyze a market-based approach to reducing consumption risk: financial as-
sets with payoffs tied to households’ labor income realizations or, as we call them, income-linked
assets. We investigate the use of such assets in the context of a calibrated life-cycle model of con-
sumption and portfolio choice, in which households can invest in different assets and can borrow
but at a substantial premium to the riskless rate of return. We find that the benefits of income-linked
assets can be sizeable, but are highly sensitive to the precise design of the assets. For example,
the seemingly innocuous decision of whether to link income negatively to the return on a savings
instrument or positively to the interest rate on a loan has a large impact on the welfare gains our
model predicts. The intuition here is that in a world with realistic frictions, one cannot separate
the effect of an asset on consumption across states of nature with the effect on consumption across
time. For instance, an asset that needs to be purchased today to provide insurance against future
shocks reduces the variability of future consumption but also increases future consumption relative
to current consumption. In a frictionless world, households can borrow to undo such an intertem-
poral distortion, but in a realistic world where borrowing is expensive, households may not want
to invest in such an asset in spite of the reduction in future consumption variability.
   The reason why such assets deserve consideration is that risk sharing between households is
limited, as evidenced by the fact that much of observed household consumption volatility is due
to idiosyncratic income shocks, not aggregate income fluctuations. This limited risk sharing can
be seen either as a puzzle or as evidence of frictions. Chief among the frictions is asymmetric
information, in particular moral hazard: if one knew that one’s consumption is independent of
one’s income, there is of course no longer a strong incentive to expend effort on trying to avoid
negative income shocks, such as being fired for shirking.
   However, in principle there is scope for sharing part of one’s labor income risk without induc-
ing moral hazard, as part of this risk is group-specific. Groups could be defined, for instance, in

                                                  2
terms of occupation, industry, region, or education level. As an example, an auto worker may ex-
perience an income shock because of his individual job performance, but also because the overall
evolution of the demand for cars affects the average wage of auto workers, which is beyond his
control. Shocks of the second kind are observable and verifiable, so that insurance-like contracts
based on such risks can, in principle, easily be written. Indeed, Attanasio and Davis (1996) argue
for the “puzzle” view of the limited risk sharing present in the data precisely because they find
that a particular group-level shock — income variation at the education-sex-birth cohort level —
appears not to be shared across households. One reason why the sharing of such risks that are
immune to moral hazard may be difficult is the possible importance of another friction, namely
limited commitment: if two individuals sign a contract in which they promise to share their re-
spective incomes with each other, the one receiving a high positive income shock may be tempted
to renege on the promise, even if afterwards he gets punished by being excluded from future sim-
ilar transactions. This issue can be mitigated by moving from bilateral contracts to trading such
risks through long-lived institutions that hold a diversified portfolio and have strong reputational
concerns, so that they are very unlikely to default. This solution makes the market-based approach
considered in this paper a potentially promising way to share household income risks.
   The income-linked assets we consider take two basic forms. The first is a standard insurance-
like contract in which an individual pays something now for an asset whose future payoff is neg-
atively correlated with the individual’s income innovations — we call this an “income-hedging
instrument.” Thus, if the individual’s group receives a negative income shock, this asset will pay
off more than if the group receives a positive shock. The second form we consider are “income-
linked loans,” where the required repayment is positively correlated with one’s group’s income
shocks. Either way, the upshot of adding such assets to a household portfolio would be to re-
duce consumption fluctuations. Our contribution in this paper is a quantitative evaluation of what
households’ demand for such assets would be, and which design features of the assets this demand
most strongly depends on. Furthermore, we assess the size of the welfare gains that the presence
of such assets would generate for households.
   Our undertaking, and the assets we consider, are inspired by two thought-provoking books
by Robert Shiller (1993, 2003) in which he argues for the development of new household risk



                                                 3
management instruments.3 He also furnishes the motivation for our study, as he writes that “Imag-
ining the social and economic achievement that could come from a new financial order is difficult
because we have not seen such an alternate world.”4 Of course, our model-based approach is pre-
cisely an attempt to predict what might happen in an alternate world. Understanding the potential
welfare gains from such assets, and what these benefits depend on, is also important from a policy
perspective because Shiller argues that we require a concerted effort from the government and the
private sector to facilitate the introduction of such assets.
       To evaluate the demand for and the usefulness of the income-linked assets, we embed them
in a realistic portfolio choice problem. We use a finite horizon, partial equilibrium model which
roughly matches basic facts about households’ risky asset holdings. Households receive stochastic
labor income, which is subject to permanent and transitory shocks, and they can invest in bonds
and stocks. Furthermore, they can also engage in unsecured borrowing at an interest rate that
exceeds the return on the riskless bond.
       A significant challenge for this research is the need to make assumptions about the return
characteristics of assets that do not yet exist. For the mean returns of the income-linked assets,
we make the baseline assumption that the risks upon which the payoffs are based are purely cross-
sectional, such that the assets can be priced fairly. Thus, we assume that the mean return on
the income-hedging instrument equals the mean return on the risk-free bond, and that the mean
interest rate to be paid on the income-linked loan is equal to the interest rate on other unsecured
household debt.5 For the other return characteristics, we remain relatively agnostic and simply plug
in different values for the volatility of the returns on the income-linked assets and their correlation
with the permanent shock to a household’s labor income. We do, however, present some back-
of-the-envelope calculations that lead us to adopt as our baseline assumption a correlation of 0.5

   3
      We only consider a subset of Shiller’s proposals. Our income-hedging instrument can be seen either as “livelihood
insurance” or as a particular example of a “macro market.” In addition to these two, and the income-linked loans
that we also look at, Shiller’s other suggestions include “home equity insurance” (which is now arguably available,
through an exchange-traded product based on the Case-Shiller index), “inequality insurance,” and “intergenerational
social security.”
    4
      Shiller (2003), p.10.
    5
      An alternative to our partial equilibrium approach would be to build a general equilibrium asset-pricing model to
generate prices for the assets, but the well-documented problems with such models in generating prices even in-sample
mean that misspecification of either the household decision problem or the general equilibrium could lead to inaccurate
predictions about the benefits of the assets. Another advantage of the partial equilibrium setting is that it allows us to
explore the effects of different assumptions about the prices of other assets on the benefits of income-linked assets.


                                                            4
between individual permanent labor income shocks and the returns on income-linked assets.
   Our calibrated model yields two main results. The first is that the benefits that income-linked
assets could generate for households are very sensitive to the parameters of the return process.
Most importantly, potential welfare gains are strongly convex in the assumed correlation between
rates and income shocks. As a consequence, unless the correlation is very high, the income-linked
assets can only eliminate a rather small part of the welfare cost imposed by income shocks over the
life cycle. The attractiveness of our assets further depends on the assumed return volatility, with
higher volatility providing “more bang for the buck” for households. The size of the cost differ-
ential between borrowing and lending is also very important: the larger it is, the less households
gain from having access to the proposed income-linked assets.
   The second main result is that income-linked loans are generally much more appealing and
useful to households than the income-hedging instrument. For a baseline calibration in which the
correlation between permanent income shocks and the interest rate on the income-linked assets is
0.5, and the volatility of the rate is 0.5, we find that income-linked loans would produce a welfare
improvement of 1.4% (an increase in consumption of about 400 USD per year, in 2009 dollars)
while the income-hedging instrument is essentially worthless. We also explore the boundaries
of this result. For instance, we show that the attractiveness of the alternative investment option
matters for the relative appeal of the two income-linked assets: the presence of equity (as in our
baseline) makes the income-linked loan relatively more attractive (as households can invest some
of the borrowed money in a high return asset) while the income-hedging instrument is in less
demand than if equity were not available. If a household has access to borrowing at a cheap rate
(lower than what it would have to pay on average on the income-linked loan), the ranking of the
two assets may be reversed, such that the income-hedging instrument is more valuable. However,
even under such assumptions, the gains from the income-hedging instrument remain moderate
(below 1%). In sum, we find that under some assumptions, the gains to households from having
access to income-linked loans could be significant, while it is more difficult to come up with a
scenario in which income-hedging instruments would have an equally positive effect on welfare.
   To understand these results, we turn to the theory of portfolio choice in the presence of con-
straints and focus on the risk-adjusted returns on assets. The higher the correlation of an asset with
household income, the lower the risk-adjusted return on that asset. Thus, the negative correlation of


                                                  5
the income-hedging instrument raises the risk-adjusted return and makes the asset more attractive
to investors than a risk-free asset with the same mean return. Similarly, income-linked loans have a
lower risk-adjusted cost of funds than borrowing at a fixed rate. However, even though the two as-
sets are equally attractive in terms of intratemporal consumption smoothing, whether households
will demand them also depends on how the assets square with households’ desire for intertemporal
smoothing. We show that over the life cycle, income-linked loans are more attractive in that regard
than income-hedging instruments. The reason is that early in the life cycle, most households’ main
financial activity is high-interest rate borrowing (because they want to consume part of the higher
income they expect in the future), for which income-linked loans provide a lower-cost alternative.
To attract interest, the income-hedging instrument, in contrast, would need to offer a risk-adjusted
return that exceeds the cost of unsecured debt. Later in life, the competition for funds comes not
from high-interest borrowing but from high equity returns. Then, the risk-adjusted return on the
income-hedging instrument must exceed the risk-adjusted return on equity, and if we set expected
equity returns to match historical averages, that is a tall order as well. Meanwhile, the presence
of high-return equity makes the income-linked loans relatively more attractive to households, as it
means that they can insure at relatively low cost by taking out an income-linked loan and investing
most of it in equity.
       Given that some calibrations of our model predict substantial benefits from income-linked
loans, an obvious question is why such loans are not more frequently observed in the real world.6
We first reiterate that we assume here that the risks households are hedging are both observable and
cross-sectional. The former implies that there are no adverse selection or moral hazard problems
and when combined with the latter, means that no risk premium needs to be added to the risk-free
rates.7 One can view this as an extreme assumption which stacks the deck in favor of income-
linked assets and makes the failure of the income-hedging instrument even more surprising than it

   6
      Some examples of particular forms of income-linked loans do exist in the real world. For instance, in Australia
and some other countries, there exist education loans for which the required repayment is based on subsequent labor
income. In the United States, there have been recent examples of car firms (Hyundai, Ford) offering to make car
payments for up to a year and/or take the car back with no loss in equity in case the buyer loses his job.
    7
      As our focus is on the benefits that income-linked assets could generate for households, we do not directly
address what entities would be willing to offer these assets at such prices. One candidate would be investment firms
that already manage the retirement funds of people in a wide variety of occupations. Alternatively, income-hedging
instruments could be operationalized as exchange-traded products, or they could be offered by insurance companies
(which would presumably add loadings and thus offer rates that are less than actuarially fair).


                                                         6
already is.
       Shiller (2003) advances another reason for the current nonexistence of the income-linked assets
he envisions, arguing that until recently we did not have the technology necessary to collect and
maintain the data underlying the various proposed instruments. He points out that there will likely
be a need for government intervention to help establish what he calls “Global Risk Information
Databases,” and that new regulations may need to be enacted in order to make the “New Financial
Order” possible—for instance, a change in the bankruptcy law, such that income-linked loans
could not be canceled by declaring personal bankruptcy.8
       The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In the next subsection, we discuss some of the
related literature. We then turn to a two-period model, in order to explain the theory of portfolio
choice under constraints and to provide intuition for our results on the use of and gain from the
assets we introduce. Section 3 then describes our life-cycle model and the quantitative results we
obtain from it, which are further discussed in section 4. Finally, section 5 briefly concludes.

1.1. Related Literature
       Risk sharing is one of the fundamental topics of economics and finance and therefore much
too vast to be surveyed here. We will therefore concentrate on referencing some classic and recent
papers that we deem particularly relevant or related to our analysis. We begin by discussing papers
that focus on measuring the extent of risk sharing or on the welfare cost of income or wage risk,
and then consider papers on households’ life-cycle portfolio choice that are more closely related
to our model.
       Classic empirical papers on the degree of risk sharing between households include Cochrane
(1991), Attanasio and Davis (1996), and Hayashi et al. (1996). These authors all attempt to assess
the degree to which household consumption is insured against shocks to income, and find that such
insurance is far from perfect (if it were not, there would of course be no need for new financial
instruments that facilitate better insurance). In a related vein, papers by Blundell and Preston
(1998), Krueger and Perri (2006), Blundell et al. (2008), and Heathcote et al. (2008b) use both
income and consumption data to examine the evolution of income risk and inequality over the

   8
    Income-linked loans would then have a similar status as student loans. This change in the bankruptcy law may
be necessary because otherwise, individuals are tempted to default on their income-linked loans after they receive a
positive income shock.

                                                         7
past decades, the degree of households’ insurance against income risk, and the different channels
through which such insurance can be achieved.
       In quantitative dynamic macro models that are calibrated to match empirical data9 , the welfare
cost of income uncertainty is typically very large. For instance, Storesletten et al. (2004) use
a model that is calibrated to match the empirically observed evolution of household income and
consumption inequality over the life cycle to determine the relative importance of initial conditions
and life-cycle shocks for inequality, and find that in their model, an agent would be willing to give
up 26% of lifetime consumption in exchange for insurance against all life-cycle shocks. Pijoan-
Mas (2006) studies a general equilibrium production economy with infinitely-lived agents, flexible
labor supply, and stationary wage shocks, and finds that complete markets (meaning full insurance
against wage risks) would lead to a welfare gain equivalent to increasing lifetime consumption by
16%. In a related paper, Heathcote et al. (2008a) find that in a model with permanent and transitory
wage shocks the welfare gain from complete markets would be almost 40% of expected lifetime
consumption.10 Their conclusion is thus the following: “From a policy perspective, an important
implication is that the government should develop the legal and institutional frameworks that will
allow new insurance markets to develop” (p. 520).
       The papers referenced above and, in general, most quantitative general equilibrium macro
models, only feature a rather simple asset market structure (often composed of only one asset).
We opt to go the partial equilibrium route, which has the advantage of allowing for more realistic
asset market structures but at the cost of taking returns as exogenously given, an assumption that
is somewhat intellectually unsatisfying and may also yield misleading results in counterfactual
exercises.11 Our model builds on other computational analyses of optimal portfolio choice over
the life cycle, some well-known examples of which include Bertaut and Haliassos (1997), Cocco
et al. (2005), Gomes and Michaelides (2005), or Davis et al. (2006), which is the model we will

   9
      For an excellent recent summary of this literature, see Heathcote et al. (2009)
  10
      They emphasize that in their model, this gain is more than twice as large as the gain from completely eliminating
all risk (for instance, through distortionary taxation), because the latter would take away the opportunity to profit from
temporarily high wages by increasing labor supply.
   11
      For our exercise of evaluating the potential use and usefulness of new assets, one justification for using partial
equilibrium instead of general equilibrium, which would allow for endogenous responses of the other asset returns, is
that the world would most likely not move to the new general equilibrium very quickly. Rather, the new assets would
need to be introduced into, and used in, the current equilibrium, which is captured by our calibrations.



                                                            8
build on. Some papers in this literature explicitly investigate the welfare effects due to the presence
or absence of certain assets or government policies. Perhaps closest in spirit to our work are recent
papers by De Jong et al. (2008) and Cocco and Gomes (2009).12 De Jong et al. consider the welfare
benefits generated by the presence of housing futures and find these gains are small (mostly due
to the significant fraction of house price risk that is idiosyncratic). Cocco and Gomes investigate
the role that longevity bonds (for which no liquid market currently exists) could play in individual
portfolios, what the welfare benefits from such bonds would be, and the optimal design of such
bonds.


2. Two-Period Model

       To gain some intuition for how the introduction of the income-linked assets might affect house-
holds’ asset portfolios and welfare, we first consider a simple two-period model. We start by briefly
discussing the theory of optimal portfolio choice in the setting we are interested in13 , and then look
at an example with a calibration similar to the one we will be using in the life-cycle model. As
will be shown in later sections of the paper, the results from the two-period model largely carry
over to the more complex setting.

2.1. Theory

       Suppose an investor who lives for two periods has some cash-on-hand in period 1 and expects
to receive a stochastic income in period 2 with mean E(Y2 ) and standard deviation σY2 . The ob-
jective is to maximize his overall expected utility, u(c1 ) + βE[u(c2 )]. The investor has access to
I financial assets, with stochastic or deterministic returns. Finally, assume that the state space is
finite-dimensional. We first consider the optimal policy of an investor who faces no constraints
(other than the budget constraint) on his asset holdings between the two periods. In this case,
the optimal policy can be understood in terms of a simple algorithm. Start with any admissible
asset allocation, which will imply a consumption stream {c1t+1 , ..., cSt+1 } for the S states of the
world. Based on this consumption stream, one can define the “risk-neutral” or “martingale” prob-
ability measure, which reweights the objective probabilities of the different states by their relative

  12
       Other examples include Campbell et al. (2001) and Gomes et al. (2007, 2008).
  13
       This discussion follows He and Pearson (1991) and Willen and Kubler (2006).


                                                          9
marginal utilities:                                             
                                                      ′
                                                 Pp1 u (c 1)
                                                  ps u′ (cs )   
                                                      ..        
                                        Q=             .        .
                                                                
                                                 pS u′ (cS )
                                                   ps u′ (cs )
                                                 P


Then, for any asset i ∈ {1, ..., I}, we can define its “risk-adjusted” (gross) return using these
risk-neutral probabilities: EQ [R̃i ]. Intuitively, this measure adjusts an asset’s mean return by how
useful it is for consumption smoothing across states of the world. Thus, an asset that has a high
payoff in states of the world in which consumption is low, and marginal utility therefore high, has
a higher risk-adjusted return than an asset that has the same average return but pays off more in
states of the world in which consumption is high.
   Next, define the “shadow rate” as

                                                  u′ (ct )
                                         R=                   .
                                               βE(u′ (ct+1 ))

This is the minimum interest rate at which an investor would be willing to decrease his consump-
tion in period t by a small amount ǫ if in return he received Rǫ in period t + 1 (or, equivalently,
the highest rate at which he would be willing to borrow ǫ for consumption in t if he had to repay
Rǫ in t + 1). This rate is higher the more the investor expects consumption to grow between t
and t + 1, and (for utility functions such that marginal utility u′ is convex) the less uncertain he is
about consumption in t + 1. Thus, the shadow rate is influenced by the investor’s desire to smooth
consumption across periods and across states of nature within a period.
   Optimal portfolio choice can then be characterized by the following simple rule: investors
should optimally add to (subtract from, leave unchanged) their position in an asset i if and only
if the risk-adjusted return on that asset exceeds (falls short of, equals) the shadow rate. Thus, the
portfolio’s overall optimality requires EQ [R̃i ] = R ∀i. Furthermore, if the set of available assets
includes one that is risk-free, so that investors can borrow and lend potentially unlimited quantities
at the risk-free rate, the shadow rate will be equal across all investors.
   Classical unconstrained portfolio choice is easy to understand. However, limits on the quanti-
ties of assets the investor can hold, such as short-sales or borrowing constraints, make things more
complicated. It may now be the case that the investor would like to sell an asset that has a low


                                                  10
risk-adjusted return for him, but cannot do so because of short-sales constraints. Alternatively, he
may want to buy more of an asset (because the asset has a high risk-adjusted return) but is unable
to do so because he has already invested all his wealth in that asset and cannot borrow to fund
more investment.
   If such constraints are present, which is arguably the most realistic case, optimal asset holdings
will depend on an investor’s current wealth position and future income process, and shadow rates
will differ across investors with different characteristics. Obviously, it also follows that for a given
investor, risk-adjusted returns will generally differ across assets.
   For instance, assume that the only available assets are risk-free borrowing and lending, at rates
Rb and Rl respectively, with Rb > Rl and the constraints that b ≤ 0 and l ≥ 0. Then, a relatively
poor investor will borrow today, which means that his shadow rate R equals Rb and exceeds Rl —
if he could, he would like to set l < 0, but he cannot do so. Likewise, a relatively rich investor
lends today and has R = Rl < Rb , as he cannot set b > 0.
   Now, suppose we add to this setting the possibility of investing in an income-hedging instru-
ment (IHI) with E[R̃IHI ] = Rl and corr(R̃IHI , Y2 ) < 0. In a world with incomplete markets, we
would typically have EQ [R̃IHI ] > Rl , because consumption tracks income. As a consequence,
if relatively poor investors could borrow at Rl , it would always be worth it for them to do so in
order to buy the IHI. Likewise, relatively rich investors who would otherwise save at Rl would
now instead invest in the IHI. However, as discussed above, in the real world it is very possible
that people are borrowing at a higher rate, such that R = Rb , or they may even be maxed out on
their borrowing, such that R > Rb . In such cases, it is far from clear that EQ [R̃IHI ] > R, so that
the investor may not want to hold the IHI. Similarly, relatively rich investors may have access to
other investment opportunities, such as equity, which offer higher risk-adjusted returns than the
IHI.
   To summarize, in order to determine whether investors will demand an income-linked asset
(or any other asset), we need to know the risk-adjusted return on this asset and compare it to the
investors’ shadow rate. An asset’s risk-adjusted return depends on how helpful it is for consump-
tion smoothing across states, while investors’ shadow rates are driven by their desire to smooth
consumption across states and time. The shadow rates thus depends on investors’ current wealth
position, their expected future income and its riskiness, and the return processes of the other assets


                                                  11
they have access to.

2.2. Example

       An investor starts life with some cash-on-hand in period 1 and will receive a stochastic income
in period 2 with mean 8 and standard deviation 1.5.14 The investor has an isoelastic utility function
with relative risk aversion of 2, and does not discount the future.
       As a benchmark, suppose that he can borrow at rb = 8%, save at rl = 2%, and invest in equity
with an expected return of E(r̃e ) = 6% and a standard deviation of 16%.15
       The top left panel of figure 1 displays the investor’s optimal asset holdings as a function of his
cash-on-hand in period 1. As his goal is to smooth consumption over the two periods, he borrows
if he is relatively poor in period 1, and saves (by investing in equity) if he is relatively rich. Using
the terminology from the previous subsection, the shadow rate equals 8% in the cash-on-hand
region where the investor borrows, then falls to 6% (the mean return on equity) at the point where
the investor starts investing in equity, and then further decreases in cash-on-hand. As rb > E(r̃e ),
the investor does not borrow to invest in equity nor engages in risk-free saving (but he would do
so if he were more risk averse or had very high cash-on-hand).
       The top right panel shows the optimal asset holdings if in addition to the assets from the
benchmark model, the investor has access to an IHI with E(r̃IHI ) = rl = 2%, standard deviation
25%, and a negative return correlation of 0.5 with second-period income. Thus, the IHI tends to
pay off more when the investor experiences a negative income shock and pays less if his income
exceeds expectations. The optimal policy features positive holdings of the IHI at low levels of
cash-on-hand, financed by additional borrowing. As cash-on-hand increases, holdings of the IHI
decrease, and for cash-on-hand levels between 5.5 and 7.3 equal zero. At higher levels of cash-on-
hand, the IHI holdings become positive again, and eventually the investor simultaneously holds
both the IHI and equity. IHI holdings continue to increase in cash-on-hand even for higher levels

  14
     Y2 can take the values {5.4, 8, 10.6} with respective probabilities {1/6, 2/3, 1/6}.
  15
     There is no exogenously imposed borrowing limit, but we require the investor to pay back his debt in period 2.
Given our assumed possible values for income in period 2, this means the investor can borrow at most 5.4/(1 + rb )
(or more if he hedges his income risk). It may seem odd that rb > rl even though there is no default in the model.
However, there are many reasons other than losses from defaults for why borrowing costs exceed lending rates, such
as transaction costs or the cost that lenders face in the screening of potential borrowers (with the goal of lowering
default risk).



                                                        12
of cash-on-hand than depicted in the graph, up to a point at which the variance of cash-on-hand in
the next period cannot be decreased any further by higher IHI holdings. As a consequence, equity
holdings are lower than in the benchmark case.
       In the lower left panel, we instead add the possibility of borrowing through an income-linked
loan (ILL). We assume that this loan features a stochastic interest rate with mean E(r̃ILL ) = rb =
8%, standard deviation 25%, and a positive correlation of 0.5 with income in period 2. Thus,
when taking out an ILL, the investor will need to repay a larger amount if his income is higher
than expected in the next period and a lower amount if his income falls short of expectations. The
figure shows that the investor makes quite extensive use of the ILL. For low levels of current cash-
on-hand, borrowing through the ILL mostly replaces fixed-rate borrowing, but does not lead to
much additional total borrowing.16 For a large intermediate range of cash-on-hand, however, there
is now more borrowing (through the ILL) than there was at the fixed rate. Also, over this range,
the investor takes a larger position in equity as compared with the benchmark case.
       Interestingly, demands for both the IHI in panel 2 and the ILL in panel 3 are non-monotonic
in cash-on-hand. While this may be surprising at first glance, it is a general feature of portfolio
choice problems with short-selling constraints. The reason is that due to these constraints, and the
types of assets available, the shadow rate may stay constant over some ranges of cash-on-hand but
decreases over others, and sometimes discontinuously falls when a constraint is hit.
       The lower right panel in figure 1 displays the welfare gains from having access to one of the two
income-linked assets in this example. Welfare is measured in terms of certainty-equivalent (CE)
consumption, which is defined as the constant consumption stream that would provide the same
lifetime utility as the risky stream the investor actually expects. As can be seen, both assets provide
higher gains for relatively poor investors than for rich ones. Also, over most of the cash-on-hand
range depicted, the ILL provides higher welfare gains over the benchmark case than does the IHI.
Here is some intuition for why this is the case. First consider a case in which the investor has little
cash-on-hand in the first period. When he has access to the income-linked loan, he uses it instead of
risk-free borrowing. Given that the ILL has the same expected cost (as we assume E(r̃ILL ) = rb )
but provides additional insurance benefits as compared with standard borrowing, the ILL clearly is

  16
     The ILL does not fully replace fixed-rate borrowing because that would be too risky, given the imperfect correla-
tion of the interest rate with next period’s income.


                                                         13
a good deal for the investor. As his cash-on-hand increases, he keeps borrowing through the ILL,
but now also invests in equity, which has a slightly lower expected return than the expected interest
rate on the ILL. As such, the insurance provided by the ILL becomes somewhat more “expensive.”
For high cash-on-hand levels, ILL borrowing decreases to zero, so that investors in that range
do not gain from having access to the ILL. IHI holdings, on the other hand, are financed through
expensive borrowing at low cash-on-hand levels, and reduce equity holdings at higher levels. Thus,
intuitively, the (opportunity) cost of holding the IHI is higher than for the ILL. However, note that
IHI holdings do not go to zero as cash-on-hand increases — even for rich investors, hedging next
period’s income risk has some value (though the welfare gains in this example are minuscule).17
Thus, for such investors, the IHI is preferred to the ILL.
    The previous discussion hints at the role of equity in this model: it makes the ILL relatively
more attractive (by lowering its effective cost) and the IHI relatively less attractive (because the
opportunity cost of investing in the IHI is higher than if only risk-free saving were available).
Indeed, if no equity were available in our example, relatively rich investors (with cash-on-hand
above 7.3 in this example), would hold more of the IHI, and borrow less through the ILL than in
the case depicted in figure 1. As a consequence, for such investors the IHI would lead to larger
welfare gains and the ILL to lower welfare gains than shown in the figure.18
    One can also compare the welfare gains from the two assets with the welfare gain that would
result from completely eliminating income risk (that is, the investor is certain to receive an income
of 8 in the second period). With the parameters we assumed, this gain would be much larger
than the ones depicted: for an investor with no cash-on-hand, the gain in CE consumption would
equal 9.2%, while an investor with cash-on-hand of 5 would gain 2.8% and one with cash-on-
hand of 10 about 1.4%. Thus, the assets we introduce reap rather little of the potential gains.
What accounts for this result? Part of the explanation is provided by the imperfect correlation of
the rates of return with the income shock. As table 1 shows, if the rates are perfectly correlated

    17
       This is because the risk-adjusted return on equity declines in equity holdings and thus tends towards rl as cash-
on-hand increases. The risk-adjusted return on IHI decreases as well in holdings, and always remains weakly above
rl , so that optimal IHI holdings do not decline as cash-on-hand goes up.
    18
       The gains in CE consumption from the IHI would average about 0.25% for an investor with cash-on-hand between
10 and 15, for instance, while the welfare gains from ILL would be zero for such an investor, as he would not borrow
through the ILL at all.



                                                          14
with the income shock, the gains provided by the two income-linked assets move significantly
towards the gains that an elimination of income shocks would provide. This is particularly true for
relatively poor investors; rich investors still gain less. Also, the table confirms that for relatively
poor investors, the ILL is more useful while for rich ones, the IHI leads to higher welfare gains.
   Table 1’s lines 5–8 further show the effect more volatile IHI or ILL returns will have on welfare
gains. Clearly, given our earlier discussion of opportunity costs, it is not surprising that these assets
become more useful if their returns are more volatile, as one then has to hold less of them to obtain
the same insurance. However, the table also demonstrates two additional points. First, the welfare
gains from the ILL seem less strongly affected by the increase in volatility than the ones from the
IHI. Second, higher volatility has a relatively larger positive effect on welfare the more strongly
returns and income are correlated. This is intuitive: an asset that is highly volatile but only offers
an imperfect hedge against income risk also adds risk. Thus, even though an increase in volatility
never lowers the welfare gains provided by an asset, it may be that it does not increase welfare
gains or only slightly so.
   In the remainder of the paper, we will show that the main points discussed in this section
carry over to a more realistic life-cycle setting. The demand for income-linked assets, and the
welfare gains achieved by their presence, will be very sensitive to the parameters of the return
process. Also, the welfare gains we find will be rather small for the parametrizations we deem
most realistic (particularly as compared with the hypothetical gain from completely eliminating
all income risk), and income-linked loans generally appear to be more promising than the income-
hedging instrument.


3. Life-Cycle Model

3.1. Setup

   Our strategy in this part is as follows: We start out with a life-cycle portfolio choice model
with realistic borrowing and investment opportunities. We show that this model generates pre-
dictions regarding borrowing and equity holdings that are roughly consistent with the data. We
then introduce new assets into this model, one at a time, and analyze what the demand for these
assets would be, how these would affect the demand for the other assets in the model, and what
the predicted welfare gains from the new assets would be.

                                                   15
       The specific portfolio choice model that we build on is the one by Davis et al. (2006). This
model explicitly accounts for the fact that the typical household has access to unsecured credit,
albeit at a higher interest rate than the lending rate or the expected rate of return on equity. Young
households, who expect to earn higher incomes in the future, typically take advantage of this bor-
rowing opportunity in order to smooth their consumption over time. However, this borrowing
slows down the speed at which households accumulate wealth, and reduces their rate of participa-
tion in equity markets until about age 45. As a consequence, this model generates more realistic
predictions than models that allow for no borrowing or, at the other extreme, borrowing at the
risk-free lending rate. Furthermore, this is accomplished without a need to rely on implausible
preference parameters.
       The basic ingredients of our life-cycle consumption and portfolio choice model are the standard
ones used in this literature. The household life cycle consists of two phases, work and retirement.
Retirement age is assumed to be exogenous, at tR . During working years, log labor income (y˜t )
evolves as the sum of a deterministic component (dt ), a random walk component (η̃t ), and an i.i.d.
transitory shock (ε˜t ):
                                         y˜t = dt + η̃t + ε˜t for t ≤ tR ,                                       (1)

where η˜t = ηt−1 + ν˜t , with ν̃t ∼N (−σν2 /2, σν2 ), and ε˜t ∼N (−σε2 /2, σε2 ). Thus, ∆y˜t is an MA(1)
process. During retirement, it is assumed that the household receives a constant fraction λ of its
permanent income in the last year of work: y˜t = log(λ) + dtR + ηtR for t > tR .
       The household maximizes expected utility over its remaining lifetime,

                                                        T
                                                        X
                                      U(αt ct ) + Et           β s−tU(αs cs ),                                   (2)
                                                       s=t+1


in each period t, where U(·) is an isoelastic (power) utility function with curvature γ, β is the
constant discount factor, and α is a “taste shifter” that we include mainly to account for the drop
in consumption when entering retirement.19 We assume that the household dies with certainty at
age T , and do not include stochastic death or a bequest motive in our model.

  19
    The taste shifter can be seen as a stand-in for a more elaborate model with labor supply. For instance, Cocco and
Gomes (2009) use αt = Lζt , which generates a consumption drop at retirement, because leisure and consumption are
substitutes in the utility function if γ > 1.


                                                        16
   The following expression gives the budget constraint of a household at age t, in its most general
form:


     ct         + et + lt +             IHI         −     bt         −     ILLt          =
    |{z}         |{z} |{z}              | {z }t          |{z}              | {z }
  Consumption    Equity   Saving        Income-         Fixed-rate       Income-linked
                                        hedging         borrowing            loan
                                       instrument

                               Yt        +R̃e,t et−1 + Rl lt−1 + R̃IHI,t IHIt−1 − Rb bt−1 − R̃ILL,t ILLt−1 .
                              |{z}
                              Labor
                              income


   Households can always trade at least three financial assets. They can buy equity (e) with a
stochastic return r̃e (= R̃e,t − 1), save (l) at a net risk-free rate of return rl , and borrow (b) at a
fixed risk-free interest rate rb . We will refer to the version of the model in which only these three
assets are available as the benchmark case.
   We then add an additional financial asset to this model. The first possible addition is an income-
hedging instrument which has a stochastic return r̃IHI that is negatively correlated with the per-
manent income shock the household receives. We vary this correlation, as well as the volatility
of the interest rate, to see how these parameters affect the demand for and the welfare gains from
the asset. The other addition is income-linked loans, which offer another way for the household to
borrow. They are different from risk-free borrowing in that their interest rate r̃ILL is stochastic and
positively correlated with the permanent income shock the household receives. We only consider
assets that correlate with the household’s permanent income shock, because in models such as
ours, the transitory shock is usually smoothed out easily by the household and has very little effect
on welfare or asset allocations.
   We do not impose an exogenous borrowing constraint, but require that households be able to
repay their debt with probability 1 by the time they die, so that bT = ILLT = 0 (this is usually
referred to as the “natural debt limit”). Thus, in our model households never default on their debt.
Another simplifying assumption of the model is that it ignores housing and secured (mortgage)
borrowing. Given that a large proportion of households hold much of their wealth in housing, this
leads the model to overpredict equity holdings. However, apart from that, we do not believe that




                                                               17
omitting housing and mortgages from the analysis has a large influence on our results.20

3.2. Welfare and Insurance Measures

    We employ different measures to determine how “useful” the assets we introduce are for a
household. First, we will analyze what demand the model predicts for these assets (meaning how
much households would hold on average at different stages of the life cycle). However, this does
not tell us much about the welfare benefits from the new assets.
    A better measure (which is standard in the literature) is the gain in certainty-equivalent (CE)
consumption due to the introduction of a new asset. CE consumption is computed as follows: We
first compute the (ex-ante) lifetime expected utility Ū in a given environment. Then, we find the
constant level of consumption, c̄, that would yield the same level of utility:

                           T −1
                                          !                                                 1
                                                                                           1−γ
                           X
                                      t       c̄1−γ                     1−β
                                  β                 = Ū ⇔ c̄ =               (1 − γ)Ū           .              (3)
                           t=0
                                              1−γ                      1 − βT

    Finally, we will also use the measure of partial insurance against permanent shocks proposed
by Kaplan and Violante (forthcoming). Define the insurance coefficient at age t as

                                                              cov(∆cit , νit )
                                                  φνt = 1 −                    ,                                 (4)
                                                                var(νit )

where cit is log consumption, νit the innovation to the permanent component of log income, and
variances and covariances are taken over the cross-section of simulated households at age t. The
interpretation of this coefficient is intuitive: the lower it is, the more a permanent income shock
translates into consumption changes. If φνt = 0, consumption adjusts one-for-one with permanent
income. On the other hand, φνt = 1 would mean “perfect insurance” in the sense that households’
consumption growth is completely independent of the particular shock they experience.

   20
      Mortgages usually come at a lower interest rate than the unsecured borrowing we focus on in our model. However,
except perhaps over the past few years, mortgages are usually taken out with the sole purpose of buying a primary
residence, not to smooth consumption or invest the borrowed money in equity or other assets. Nevertheless, in
section 3.4.4 we consider a calibration in which households have access to low-cost borrowing, for instance through
home-equity loans.




                                                              18
3.3. Calibration and Discretization

       Table 2 gives an overview of the parameter values we use to calibrate the model. For the labor
income process, we use the parameters from Cocco et al. (2005) for high school graduates, which
in this literature have been accepted as somewhat of a standard. The deterministic component of
income, dt , is given by a third-order polynomial in age, the standard deviations of the permanent
and transitory shock are set to 0.103 and 0.272, respectively, and the replacement rate λ equals
0.682. Households enter the model at age 20, retire immediately after age 65, and die with certainty
at age 80. Figure 2 displays the mean income over the life cycle as well as one simulated realization
(to give a sense of the significant extent of income uncertainty households face).
       The preference parameters in our main calibration are set as follows: relative risk aversion γ
(equal to the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for the assumed isoelastic utility
function) is assumed to equal 2. The discount factor β is chosen such that the mean wealth-to-
income ratio of households with a head aged 50 to 59 in the model’s benchmark case where only
equity, unsecured borrowing, and risk-free saving are available, matches its empirical counterpart
of 2.6 (Laibson et al. 2007).21 This yields β = 0.936. The taste shifter α equals 1 before retirement
and 0.9 afterwards; this generates a mean consumption drop at retirement of about 10 percent,
which is consistent with most empirical estimates.
       For asset returns, we make the same assumptions as in the two-period example earlier. We
set the annual return on risk-free saving, rl equal to 2% per year, and the mean equity premium,
E(r̃e ) − rl to 4%, which are customary values in this literature. The standard deviation of equity
returns, σe , is set to 16%. For simplicity, equity returns are assumed to be uncorrelated with labor
income shocks, though relaxing this assumption and setting the correlation equal to an empirically
reasonable value (for instance 0.15, as in Gomes and Michaelides 2005) has very little effect on
our results. The interest rate on risk-free borrowing, rb , is set equal to 8%, which is what Davis
et al. (2006) choose based on empirical data in which they find an interest rate differential between
the risk-free lending rate and the mean rate on unsecured borrowing of approximately 6%, after
adjusting for tax considerations and charge-offs.
       We solve the model using numerical methods. The algorithm is similar to the one used by

  21
     The empirical wealth measure used to obtain this number includes claims on defined contribution pension plans,
but not Social Security wealth or claims on defined benefit plans, which are included in our retirement income measure.

                                                         19
Davis et al. (2006). Depending on the asset market assumptions, there are three or four sources of
randomness in our model: the permanent income shock, the temporary income shock, the equity
return shock, and the income-linked asset rate shock. We discretize the state space using Gaussian
quadrature, with two nodes for the labor income shocks, three for the equity return, and four for
the income-linked asset return. This is not restrictive: using five nodes for each shock does not
qualitatively alter the results (but significantly increases computation time).22 All the results we
report are based on simulation of the life cycle for 5,000 households, using the same random draws
for all parameterizations.

3.3.1. On the Labor Income Process
       Clearly, if one wants to make a quantitatively appropriate assessment of the welfare burden
of labor income risk, and the welfare gains from having access to financial instruments that can
be used to hedge part of that risk, it is important to use a realistic labor income process with
appropriate degrees of uncertainty. We follow the bulk of the existing literature and use a slightly
simplified version of the labor income process introduced by MaCurdy (1982) and Abowd and
Card (1989). This “permanent-transitory” process was popularized in the consumption literature
by Zeldes (1989), Carroll (1997) and Gourinchas and Parker (2002), and has the advantage that
the life-cycle optimization problem can be normalized by permanent income, which reduces the
number of state variables and makes the model’s computational solution easier.
       The main feature of the permanent-transitory income process is that there is no individual het-
erogeneity in income growth rates beyond what is captured in the deterministic component dt ,
which is typically estimated separately for different education levels. However, Guvenen (2007,
2009) has recently argued that this assumption may be overly restrictive, and that allowing for
“heterogeneous income profiles” (HIP) can account for features of the evolution of consumption
inequality and the slopes of consumption profiles for different education groups over the life cycle
that otherwise would be puzzling. In Guvenen’s model, income shocks are less persistent, but

  22
     Results would change, however, if we increased the number of possible income shock realizations a lot, so that
we would have the possibility of a shock in the very far left tail of the lognormal shock distribution. This would affect
the natural debt limit, and in the extreme case of a possible zero-income shock, eliminate borrowing altogether. We
believe that it is realistic to assume that there is a positive lower bound for income shocks, due to the presence of
social safety nets.



                                                          20
individuals only learn about their personal dt over time, through observation of their realized in-
come. While his model intuitively makes a lot of sense, it is very computationally demanding; to
our knowledge, nobody has solved a version that contains more than the risk-free asset. Further-
more, Hryshko (2009) argues that the PSID income data actually reject the HIP model when it is
estimated in first differences, while the model with a permanent component that we use cannot
be rejected. Thus, the question of which process is preferable is far from settled, and to maintain
comparability with the existing portfolio choice literature as well as computational tractability, we
stick with the status quo.
       Even once the form of the income process has been determined, there remain calibration de-
cisions that are crucially important for the extent of uncertainty and the consumption and asset
profiles over the life cycle. In particular, the assumed variances for the permanent and transitory
shocks matter a lot. As mentioned above, we use the estimates for high school graduates by Cocco
et al. (2005). They estimate a variance of the permanent shock of σν2 = 0.0106 and a variance of
the transitory shock of σε2 = 0.0738. These estimates are quite different, for instance, from the
ones by Gourinchas and Parker (2002), who find σν2 = 0.0277 and σε2 = 0.0431, meaning that
the relative volatility of permanent shocks is significantly larger. Feigenbaum and Li (2009) point
out that the estimates strongly depend on the sample length of the PSID data used.23 They find,
using the longest possible sample 1968–2001, σν2 = 0.009 and σε2 = 0.071, which is close to the
numbers we are using.24 Furthermore, they compare what these numbers imply for income uncer-
tainty over various future horizons to the results of a semi-parametric model. While the implied
uncertainty of the permanent-transitory process with the variances they estimate is somewhat too
high, its slope over different horizons seems much more appropriate than if the Gourinchas and
Parker numbers were used.
       Importantly, Cocco et al. (and most other articles in this literature) use a broad definition of la-
bor income to estimate the variances of permanent and transitory income shocks. In particular, the
following additional sources of income are included in the measure of labor income they use: un-

  23
      They note that this fact by itself may be an indication that the persistent shock follows an autoregressive process
and not a random walk.
   24
      Gourinchas and Parker use the data of Carroll and Samwick (1997), which only comprises the PSID years 1981
to 1987. Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout use 1970 to 1992.




                                                          21
employment compensation, workers’ compensation, social security, supplemental social security,
other welfare, child support, and total transfers (mainly help from relatives). Also, the incomes
of both the household head and the spouse (if present) are included. Thus, this income measure
accounts for many implicit and explicit insurance mechanisms other than asset accumulation that
are already available to households.

3.3.2. Correlation between Income-Linked Assets and Income Shocks
       In our assessment of the use and usefulness of the income-linked assets, the assumed correla-
tion between the return on the income-linked asset and an individual’s labor income shock plays
a crucial role. In this subsection, we briefly discuss the correlation that could realistically be
achieved if the return on the income-linked asset were solely based on an occupation-level income
index.25 The empirical question is how much of an individual’s income risk is specific to his oc-
cupation, and how much is completely idiosyncratic? In terms of our model, we can decompose
individual i’s permanent shock νit into a group-specific component ξt ∼N (−σξ2 /2, σξ2 ), and an in-
dependent idiosyncratic component ωit ∼N (−σω2 /2, σω2 ), such that νit = ξt + ωit .26 If we assume
that the return on the income-linked asset (ILA) is perfectly correlated with the group-specific
permanent shock ξt , then the correlation of the return with individual i’s permanent income shock
is given by
                                                                      σξ
                                             corr(r̃ILA,t , νit ) =      .                                        (5)
                                                                      σν
Thus, in addition to the total standard deviation of a person’s permanent income innovations, we
need to know the standard deviation of permanent shocks to an occupation’s income series. In
Davis et al. (2010), we use repeated cross sections of the Current Population Survey to construct
occupation-level components of individual income shocks (after removing predictable components
of individual income) for 17 occupational classifications that have remained largely unchanged for

  25
      In a related exercise, Shiller and Schneider (1998) use PSID data from 1968–1987 to construct group-level income
indices after first identifying occupation-industry groups such that only few people transition from one group to
another over time. Their preferred grouping procedure yields seven distinct groups, such as “Professional/Technical”
or “Agriculture/Labor.” They find that changes in the index of the group an individual belongs to explain 40–50%
of individual nominal income changes at a one-year horizon (and more at a five-year horizon) after controlling for
hedonic variables, while the consumer price index only explains 20%.
   26
      This decomposition is similar to the one used in Cocco et al. (2005), who concentrate on an aggregate component
instead of a group-specific component.



                                                         22
at least 35 years and for which we have a relatively large number of individuals in each survey
year.27 Although these occupations are not necessarily a representative set of occupations for the
U.S. population, we can at least get an estimate of the order of magnitude of occupation-specific
income shocks. If for simplicity we assume that all occupation-level income shocks are permanent
(an assumption that is not too far from the truth in our data — see Davis et al. 2010 for details),
we can get an estimate of σξ simply by looking at the standard deviation of annual changes to the
occupation-level income index. For the 10 occupations in our data for which at least two-thirds
of the individuals are high school graduates but not college graduates, these standard deviations
range from 0.021 (secretaries) to 0.059 (plumbers), with an average of 0.038. Given our σν of
0.103, this average implies a correlation of individual permanent income shocks with the return on
an asset that is based on an occupation-income index of slightly below 0.4.28 This estimate comes
from the best data currently available; yet it is possible that, if better and broader data sources
became available in the future, “finer” indexes could be constructed which would be more highly
correlated with individual income shocks (for instance, “Plumbers located in New England”). We
take a somewhat optimistic baseline assumption, namely a correlation of 0.5. One of the main
results from our analysis, however, will be how sensitive the usefulness of income-linked assets is
to this correlation.

3.4. Results
3.4.1. Benchmark Case
    In the benchmark case, households can borrow at a rate rb , and invest either in the risk-free
asset with a fixed return rl or in equity with a stochastic return r̃e . The life-cycle profiles, displayed
in figure 3, mirror the ones in Davis et al. (2006): households borrow substantial amounts while

   27
      These occupations are: Accountants and Auditors; Electrical Engineers; Registered Nurses; Elementary School
Teachers; Cashiers; Secretaries; Police and Detectives; Waiters and Waitresses; Cooks; Janitors and Cleaners; Auto
Mechanics; Carpenters; Electricians; Plumbers; Machinists; Welders and Cutters; and Truck Drivers.
   28
      Ideally, one would also want to estimate σν separately by occupation, rather than simply taking the estimate for
all high school graduates. Unfortunately, the PSID does not contain a large enough number of observations to do that.
However, Campbell et al. (2001) split households into 36 different industry-education cells, and estimate separate labor
income profiles for each cell. The four industries that are most relevant for our occupations (which coincidentally have
the largest cell sizes in the PSID), are the following (with Campbell et al.’s estimate of the permanent shock standard
deviation for high school graduates in the industry in brackets): Manufacturing (0.068), Construction (0.120), Trade
(0.106) and Transportation (0.067). The differences in the magnitude of the permanent shocks is in accordance with
what we find on the occupation level: occupations that are mainly active in construction or trade tend to have a higher
standard deviation of earnings changes than the ones in manufacturing and transportation.

                                                          23
they are young (on average, 50% of their annual income between ages 20 and 30)29 and only start
making substantial investments in the stock market after age 35. The predicted equity market
participation rate starts out around 20% for young households and increases through mid age,
reaching 95% at age 45. Average equity holdings at retirement amount to about three times annual
income; this is about twice as high as in the data. However, this is arguably not a major failing
of the model, as the model does not feature home equity, which in reality is a risky asset held
by most households. Other features of the model are that it predicts practically no borrowing
for households older than 40 years, and no significant bond holdings at any age. Both of these
predictions are somewhat at odds with reality; this may be due to liquidity motives that are missing
from the model.30 (In section 3.4.4, we will consider a version of our model in which households
are forced to invest at least 50% of their financial wealth in bonds.) Another possible shortcoming
of the model is that it produces the consumption hump that is typically observed in empirical data
only for median consumption, while mean consumption increases until retirement.31
       For our benchmark case, CE consumption equals 19,638 USD.32 The partial insurance coeffi-
cient averages 0.09 over the life cycle. This is significantly lower than what Kaplan and Violante
(forthcoming) find in their model, which features more redistributive social security, and is even
further below the baseline insurance coefficients that Blundell et al. (2008) estimate in empiri-
cal data. This means that we may be overestimating the welfare cost of income uncertainty and
therefore also the potential gain that new assets would be able to provide. On the other hand, the
main insurance coefficients reported by Blundell et al. and used as a benchmark by Kaplan and
Violante may give too optimistic a view of “true” insurance, as these coefficients are computed
only from nondurable consumption. However, households may respond to income shocks largely
by changing their expenditures on durables, which then affects the utility flows they get from these

  29
      This is somewhat higher than the average unsecured borrowing (credit card balances plus installment loans and
other unsecured borrowing) as a percentage of income reported in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which
was 28% for below-30-year olds in 1995 and 1998 (Davis et al. 2006). However, Zinman (2009) finds that the SCF
misses around one-half of revolving debt.
   30
      The continued credit card borrowing might also be due to consumers having self-control problems, as in Laibson
et al. (2007).
   31
      Mean consumption is so much higher than median consumption in our model because some of our households
get very rich thanks to positive income and asset return shocks. It may be that the introduction of flexible labor supply
would reduce this disparity.
   32
      All dollar amounts are expressed in 1992 dollars.



                                                          24
goods.33
       The welfare cost to households imposed by income shocks is fairly high in our model: if
there were no life-cycle income shocks, but all asset return characteristics remained the same, CE
consumption would equal 22,861 USD, or 16.4% more.34 Thus, the ex-ante cost of income shocks
is high, and of a similar order of magnitude as what is found in the quantitative macro literature
discussed earlier. Thus, one would hope that introducing financial assets for households to hedge
the risk of these income shocks could yield high welfare gains.35

3.4.2. Income-Hedging Instrument
       Our baseline assumption for the mean return on the IHI available to a household is that it is
equal to the rate on risk-free bonds, or “actuarially fair”: E(r̃IHI ) = rl . We vary the correlation
of the return with the household’s permanent income shock from –0.25 to –1, taking –0.5 as our
baseline, using the empirical evidence discussed in section 3.3.2 as a guide. The baseline for
the standard deviation of returns is 0.5, meaning that the return on the IHI is much more volatile
than the return on equity. This may seem excessive, but given that the IHI is more useful to the
household if its return is more volatile (at least up to some point), and as in principle this asset
could be created to be arbitrarily volatile, we chose this high volatility as our benchmark.36
       Table 3 summarizes the results, while figure 4 shows the mean life-cycle holdings of the IHI,
equity, and unsecured borrowing (denoted by “CC”, which stands for “credit cards”) for the base-
line case and also for two cases with higher (absolute) correlation.37
       Our first finding is that households would not have high demand for the baseline IHI. As the top
left panel of figure 4 shows, mean holdings of the IHI never go much above 5,000 USD, and as the
top right and lower left panels show, this investment is financed almost exclusively by a reduction
in equity holdings, not by additional borrowing. As a consequence, young households hold only

  33
      Blundell et al. present some evidence that is consistent with this idea. As part of their sensitivity analyses, they
consider a measure of total expenditure and find that, at least for low-wealth households, there appears to be much less
(indeed, no) insurance against permanent shocks in this case than when only nondurable consumption is considered.
   34
      In this counterfactual, we do not alter the income shocks in the first period of the working life, which can be seen
as a “fixed effect,” for instance due to inherent differences in ability, and could never be insured against in our model.
   35
      Meanwhile, the welfare gain of having access to stocks is fairly modest in this model: without equity, CE con-
sumption equals 19,424 USD, and thus only 1.1% less than in the benchmark with equity.
   36
      The volatile version of our IHI also approximates a classical insurance contract, which pays off at all only in a
small number of states of the world.
   37
      We do not display the case with lower correlation (ρ = −0.25) because in this case there are no IHI holdings.


                                                           25
very little of the IHI (less than half the households hold any of this asset until age 33). Mean IHI
holdings peak around age 50, then slowly decline as households move towards retirement, while
equity holdings keep increasing until retirement.
       The bottom right panel of the figure shows how the presence of the IHI affects the degree of
partial insurance against permanent income shocks. Particularly for young households, which are
not insured against shocks to permanent income, the degree of insurance is virtually unchanged
by the availability of the baseline IHI.38 Even for older households, the increase in the degree of
insurance is rather small.
       Next, the figure shows how strongly the demand for the IHI, as well as the impact on borrowing
and equity holdings, depend on the correlation between the IHI return and the permanent income
shock. With ρ = −0.75, demand for the IHI is higher, but still starts out relatively low for younger
households. It is financed by a combination of reduced equity holdings and additional borrowing.
On the other hand, with ρ = −1, households start holding high amounts of the IHI much earlier in
the life cycle, and borrow massively higher amounts — much more than what is needed to finance
their IHI holdings. This is because there is now less need for precautionary wealth, and households
can consume more in anticipation of higher future income. As the bottom right panel shows, in
this case insurance against the permanent income shock is much improved, even though it is still
only around 0.5 on average over the working life.
       IHI return volatility matters greatly for mean holdings of the IHI as well as the effect on equity
holdings and borrowing.39 For the baseline correlation of –0.5, for example, there are practically
no IHI holdings when the standard deviation of IHI returns is only 0.3 (nobody invests in the
IHI until age 50; the maximum participation rate is 5%, right before retirement), and mean IHI
holdings also decrease for the other assumed correlations. Also, while with perfect correlation
and volatility 0.5, households’ average borrowing over the life cycle is above 25,000 USD, with
volatility 0.3 the corresponding number is below 4,000 USD. The partial insurance coefficients are
also very significantly reduced compared to the case with more volatile IHI returns.

  38
      It may be surprising that the insurance coefficient is slightly negative for young households in the benchmark.
Kaplan and Violante (forthcoming) explain that this is due to the interaction of permanent and transitory shocks in
this model (see their footnote 30).
   39
      This can be seen by comparing lines 5–7 of table 3 to lines 1–3.




                                                        26
       Figure 5 displays the welfare gains over the benchmark case (in percent of CE consumption)
that having access to the IHI would generate for consumers. The first thing one notes is how
strongly the gains depend on the correlation between the IHI return and the permanent shock, as
well as the volatility of the IHI return. Welfare gains are convex in the strength of the correlation.40
The welfare gains are tiny (below 0.1%) if the correlation is 0.5 or less, while if the correlation is
perfect and volatility high, the gain reaches almost 2.4% (with low volatility, on the other hand,
the corresponding gain is only 0.3%).
       Overall, the results in this section indicate that unless the IHI had volatile returns that are
highly correlated with a household’s permanent income shock, the welfare gains it generates are
very small. As in the two-period model in section 2, the reason behind this surprising finding
lies in households’ effective cost of funds — the borrowing costs for young households and the
opportunity costs due to the possibility of investing in equity for older households.

3.4.3. Income-Linked Loans
       For the ILL, our baseline assumption is that the mean interest rate a borrower needs to pay
on it is the same as for other unsecured (“credit card”) borrowing: E(r̃ILL ) = rb . As in the
previous section, we again make different assumptions about the volatility of the interest rate and
its correlation with the household’s permanent income shocks. Our baseline assumption is to set
both parameters equal to 0.5.
       Figure 6 shows mean borrowing through the ILL, equity holdings, and other borrowing un-
der this baseline assumption as well as for higher correlations. The first panel shows that mean
ILL borrowing increases by age for young households, then peaks between ages 30 and 35, and
decreases towards retirement. The higher the correlation between the rate on the ILL and the
permanent income shock, the more extensively households borrow through the ILL.
       It is interesting to consider the effect that the presence of the ILL has on other borrowing. The
bottom left panel shows that when ρ = 0.5, ILL borrowing reduces other borrowing early in the
life cycle, as one would expect, given that the ILL clearly has a lower risk-adjusted cost. What
may be more surprising at first is that as ρ increases, households massively increase their fixed-rate
borrowing, even though they also engage in a lot of borrowing through the ILL. This is because the

  40
       They are also convex in the square of the correlation.


                                                            27
uncertainty about future resources is now much smaller, so that young households want to borrow
to consume from their future (higher) income. What they do not consume is invested in equity,
so that mean equity holdings are higher for young households when ILL borrowing is available,
while equity holdings are lower for households that are approaching retirement, as they had less
need to accumulate precautionary wealth.
    The bottom right panel displays the insurance coefficients, and we see that especially for young
households, the ILL is much better at improving insurance than the IHI discussed in the previous
subsection. With ρ = 1, households approach perfect insurance, especially in the early parts of the
life cycle.
    Lines 12–15 in table 3 show what happens to mean asset holdings (and welfare gains) if the
ILL interest rate is less volatile (0.3 instead of 0.5). It is interesting to note that the effect of
lowering volatility on mean ILL borrowing does not go in the same direction for all assumed
correlations. For some ρ, mean ILL borrowing increases when the ILL return volatility decreases
(because households needs to borrow more through the ILL to get the same degree of insurance)
while at other times mean ILL borrowing decreases (because the ILL is less attractive when its
volatility is lower). The effects on equity holdings are small, while other borrowing is reduced.
    The welfare gains from different types of ILL are shown in figure 7. As was the case for
the IHI, these are again convex in the strength of the correlation of rates and permanent income
shocks. However, the gains are now much higher, and also less dependent on highly volatile rates.
For the baseline case of a correlation of 0.5, the welfare gain from ILL is 1.36% if volatility is 0.5
and 0.95% if volatility is 0.3. This would be quite a substantial welfare gain.

3.4.4. Alternative Calibrations
    In this subsection, we investigate further what is driving the differences in welfare gains be-
tween the two income-linked assets we consider, and how sensitive our results are to the assumed
risk aversion of agents. A summary of the results is provided in table 4.

Equity returns and borrowing rates. One shortcoming of our benchmark model is that it does not
match empirically observed bond holdings — indeed, it predicts practically no bond holdings at
all, because equity is so much more attractive. This is a common feature of portfolio choice models



                                                 28
such as the one we use.41 One possible explanation for the lack of demand for bonds is that our
model ignores potential liquidity benefits to holding the risk-free asset, or that participation costs
exist in equity markets that we have not modeled. In our model, the presence of equity makes
the IHI relatively less attractive (because it has to “compete” with equity to enter households’
portfolio) while the ILL is made relatively more attractive (because what a household borrows
through an ILL in order to insure against income fluctuations can be invested in a high return
asset). As a consequence, our model may be understating the gains from the IHI and overstating
the gains from the ILL.
       To address this issue, we solve a version of the model in which households are required to
invest at least as much money in bonds as they invest in equity, which will make the portfolios
generated by our model look more like what is observed empirically. For our calibration, this
assumption is equivalent to replacing equity by a 50/50 stock-bond fund with expected return
of 0.5 · (E(r̃e ) + rl ) and standard deviation 0.5 · σe . We again choose β such as to match the
mean wealth-to-income ratio before retirement, which yields β = 0.947. As compared with the
benchmark with no income-linked assets, the gain in CE consumption from having access to the
baseline IHI with correlation –0.5 and volatility 0.5 is now 0.33% and thus, as expected, higher
than if no bond holdings are required. In a related exercise that is more favorable to the IHI,
we assume that households could invest in 50/50 stock-bond funds and in 50/50 stock-IHI funds
(which assumes that households would view the IHI as a direct substitute for bonds in terms of
liquidity advantages). The predicted welfare gain from having access to such a vehicle would be
0.71%. Meanwhile, the baseline ILL now produces a welfare gain of only 0.85%, instead of the
1.36% without required bond holdings. Thus, even though the ILL is still more attractive than
the IHI, the differential welfare gain is now significantly smaller than when no bond holdings are
required.
       Next, we consider what would happen if the interest rate wedge between borrowing and lending
were smaller, and solve a model with rb = 0.05. This may be applicable if households have access
to funding that is cheaper than credit card borrowing—for instance, through home equity loans.

  41
    Some papers in the literature generate positive bond holdings, particularly later in the life cycle, by assuming a
much higher risk aversion than we do. However, this leads them to predict too much wealth accumulation as compared
with U.S. data.



                                                         29
As borrowing becomes cheaper, the gains from both income-linked assets increase: the baseline
IHI now produces a welfare gain of 0.8% while for the baseline ILL with E(r̃ILL ) = 0.05 the gain
is a very substantial 3.04%. If the mean rate on the ILL is instead assumed to equal 0.08 as before,
while rb = 0.05, the ILL produces a welfare gain of 0.52%. Thus, the size of the borrowing wedge
is an important determinant of the absolute size of the predicted welfare gain, and if the mean rate
on the ILL is much above the rate on other borrowing possibilities the household has access to, the
usefulness of the ILL is reduced. In this example, in fact, the IHI now generates a higher welfare
gain than the ILL. However, we think that this case is less realistic than our benchmark case where
rb = E(r̃ILL ) = 0.08, because in reality most household borrowing other than through mortgages
occurs at a rate significantly above the return on risk-free saving.

Preferences. We additionally quantify the sensitivity of our results to the assumed coefficient of
relative risk aversion. Our baseline assumption is that this coefficient equals 2, which seems rea-
sonable from micro studies of consumption behavior, and also corresponds to the most commonly
made assumption in macro models. However, the finance literature often assumes a much higher
risk aversion, in order to justify the observed equity premium. It is important to point out here
that in life-cycle portfolio choice models such as the one used in this paper, equity holdings usu-
ally increase in risk aversion over the range of risk aversion parameters that are at least somewhat
plausible (say, from 2 to 8). This is because more risk averse individuals accumulate more pre-
cautionary wealth to self-insure against their labor income fluctuations, and this more than offsets
their lower willingness to invest in risky assets at any given wealth level. Hence, if we want to
match the empirically observed wealth-to-income ratio (or the observed debt holdings; see Davis
et al. 2006), we need to lower the discount factor when increasing the coefficient of relative risk
aversion.
   Here, we check what happens if we increase the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ from 2
to 3. For the benchmark case without income-linked assets, we need to lower the discount factor
β to 0.920 in order to match our target wealth-to-income ratio before retirement. In this case, the
welfare gain from our baseline IHI (with correlation –0.5 and volatility 0.5) is now 0.42%, which
is significantly larger than the 0.04% in the case of γ = 2, but still rather small. For the ILL, the
effects are again more dramatic. The baseline ILL now produces a welfare gain of 2.42%, which


                                                 30
is definitely very substantial for the standards of such models. Nevertheless, the gains from the
income-linked assets are still far below the welfare cost of labor income risk, which is 27.4% of
certainty-equivalent consumption if γ = 3.


4. Discussion

   In our view, the most important results from the previous section can be summarized as fol-
lows: First, the potential use and usefulness of both income-linked assets strongly depends on the
characteristics of the assumed return process. For both assets, welfare gains are convex in the
assumed correlation between rates and permanent income shocks. Furthermore, the welfare gains
from the income-hedging instrument are very sensitive to the assumed volatility of the return,
while the same is the case in less extreme form for income-linked loans.
   Second, income-linked loans usually generate higher welfare gains than the income-hedging
instrument. The extent of the difference is sensitive to the assumptions about other assets the
households can invest in. If an asset with high expected return (such as equity) is available, the
welfare gains from income-linked loans become relatively larger while those from income-hedging
instruments become smaller.
   Third, under some assumptions, namely a low borrowing wedge (a rate on borrowing that is
not much higher than the risk-free lending rate) or high risk aversion, the income-linked assets can
generate very substantial welfare gains, in excess of 2% of certainty-equivalent consumption.
   Our fourth and final main finding is that none of the assets we consider generate a welfare gain
that comes close to the 16.4 percent of certainty-equivalent consumption that would be attained
under our baseline parameter assumptions if life-cycle income risk were completely eliminated.
   To understand these results, we reemphasize the intuition from the earlier two-period model:
in a world where borrowing rates are higher than returns on saving, risk management is expensive,
especially if a relatively poor household has to pay money upfront to insure against a future con-
tingency (this is the case for the income-hedging instrument, but not income-linked loans). It may
then not be worth it to do so, especially if insurance is imperfect. And even if one does not need
to borrow, putting money in a risk management asset may be inferior to just investing it in other
risky assets, such as equity.
   Households would not eliminate all income risk even if the correlation between the returns on

                                                31
the income-linked asset and income shocks were perfect. This might seem surprising in light of
our assumption that the assets are fairly priced. However, in our constrained life-cycle framework,
actuarial fairness must be considered relative to the household’s cost of funds. Suppose that there
is an income-hedging instrument perfectly correlated with an investor’s labor income, and with an
expected return equal to the riskless rate. If the investor could borrow at the riskless rate, then he
would perfectly hedge away his income risk, at no cost. But if the investor needs to use a credit
card and pays a much higher interest rate, then the insurance requires a costly investment and is
no longer actuarially fair to this investor. To be sure, the investor would prefer the income hedging
instrument to the riskless asset, but an investor that is borrowing on a credit card should not invest
in the riskless asset anyway.
       A frequently heard comment is that if people were as concerned with labor income risk as in
our model, and as rational and sophisticated as we assume them to be, they would hedge their
income risk by shorting an equity index of the industry they work in, or even the their employer’s
stock. There are different reasons for why such a strategy is not as appealing as one might think.
First, it is costly to take short positions, as one needs to post money in a margin account, and this
has an opportunity cost to the investor (in particular if he needs to borrow). Second, and perhaps
more surprisingly, the data on the correlation between industry stock returns and labor income
shocks to workers in this same industry reveal that the correlation is often near zero and unstable
over time (Davis et al. 2010). Thus, even ignoring the costs of taking short positions, such a
strategy might not provide a good hedge against labor income shocks.42
       Another important issue is how the proposed income-linked instruments relate to currently
existing social insurance mechanisms such as unemployment and disability insurance, or the pos-
sibility of declaring bankruptcy to clear one’s debt after a negative shock. Given these mechanisms,
are income-linked assets even needed? One answer is that the existing institutions provide insur-
ance only temporarily (in the case of unemployment insurance) or against extreme negative shocks
(disability insurance). Likewise, bankruptcy is very costly for defaulting households (in terms of

  42
     The correlation between income shocks and stock returns may be more robustly positive at the firm level (it
certainly is for most executives), but shorting the stock of one’s own company may be undesirable for other reasons,
such as the possibility of being accused of insider trading. Also, a significant fraction of the workforce does not work
for publicly traded companies.




                                                          32
legal costs as well as limited access to credit in the future) such that the option to default on one’s
debt after an adverse income shock usually will only be exercised after an extreme negative in-
come shock, and thus may provide only a moderate ex-ante welfare gain. Income-linked assets,
on the other hand, would facilitate insurance against less extreme shocks, potentially at a low cost.
       In evaluating income-linked assets, using a model with realistic borrowing and investment
opportunities for the households is crucial. If one instead relied on a simpler model in which there
is only one other asset, which households can go long or short in, and still assumed that the income-
linked assets were priced fairly, one would get very different results. In particular, there would
be no difference between income-linked loans and income-hedging instruments, return volatility
would not matter, and such a model would predict large welfare gains. For instance, if households
could borrow and save at 2%, and the mean return on the income-linked asset were also 2% and
had a correlation of 0.5 with permanent income shocks, the predicted welfare gains would exceed
4%.


5. Conclusion

       Income-linked assets such as the ones we consider in this paper have the potential to be useful
for households’ income risk management, but as we have emphasized, the devil is in the details.
Folding the insurance against negative income shocks into a loan product makes it more useful to
households than letting them purchase the insurance directly.43 Furthermore, the correlation of the
income-linked assets with households’ permanent income shocks is a crucial determinant of the
predicted size of the welfare gains.
       This latter point highlights the importance of measurement issues, a point made also by Shiller
(2003). To make good use of financial instruments such as the ones we have considered, one
must be able to precisely measure both the risks households face and the covariance of those risks
with other risky financial assets. This remains a challenge, and arguably it is this problem that
has prevented financial intermediaries from offering income-linked assets. Measuring the interest-
rate risk exposure of a portfolio of financial assets is much easier than measuring the exposure of

  43
    Incidentally, we believe that the intuition from our model likely carries over to insurance against house price risk:
the welfare gains from folding such insurance directly into mortgage contracts (for instance, by reducing the mortgage
principal if a — preferably local — house price index decreases) may be much larger than what households gain from
having access to a housing derivatives market in which they can purchase such insurance separately.

                                                          33
individual household income. But the dramatic improvements in computing power and the wide
availability of large disaggregated datasets mean that these challenges can be overcome.
   Our model focuses on the risk management benefits that income-linked assets would provide,
taking the riskiness of household income as given. Shiller (2003) discusses some additional bene-
fits that these instruments might have which are not part of our analysis. First, the prices of these
instruments (for instance, the borrowing rates on income-linked loans that the market offers to dif-
ferent professions) might aggregate and reveal information which would facilitate more effective
decision making—for instance, when choosing which occupation to enter. Second, the availability
of such instruments might encourage occupational choices that may be beneficial for society but
(in the absence of insurance) perceived as too risky by an individual (such as highly specialized
areas of science which may be hit or miss). Analyzing the potential benefits from these channels
could be a fruitful avenue for future research.

References
Abowd, J. M., Card, D., 1989. On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours Changes.
  Econometrica 57 (2), 411–445.

Attanasio, O., Davis, S. J., 1996. Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Consumption.
  Journal of Political Economy 104 (6), 1227–1262.

Bertaut, C. C., Haliassos, M., 1997. Precautionary Portfolio Behavior from a Life-Cycle Perspec-
  tive. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21 (8-9), 1511–1542.

Blundell, R., Pistaferri, L., Preston, I., 2008. Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 98 (5), 1887–1921.

Blundell, R., Preston, I., 1998. Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 113 (2), 603–640.

Campbell, J. Y., Cocco, J. F., Gomes, F. J., Maenhout, P. J., 2001. Investing Retirement Wealth: A
  Life-Cycle Model. In: Campbell, J. Y., Feldstein, M. (Eds.), Risk Aspects of Investment-Based
  Social Security Reform. University Of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 439–473.

Carroll, C. D., 1997. Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 112 (1), 1–55.

Carroll, C. D., Samwick, A. A., 1997. The Nature of Precautionary Wealth. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 40 (1), 41–71.

Cocco, J. F., Gomes, F. J., 2009. Longevity Risk, Retirement Savings, and Financial Innovation.
  Working Paper. Available at http://faculty.london.edu/fgomes/cg.pdf.

                                                  34
Cocco, J. F., Gomes, F. J., Maenhout, P. J., 2005. Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the Life
  Cycle. Review of Financial Studies 18 (2), 491–533.

Cochrane, J. H., 1991. A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance. Journal of Political Economy
  99 (5), 957–976.

Davis, S. J., Fuster, A., Willen, P. S., 2010. Occupation-Level Income Shocks and Asset Returns:
  Covariance Structure and Portfolio Choice Implications. Work in progress.

Davis, S. J., Kubler, F., Willen, P., 2006. Borrowing Costs and the Demand for Equity over the
  Life Cycle. The Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (2), 348–362.

De Jong, F., Driessen, J., Van Hemert, O., 2008. Hedging House Price Risk: Portfolio Choice With
  Housing Futures. Working Paper. Available at http://ssrn.com/paper=740364.

Feigenbaum, J., Li, G., 2009. A Semiparametric Characterization of Income Uncertainty over the
  Lifecycle. Working Paper.

Gomes, F., Michaelides, A., 2005. Optimal Life-Cycle Asset Allocation: Understanding the Em-
  pirical Evidence. Journal of Finance 60 (2), 869–904.

Gomes, F. J., Kotlikoff, L. J., Viceira, L. M., 2007. The Excess Burden of Government Indecision.
  NBER Working Paper No. 12859.

Gomes, F. J., Kotlikoff, L. J., Viceira, L. M., 2008. Optimal Life-Cycle Investing with Flexible
  Labor Supply: A Welfare Analysis of Life-Cycle Funds. American Economic Review 98 (2),
  297–303.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Parker, J. A., 2002. Consumption over the Life Cycle. Econometrica 70 (1),
  47–89.

Guvenen, F., 2007. Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very Persistent?
  American Economic Review 97 (3), 687–712.

Guvenen, F., 2009. An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes. Review of Economic
  Dynamics 12 (1), 58–79.

Hayashi, F., Altonji, J., Kotlikoff, L., 1996. Risk-Sharing Between and Within Families. Econo-
  metrica 64 (2), 261–294.

He, H., Pearson, N. D., 1991. Consumption and Portfolio Policies with Incomplete Markets and
  Short-Sales Constraints: the Finite-Dimensional Case. Mathematical Finance 1 (3), 1–10.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., Violante, G. L., 2008a. Insurance and Opportunities: A Welfare
  Analysis of Labor Market Risk. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (3), 501–525.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., Violante, G. L., 2008b. The Macroeconomic Implications of Rising
  Wage Inequality in the United States. NBER Working Paper No. 14052.



                                               35
Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., Violante, G. L., 2009. Quantitative Macroeconomics with Hetero-
  geneous Households. Annual Review of Economics 1, 319–354.

Hryshko, D., 2009. RIP to HIP: The Data Reject Heterogeneous Labor Income Profiles. Working
  Paper.

Kaplan, G., Violante, G. L., forthcoming. How Much Consumption Insurance Beyond Self-
  Insurance? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Krueger, D., Perri, F., 2006. Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence
  and Theory. Review of Economic Studies 73 (1), 163–193.

Laibson, D., Repetto, A., Tobacman, J., 2007. Estimating Discount Functions with Consumption
  Choices over the Lifecycle. NBER Working Paper No. 13314.

MaCurdy, T. E., 1982. The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Structure of Earnings
 in a Longitudinal Data Analysis. Journal of Econometrics 18 (1), 83–114.

Pijoan-Mas, J., 2006. Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours? Review of Economic
   Dynamics 9 (2), 326–352.

Shiller, R. J., 1993. Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s Largest Eco-
  nomic Risks. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Shiller, R. J., 2003. The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st Century. Princeton University
  Press, Princeton, NJ.

Shiller, R. J., Schneider, R., 1998. Labor Income Indices Designed for Use in Contracts Promoting
  Income Risk Management. Review of Income and Wealth 44 (2), 163.

Storesletten, K., Telmer, C. I., Yaron, A., 2004. Consumption and Risk Sharing over the Life
  Cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics 51 (3), 609–633.

Willen, P., Kubler, F., 2006. Collateralized Borrowing and Life-Cycle Portfolio Choice. NBER
 Working Paper No. 12309.

Zeldes, S. P., 1989. Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from Certainty
  Equivalence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (2), 275–298.

Zinman, J., 2009. Where is the Missing Credit Card Debt? Clues and Implications. Review of
  Income and Wealth 55 (2), 249–265.




                                               36
                                                Figure 1: Optimal Asset Holdings and Welfare Gains in Two-Period Model

                                                              Benchmark                                                                                                  With Income-Hedging Instrument
                                   4                                                                                                                   4

                                   3                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Equity ց
                                   2                                                                                                                   2
      Asset holding in period 1




                                                                                                    Asset holding in period 1
                                                                                                                                                               ւ Income-hedging          instr.
                                   1                                           տ Equity                                                                1                                  ↓

                                   0                                                                                                                   0

                                  -1                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                                                             տ Borrowing
                                  -2              տ Borrowing                                                                                         -2

                                  -3                                                                                                                   -3

                                  -4                                                                                                                  -4
                                       0    2    4       6        8       10      12      14   16                                                          0    2        4      6        8       10     12        14   16
                                                             Cash-on-hand                                                                                                           Cash-on-hand

                                                     With Income-Linked Loan                                                                                        Welfare Gains from the Income-Linked Assets
                                   4                                                                                                                  2.5

                                   3                                                                Gain in certainty-equivalent consumption (in %)
                                                                                                                                                       2
                                   2
      Asset holding in period 1




                                   1                             տ Equity                                                                             1.5

                                                                                                                                                                     ւ ILL
                                   0
                                                                                                                                                       1
                                           տ Borrowing
                                  -1
                                                                 տ Income-linked       loan                                                           0.5
                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                                ւ IHI
                                  -3                                                                                                                   0

                                  -4
                                       0    2    4       6        8       10      12      14   16                                                          0    2        4      6        8       10     12        14   16
                                                             Cash-on-hand                                                                                                           Cash-on-hand




Notes: “Cash-on-hand” refers to the sum of wealth and income available to the investor in period 1. Income in period
2 can take the values {5.4, 8, 10.6} with respective probabilities {1/6, 2/3, 1/6}.




                                                                                                37
                                                       Figure 2: Income Process: Mean Profile and One Realization

                                                                    Income over the Life Cycle (Thousands of 1992 USD)
                                                        45


                                                        40


                                                        35                                                                  ← One      realization

                                                        30
                                                                                                                                            ←Mean
                                                        25


                                                        20


                                                        15


                                                        10
                                                          20            30           40          50                               60          70           80
                                                                                                 age



Notes: Based on income profiles for high school graduates estimated by Cocco et al. (2005).




                                                             Figure 3: Life-Cycle Profiles in Benchmark Model

                                     Investment and Borrowing over the Life Cycle (means)                                               Income and Consumption over the Life Cycle
                               80                                                                                         32

                               70                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                 Mean
                               60                                                                                         28     Income ց
                                                                                                  Thousands of 1992 USD
      Thousands of 1992 USD




                               50                                                                                         26                        ← Mean   Cons.
                               40
                                                                                                                          24
                               30                                                                                                              տ Median      Cons.
                                                                                                                          22
                               20                    տ Equity
                                                                                                                          20
                               10
                                                                                                                          18
                                0
                                                                                                                          16
                              -10             տ Borrowing
                                                                                                                          14
                                20      30        40         50         60         70       80                              20         30          40      50         60        70   80
                                                             age                                                                                           age




                                                                                             38
   Figure 4: Income-Hedging Instrument: Asset Holdings and Insurance Coefficients for Different Correlations

                                              IHI holdings over the life cycle (means)                                                          Equity holdings over the life cycle (means)
                              30                                                                                           80

                                                 ρ = −1 ր                                                                  70
                              25
                                                                                                                                                      benchmark →
                                                                                                                           60




                                                                                                   Thousands of 1992 USD
      Thousands of 1992 USD




                              20
                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                                           ↑ ρ = −0.5
                              15                                                                                           40
                                                      տρ    = −0.75                                                                                                        ↑ ρ = −0.75
                                                                                                                           30
                              10
                                                                                                                           20
                               5                                                                                                                                           ←ρ   = −1
                                                      տρ    = −0.5                                                         10

                              0                                                                                             0

                               20        30          40        50           60         70     80                             20            30           40        50         60         70          80
                                                               age                                                                                                age
                                              CC borrowing over the life cycle (means)                                            Insurance coefficients (against perm. shocks) during working life
                              60
                                                                                                                            1

                              50
                                                                                                                           0.8
      Thousands of 1992 USD




                                                                                                   Insurance coefficient




                              40
                                                            ←ρ   = −1                                                      0.6

                              30
                                                                                                                                           ρ = −1 ց
                                                                                                                           0.4
                              20
                                                 ←ρ    = −0.75                                                             0.2     ρ = −0.75 ց
                              10                                                                                                                                                   տ benchmark
                                    ρ = −0.5 ↑                                                                                        ρ = −0.5 →
                                                                                                                            0
                                    =benchmark
                              0
                               20        30          40         50          60           70   80                             20       25         30     35      40         45     50     55   60   65
                                                                age                                                                                                  age




Notes: ρ denotes the correlation of the rate of return on the IHI with the permanent shock to labor income. All other
parameters are as in the “Baseline” column of table 2. “Benchmark” refers to the case without IHI.




                                                                                               39
                     Figure 5: Income-Hedging Instrument: Welfare Gains (over Benchmark)

                                                                          3
                              Gain in CE consumption (% over Benchmark)




                                                                          2




                                                                          1
                                                                                              σ = 0.5 ց

                                                                                                         σ = 0.3 ց
                                                                          0


                                                                          -0.25   -0.5                 -0.75         -1
                                                                                         Correlation




Notes: “Correlation” stands for the correlation of the rate of return on the IHI with the permanent shock to labor
income, and σ denotes the volatility of the rate of return on the IHI.




                                                                                         40
             Figure 6: Income-Linked Loans: Asset Holdings and Insurance Coefficients for Different Correlations

                                            ILL borrowing over the life cycle (means)                                                            Equity holdings over the life cycle (means)
                              80                                                                                           80

                              70                                                                                           70

                              60                                                                                           60




                                                                                                  Thousands of 1992 USD
      Thousands of 1992 USD




                              50                     ρ = 1ր                                                                50

                              40                                                                                           40

                              30                                                                                           30           ρ = 1ց
                                                     ρ = 0.75 ր
                              20                                                                                           20 ρ = 0.75 ↓

                              10                     ρ = 0.5 ր                                                             10 ρ = 0.5 ց
                                                                                                                                                       տ benchmark
                              0                                                                                             0

                               20      30           40       50           60         70      80                              20             30           40        50         60         70          80
                                                             age                                                                                                   age
                                            CC borrowing over the life cycle (means)                                               Insurance coefficients (against perm. shocks) during working life
                              35
                                                                                                                          0.9
                              30
                                                                                                                           0.8               ↑ρ        =1
                              25                                                                                           0.7
      Thousands of 1992 USD




                                                                                                  Insurance coefficient




                              20
                                                         ρ = 1→                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                             ↓ρ        = 0.75
                              15                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                           0.3
                              10                    ւρ    = 0.75
                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                             ↓ρ        = 0.5
                               5                                                                                           0.1
                                                         ← ρ = 0.5                                                                                                           տ benchmark
                              0
                                    benchmark →                                                                              0
                                                                                                                          -0.1
                               20      30           40        50          60            70   80                               20       25         30     35      40         45   50     55     60   65
                                                              age                                                                                                     age




Notes: ρ denotes the correlation of the interest rate on the ILL with the permanent shock to labor income. All other
parameters are as in the “Baseline” column of table 2. “Benchmark” refers to the case without ILL.




                                                                                              41
                        Figure 7: Income-Linked Loans: Welfare Gains (over Benchmark)

                                                                         10
                             Gain in CE consumption (% over Benchmark)




                                                                          9

                                                                          8

                                                                          7

                                                                          6

                                                                          5

                                                                          4
                                                                                      σ = 0.5 ց
                                                                          3

                                                                          2
                                                                                            տσ      = 0.3
                                                                          1

                                                                          0
                                                                         0.25   0.5                 0.75    1
                                                                                      Correlation




Notes: “Correlation” stands for the correlation of the interest rate on the ILL with the permanent shock to labor
income, and σ denotes the volatility of the interest rate on the ILL.




                                                                                      42
        Table 1: Welfare Gains (over Benchmark) in Two-Period Model

            Gains in certainty-equivalent consumption, in percent,
                    for an investor with cash-on-hand of...
                                              0     5       10   15
         1) IHI with ρ = −0.5, σ = 0.25 0.49 0.00 0.02 0.01
         2) ILL with ρ = 0.5, σ = 0.25      2.23 0.49 0.03 0.00
         3) IHI with ρ = −1, σ = 0.25       5.03 0.75 0.29 0.25
         4) ILL with ρ = 1, σ = 0.25        8.52 1.87 0.47 0.12
         5) IHI with ρ = −0.5, σ = 0.5      1.20 0.20 0.13 0.08
         6) ILL with ρ = 0.5, σ = 0.5       2.23 0.69 0.15 0.04
         7) IHI with ρ = −1, σ = 0.5        6.94 1.61 0.74 0.51
         8) ILL with ρ = 1, σ = 0.5         9.21 2.52 0.91 0.40
         No income risk                     9.21 2.81 1.40 0.84

        Notes: ρ denotes the correlation of the return on the income-linked
        asset with income in period 2. σ is the standard deviation of this return.




                             Table 2: Parameter Values

Parameter                                             Baseline    Alternative values
Relative risk aversion γ                                 2                 3
Discount factor β                                      0.936      0.92, 0.939, 0.947
Age of labor force entry                                20
Age of retirement                                       65
Age of death                                            80

Std. dev. of permanent shock σν                        0.10296
Std. dev. of transitory shock σε                       0.27166
Replacement rate λ                                      0.682

Risk-free lending rate rl                                0.02
Risk-free borowing rate rb                               0.08           0.05
Mean equity return E(r̃e )                               0.06           0.04
Std. dev. of equity returns σe                           0.16           0.08

Mean return on income-hedging instrument E(r̃IHI )       0.02
Std. dev. of IHI return σILL                              0.5            0.3
Correlation(r̃IHI , ν̃)                                  -0.5      -0.25, -0.75, -1

Mean rate on income-linked loan E(r̃ILL )                0.08           0.05
Std. dev. of ILL rate σILL                                0.5            0.3
Correlation(r̃ILL , ν̃)                                   0.5       0.25, 0.75, 1




                                        43
                                                                    Table 3: Summary Table of Results

                                                               Parameters                 Welfare measures          Asset positions (in thousands)
                                                                                                           ν
                       Description                       E(r̃ILA ) ρILA,ν̃ σILA         c     Gain (%) φ            IHI ILL           Eq      CC
                       Benchmark                                                      19638              0.09                        33.82 2.33
                       1) IHI                              0.02      -0.50    0.50    19646      0.04    0.12       2.98             29.51 2.34
                       2) IHI with higher corr.            0.02      -0.75    0.50    19750      0.57    0.26       9.71             21.61 6.32
                       3) IHI with perfect corr.           0.02      -1.00    0.50    20102      2.36    0.51       19.22            13.81 25.28
                       4) IHI with lower corr.             0.02      -0.25    0.50    19638      0.00    0.09       0.00             34.00 2.34
                       5) IHI with lower volatility        0.02      -0.50    0.30    19638      0.00    0.09       0.01             33.99 2.34
                       6) ”, higher corr.                  0.02      -0.75    0.30    19644      0.03    0.12       4.24             27.56 2.34
                       7) ”, perfect corr.                 0.02      -1.00    0.30    19689      0.26    0.25       11.45            18.44 3.99
                       8) ILL                              0.08       0.50    0.50    19905      1.36    0.17                9.68 33.20 1.86
44




                       9) ILL with higher corr.            0.08       0.75    0.50    20398      3.87    0.39               20.20 33.97 4.19
                       10) ILL with perfect corr.          0.08       1.00    0.50    21497      9.47    0.79               37.50 31.85 17.20
                       11) ILL with lower corr.            0.08       0.25    0.50    19697      0.30    0.09               2.00 32.92 1.35
                       12) ILL with lower volatility       0.08       0.50    0.30    19825      0.95    0.11                7.75 30.91 0.47
                       13) ”, higher corr.                 0.08       0.75    0.30    20161      2.67    0.26               23.21 32.86 1.11
                       14) ”, perfect corr.                0.08       1.00    0.30    20996      6.91    0.59               51.52 33.14 6.77
                       15) ”, lower corr.                  0.08       0.25    0.30    19687      0.25    0.09               2.43 32.77 0.62


      Notes: “ILA” = income-linked asset, refers to the income-hedging instrument (IHI) for cases 1) to 7) and to the income-linked loan (ILL) for cases 8) to 15).
                                                                                                                                                                 ν
     ρILA,ν̃ = Correlation(r̃ILA, ν̃). c is certainty-equivalent consumption as defined in equation (4). Gains are assessed with respect to the benchmark case. φ is the
     (unweighted) average of the insurance coefficient against permanent shocks (defined in equation (5)) over the working life. Asset positions are unweigthed means
     over the entire life cycle, with “Eq” referring to equity holdings and “CC” referring to unsecured borrowing (“credit cards”). Parameters other than the ones for
     income-linked assets are as in the “Baseline” column of table 2.
                         Table 4: Summary Table of Results from Alternative Calibrations

            Preferences                   Assets                              Welfare measures
                                                                                               ν
            γ      β        Stocks/Bonds  ILA    E(r̃ILL )          rb      c     Gain (%) φ
            2 0.947             50/50       -        -             0.08   19515        -     0.08
            2 0.947             50/50      IHI       -             0.08   19579      0.33    0.17
            2 0.947             50/50    IHI/Eq.     -             0.08   19653      0.71    0.20
            2 0.947             50/50      ILL    0.08             0.08   19681      0.85    0.12
            2 0.939              free       -        -             0.05   20092        -     0.05
            2 0.939              free      IHI       -             0.05   20254      0.80    0.13
            2 0.939              free      ILL    0.05             0.05   20703      3.04    0.23
            2 0.939              free      ILL    0.08             0.05   20196      0.52    0.12
            3 0.920              free       -        -             0.08   18244        -     0.08
            3 0.920              free      IHI       -             0.08   18320      0.42    0.16
            3 0.920              free      ILL    0.08             0.08   18686      2.42    0.18


 Notes: In the “Stocks/Bonds” column, “free” refers to the case where no minimum investment in bonds is required,
while “50/50” refers to the case where the household most hold at least as much money in bonds as in stocks. In the
“ILA” (= income-linked asset) column, “IHI/Eq.” refers to the case where households have access to 50/50 stock-IHI
funds.




                                                       45
