NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MICROECONOMIC EVIDENCE ON PRICE-SETTING
Peter J. Klenow
Benjamin A. Malin
Working Paper 15826
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15826

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

Prepared for the Handbook of Monetary Economics (Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford,
editors). This research was conducted with restricted access to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
data. Rob McClelland provided us invaluable assistance and guidance in using BLS data. We thank
Margaret Lay and Krishna Rao for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Luis J. Álvarez,
Mark Bils, Marty Eichenbaum, Etienne Gagnon, Emi Nakamura, Martin Schneider, Frank Smets,
Jón Steinsson, and Michael Woodford for helpful suggestions. The views expressed here are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the BLS, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Peter J. Klenow and Benjamin A. Malin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Microeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting
Peter J. Klenow and Benjamin A. Malin
NBER Working Paper No. 15826
March 2010
JEL No. E3,E31,E5
ABSTRACT
The last decade has seen a burst of micro price studies. Many studies analyze data underlying national
CPIs and PPIs. Others focus on more granular sub-national grocery store data. We review these studies
with an eye toward the role of price setting in business cycles. We summarize with ten stylized facts:
Prices change at least once a year, with temporary price discounts and product turnover often playing
an important role. After excluding many short-lived prices, prices change closer to once a year. The
frequency of price changes differs widely across goods, however, with more cyclical goods exhibiting
greater price flexibility. The timing of price changes is little synchronized across sellers. The hazard
(and size) of price changes does not increase with the age of the price. The cross-sectional distribution
of price changes is thick-tailed, but contains many small price changes too. Finally, strong linkages
exist between price changes and wage changes.

Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
Pete@Klenow.net
Benjamin A. Malin
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Mail Stop 97
21st and C St., NW
Washington, D.C. 20551
benjamin.a.malin@frb.gov

Table of Contents

1. Introduction

Page

3

2. Data sources

6

3. Frequency of Price Changes

9

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Average frequency
Heterogeneity
Sales, product turnover, and reference prices
Determinants of frequency

4. Size of Price Changes

10
13
17
24
28

4.1 Average magnitude
4.2 Increases vs. decreases
4.3 Higher moments of the size distribution

28
29
29

5. Dynamic Features of Price Changes
5.1 Synchronization
5.2 Sales, reference prices and aggregate inflation
5.3 Hazard rates
5.4 Size vs. age
5.5 Transitory relative price changes
5.6 Response to shocks
5.7 Higher moments of price changes and aggregate inflation

30
31
36
39
40
41
43
46

6. Ten Facts and Implications for Models

48

6.1 Prices change at least once a year
6.2 Sales and product turnover are often important for micro price flexibility
6.3 Reference prices are stickier and more persistent than regular prices
6.4 Substantial heterogeneity in the frequency of price change across goods
6.5 More cyclical goods change prices more frequently
6.6 Price changes are big on average, but many small changes occur
6.7 Relative price changes are transitory
6.8 Price changes are typically not synchronized over the business cycle
6.9 Neither frequency nor size is increasing in the age of a price
6.10 Price changes are linked to wage changes
6.11 Summary: Model features and the facts

48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
57

7. Conclusion

58

Tables

60

Figures

74

References

80
2

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a wealth of rich micro price data become available. Many
studies have examined data underlying nationally-representative consumer and producer
price indices from national statistical agencies. A smaller set of studies have focused on finer
scanner data for a subset of stores or products. The U.S. and Western European countries
have received the most attention, but evidence on emerging markets has grown rapidly.
Such micro data offer many insights on the importance of price stickiness for
business cycles. We review the literature by stating a series of ten facts modelers may want
to know about price setting.
First, individual prices change at least once a year. The frequency is more like twice
a year in the U.S. versus once a year in the Euro Area. Thus we need a “contract multiplier”
to explain why real effects of nominal shocks appear to last several years.
Second, temporary price discounts (“sales”) and product turnover are important to
micro price flexibility. This is particularly true in the U.S., which plays a role in its greater
price flexibility than in the Euro Area. We provide evidence that such sale prices partially
cancel out with cross-sectional and time aggregation, but appear to contain macro content.
Third, if one drops a broad set of short-lived prices (i.e., more than just temporary
price discounts), a stickier “reference” price emerges that changes about once a year in the
U.S.

This filtering conceals considerable novelty in non-reference prices, and these

deviations could be responding to aggregate shocks as they do not seem to wash out with
aggregation. Still, reference price inflation is considerably more persistent than overall
inflation, perhaps suggesting some sort of sticky plan and/or sticky information.

3

Fourth, goods differ greatly in how frequently their prices change. At one extreme
are goods that change prices at least once a month (fresh food, energy, airfares), and at the
other extreme are services that change prices much less often than once a year. Such
heterogeneity makes mean price durations much longer than median durations, and could
help explain a big contract multiplier if combined with strategic complementarities.
Fifth, goods with more cyclical quantities (e.g., cars and apparel) exhibit greater
micro price flexibility than goods with little business cycle (e.g., medical care). Durables, as
a whole, change prices more frequently than nondurables and services. Including temporary
price changes, nondurables change price more frequently than services. Such non-random
heterogeneity in price stickiness may hold down the contract multiplier.
Sixth, micro price changes are, on average, much bigger than needed to keep up with
aggregate inflation, suggesting the dominance of idiosyncratic forces (intertemporal price
discrimination, inventory clearance, etc.). In state-dependent pricing models, price changers
can be selected on their idiosyncratic shocks, thereby speeding price adjustment and
depressing the contract multiplier. Micro evidence exists for such selection, but not as strong
as predicted by models with a single menu cost. For example, many price changes are small,
as with time-dependent or information-constrained pricing.
Seventh, relative price changes are transitory. Idiosyncratic shocks evidently do not
persist as long as aggregate shocks do. Sellers may be implementing price changes for
temporary, idiosyncratic reasons while failing to incorporate macro shocks (e.g., as in
rational inattention models).
Eighth, the timing of price changes is little synchronized across products. Most
movements in inflation (from month to month or quarter to quarter) are due to changes in the

4

size rather than the frequency of price changes. This may be a byproduct of the stable
inflation rates in the past few decades in the U.S. and Euro Area. In countries with more
volatile inflation, such as Mexico, the frequency of price changes has shown more
meaningful variation. This lack of synchronization is consistent with the importance of
idiosyncratic pricing considerations over macro ones.

When combined with strategic

complementarities, price staggering paves the way for coordination failure and a high
contract multiplier. It is also consistent with rational inattention toward macro shocks.
Perhaps related, consumer price changes (both increases and decreases) have increased
noticeably in the recent U.S. recession.
Ninth, the hazard rate of price changes falls with the age of a price for the first few
months (mostly due to sales and returning to regular prices), and is largely flat thereafter
(other than a spike at one year for services). This finding holds in the U.S. and Euro Area,
and for both consumer and producer prices. Such a pattern is consistent with a mix of Calvo
and Taylor time-dependent pricing, but can also be generated under state-dependent pricing.
Meanwhile, the size of price changes is largely unrelated to the time between price changes.
This fact seems more discriminating, and favors state-dependent over time-dependent
pricing. If price spell length is exogenous, more shocks should accumulate and make for
bigger price changes after longer price spells. Under state-dependent pricing, longer price
spells reflect stable desired prices rather than pent-up demand for price changes.
Tenth and finally, price changes are linked to wage changes. Firms in labor-intensive
sectors adjust prices less frequently, potentially because wages adjust less frequently than
other input prices. Furthermore, survey evidence suggests synchronization between wage
and price adjustments over time. Thus, in addition to contributing directly to a higher

5

contract multiplier, wage stickiness may be contributing indirectly by lowering the frequency
of price changes.
We organize the rest of this chapter as follows. Section 2 briefly outlines the micro
data sources commonly used in the recent literature. Section 3 discusses evidence on the
frequency of price changes. Section 4 describes what we know about the size of price
changes. Section 5 delves into price setting dynamics – for example, synchronization and
what types of price changes cancel out with aggregation across products and time. Section 6
reviews, at greater length, the ten stylized facts we just discussed.

Section 7 offers

conclusions.

2. Data Sources
The recent literature studies data underlying consumer (CPI) and producer (PPI) price
indices, scanner and online data collected from retailers, and information gleaned from
surveys of price setters. In this section we briefly describe these datasets.
Until recently, empirical evidence on price-setting at the microeconomic level was
somewhat limited, consisting mostly of studies that focused on relatively narrow sets of
products (e.g., Carlton 1986, Cecchetti 1986, and Kashyap 1995).1 This changed as datasets
underlying official CPIs and PPIs became available to researchers. These datasets, compiled
by national statistical agencies, contain a large number of monthly price quotes tracking
individual items over several years or more. The samples aim to be broadly representative –
in terms of products, outlets, and cities covered – of national consumer expenditure (or
industrial production). For example, the CPI Research Database (CPI-RDB), maintained by

1

Wolman (2007) provides a comprehensive survey of the older literature, while Mackowiak and Smets (2008)
also survey the more recent literature.

6

the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), contains prices for all categories of goods and
services other than shelter, or about 70% of consumer expenditure. It begins in January 1988
and includes about 85,000 prices per month (Klenow and Kryvtsov, 2008 and Nakamura and
Steinsson, 2008a).
Although the CPI and PPI datasets are alike in many ways, Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008a) point out that interpreting the PPI data is somewhat more complicated than
interpreting evidence on consumer prices.2 First, the BLS collects PPI data through a survey
of firms rather than a sample of “on-the-shelf” prices. Second, the definition of a PPI good is
meant to capture all “price-determining variables”, which often include the buyer of the good.
Intermediate prices may be part of (explicit or implicit) long-term contracts, and thus
observed prices might not reflect the true shadow prices faced by the buyer (Barro, 1977).
Related, in wholesale markets the seller may choose to vary quality margins, such as delivery
lags, rather than varying the price (Carlton, 1986). Mackowiak and Smets (2008) point out
that repeated interactions (say, for legal services) and varying quality margins (say, waiting in
order to purchase a good at the published price) are also present in some retail markets.
A critical open question for macroeconomists in interpreting prices is whether they
conform to the Keynesian sticky price paradigm of “call options with unlimited quantities.”3
On-the-shelf consumer prices may have this feature if they are available in inventory (see
Bils, 2004, on stockouts in the CPI). Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) say import prices usually
appear to be call options for buyers. Still, unlike for consumer prices, it is not clear whether
new buyers of producer goods have the option to buy at prices prevailing for existing buyers.

2

The challenges described are for United States PPI data, but Euro Area PPI data display similar features
(Vermeulen et al., 2007).

3

We are grateful to Robert Hall for this phrase.

7

Tables 1 and 2 list several studies that have made use of CPI and PPI data,
respectively. These include studies for the United States, for countries in the Euro Area
(Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal,
and Spain), and for a handful of other developed (Denmark, Israel, Japan, Norway, South
Africa) and developing economies (Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Hungary, Mexico, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia).

Although differences in methodology and coverage make cross-country

comparisons challenging, the Inflation Persistence Network (IPN) has coordinated efforts of
the many researchers in the Euro Area to allow for such comparisons (Dhyne et al. 2006 and
Vermeulen et al. 2007).
A related set of studies has made use of micro data the BLS collects to construct
import and export price indices for the United States. These include Gopinath and Rigobon
(2008), Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (forthcoming), Gopinath and Itskhoki (forthcoming),
and Nakamura and Steinsson (2009). The prices are collected from surveys of importing
firms and thus represent wholesale markets. One benefit to using international data is the
ability to analyze price-setting behavior in response to large, identified shocks (i.e., nominal
exchange rate shocks).
Another source of microeconomic evidence on pricing comes from scanner (i.e.,
barcode) data collected from supermarkets, drugstores, and mass merchandisers. These data
cover a narrower set of goods than the data underlying price indices, but they provide deeper
information. Scanner data usually cover many more items per outlet, and often contain
information on quantities sold (and sometimes wholesale cost). Data are usually collected at a
weekly frequency and may come from one particular retailer (e.g., Eichenbaum, Jaimovich

8

and Rebelo, 2009, or studies using Dominick’s data) or from multiple retailers (e.g., through
AC Nielsen). A number of these studies are listed in Table 3.
Other researchers have begun collecting price information from retailers by “scraping”
prices from websites. The ongoing “Billion Prices Project” of Cavallo and Rigobon (e.g.,
Cavallo, 2009) collects daily prices from numerous retailers in over 50 countries. Useful
aspects of this dataset include the daily frequency, comparability across many countries, and
detailed information on each product including sales and price control indicators. Lünnemann
and Wintr (2006) is another example.
A final source of microeconomic information comes from surveying firms about their
price-setting practices, as opposed to collecting longitudinal information about individual
prices.

These surveys allow researchers to ask about aspects of pricing that cannot be

captured from datasets of observed prices, such as the frequency with which price setters
review prices and the importance of particular theories of price stickiness for explaining their
pricing decisions. Blinder et al. (1998) was a pioneering study for the United States, and
subsequent surveys have been conducted in many countries, as shown in Table 4. The
surveys typically ask firms to focus on their main product (or most important products).

3. Frequency of Price Changes
We begin our review of the substantive findings of the literature by looking at the
frequency with which prices change. A theme that will arise throughout the paper is the
presence of a great deal of heterogeneity in price-setting behavior, and we therefore report
results along several dimensions. These include measures of the “average” time between
price changes, how these measures vary across different samples and types of goods, the

9

importance of temporary sales and product turnover, and some discussion of the determinants
of the frequency of price change.

3.1 Average Frequency
Table 1, drawn primarily from a survey by Álvarez (2008), presents estimates of the
mean frequency of price changes obtained from the datasets underlying national CPIs.4
Prices clearly exhibit nominal stickiness, as the (unweighted) median across these studies for
the estimated mean frequency of price change is 19% (per month). The degree of stickiness
varies considerably across countries, with prices in the Euro area appearing to change less
frequently than those in the U.S., which in turn change less frequently than those in highinflation developing countries (Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Sierra Leone, Slovakia). We will
return to the question of what explains these cross-country differences after we take a closer
look at individual country studies.
We will give particular attention to the multiple U.S. CPI studies (Bils and Klenow
2004, Klenow and Kryvtsov 2008, and Nakamura and Steinsson 2008a) in order to shed light
on a number of features of the data and provide understanding on how different
methodologies impact results. Moreover, since we have access to the micro data from the
BLS, we will be able to construct some new results as we proceed. We begin by describing
the structure of the micro data. The BLS divides goods and services into 300 or so categories
of consumption known as Entry Level Items (ELIs). Within these categories are prices for
particular products sold at particular outlets (which we will refer to as “quote-lines”). The

4

For studies that contain information on price changes due to temporary sales, we report the frequency for both
all prices (in parentheses) and non-sale prices. In many countries, the prices that are reported during sales
periods are prices without rebates (i.e., posted prices are essentially non-sale prices), and we thus use the nonsale prices when we describe results across countries.

10

BLS collects prices monthly for all products in the three largest metropolitan areas (New
York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) and for food and fuel products in all areas, and bimonthly
for all other prices.

The statistics we report from Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) and

Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) are for prices collected monthly from the top three cities.5
To construct their average monthly frequency that we report in Table 1, Klenow and
Kryvtsov (2008) first estimate frequencies for each ELI category and then take the weighted
mean across categories to arrive at a figure of 36.2% (for posted prices) between 1988 and
early 2005. Of course, this is not the only possible measure of the “average” frequency of
price change. The weighted median frequency of price changes is 27.3%. The mean is
higher than the median because the distribution of the frequency of price changes across
ELIs, shown in Figure 1 for 1998-2009 data, is convex (Jensen’s inequality). Related, the
mean implied duration (from the mean of the inverse frequencies across ELIs) of 6.8 months
is higher than the median (the inverse of the median frequency) of 3.7 months.
Turning to producer prices, the median country in Table 2 has a mean frequency of
price change of 23%.

Nakamura and Stiensson (2008a) compare price flexibility with

consumer goods by matching 153 ELI categories from the CPI with product codes from the
PPI. In general, they find the frequency of price change for producer prices to be similar to
that of consumer prices excluding sales. Goldberg and Hellerstein (2009), however, report a
higher frequency – closer to consumer prices including sales – and attribute the difference to
weighting products by their use of BLS firm and industry weights. Using these weights
makes a large difference because larger firms change prices more frequently than small firms,

5

Both studies weight ELIs by BLS estimates of their importance in consumer expenditures. Klenow and
Kryvtsov also use some BLS weighting information for items within ELIs; Nakamura and Steinsson do not, but
it does not seem to affect statistics such as the median duration of prices across ELIs.

11

they find. Vermeulen et al. (2007) document producer price setting in six European countries.
Not controlling for the composition of the CPI and PPI baskets, they find producer prices
change somewhat more frequently than what Dhyne et al. (2006) reported for consumer
prices. This pattern persists when they focus on similar products in the ‘processed food’ and
‘non-food non-energy consumer goods’ sectors.
Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) find that U.S. export and import (wholesale) prices are
sticky in the currency in which they are reported. The median implied duration in the
currency of pricing is 10.6 (12.8) months for imports (exports) during their 1994-2005
sample.6 They go on to compare the duration of their cross-border transactions to domestic
transactions by using product category descriptions to match international price (IPP)
categories with PPI categories. Restricting their sample to these matched categories (69 of
them), they find a mean duration of 10.3 months for the IPP and 10.6 months for the PPI.
Table 3 provides frequencies from a number of scanner data studies. Although the
underlying data is weekly, the numbers in the table are monthly frequencies of price change
(with the exception of Eichenbaum et al., 2009, who report a weekly frequency). Frequencies
vary, even across studies using the same dataset, because of different sample choices and
reported measures. For example, for Dominick’s, Midrigan (2009) reports a mean frequency
for one store, while Burstein and Hellwig (2007) consider many stores and report the
frequency of the median product category. Despite these differences, the studies have very
similar results: average posted (non-sale) prices change at least every three (five) months.

6

These numbers correspond to their benchmark specification, in which price changes across non-adjacent prices
and product substitutions are included and the frequencies of goods whose price never changes are adjusted by
the probability of discontinuation.

12

Table 4 presents information on price flexibility that comes from asking firms how
frequently they changed their prices in the past year (or on average in recent years). The
firms surveyed tend to sell their main product to other firms, and thus, the survey data pertains
primarily to producer prices. The median frequency of price change, about once a year in
most countries, exhibits more stickiness than the PPI micro data, although the results are not
directly comparable due to different time periods, samples of firms, etc.
To recap, prices do not change continuously but do change “on average” at least once
a year. We use “on average” in a loose sense, as we have already seen that the complexity of
the micro data make it difficult to summarize with one statistic (such as the mean or median).
We now explore this complexity in more detail, first investigating heterogeneity in the
frequency with which prices change across different types of goods and then discussing the
treatment of sales and product substitution.

3.2 Heterogeneity
Figure 1 shows a tremendous amount of heterogeneity across ELI categories, as the
price change frequency ranges from 2.7% for “Intracity Mass Transit” to 91% for “Regular
Unleaded Gasoline”. Indeed, while half of all prices have an implied duration less than 3.4
months, almost a fifth last longer than a year. This heterogeneity also helps to explain the
finding that “average” consumer prices adjust more frequently than in the narrower
investigations predating the latest generation of micro studies.

For example, Cecchetti

(1986) found the length of time between changes in the newsstand prices of US magazines
ranged from 1.8 to 14 years, but Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) find that “Single-Copy
Newspapers and Magazines”, with a duration of 17.2 months in their sample, change prices
less frequently than 84% of non-housing consumption.

13

Table 5 illustrates the heterogeneity in the frequency of price changes in additional
ways. It reports the weighted median and mean implied price durations in the U.S. CPI from
January 1988 through October 2009 separately for posted and regular (i.e., non-sale) prices
covering: (a) All Items; (b) Durables, Nondurables, and Services; (c) Raw and Processed
goods; and (d) eight Major Groups. For conciseness, consider the mean durations of posted
prices. For Durables the mean price duration is 3.0 months, whereas for Nondurables it is 5.8
months and for Services it is 9.4 months. For raw goods (energy and food commodities)
prices last about 1.1 months, whereas for processed goods and services it is 6.9 months.
Among Major Groups, price durations range from 2.9 months in Apparel to 14.7 months in
Other Goods and Services.
We further explore the connection between durability and price change frequency at a
more disaggregated level in U.S. consumer prices. For each of 65 Expenditure Classes of the
CPI (more aggregated than the 300+ ELIs, less aggregated than the Major Groups), we were
able to estimate durability from the data in Bils and Klenow (1998). For interpretability, in
Figure 2 we aggregate back up to the Major Groups. The figure plots the average frequency
of posted price changes against average durability in years, with each dot proportional to the
group’s average expenditure weight.

Transportation stands out as durable, flexible, and

important. For example, Motor Vehicles have a high weight (16% of the non-shelter sample
weight), high durability (9 years), and high frequency (38% per month). Food, on the other
hand, is nondurable, flexible and important. As a result, Table 6 reports no significant
relationship between frequency and durability across the 65 Expenditure Classes: the
weighted least squares estimate is 0.60 percentage points (standard error 0.69). Excluding
the six Expenditure Classes with raw goods (fresh food and energy) – which are nondurable,

14

flexibly-priced and often dropped from the data for business cycle analysis – the relationship
becomes significantly positive. For processed goods, each year of durability goes along with
1.47 percentage points higher frequency (standard error 0.41), so that a good lasting 10 years
tends to have 14 percentage points higher price change frequency than a nondurable. The
connection is similar for regular price changes among processed goods.
The positive correlation between durability and price flexibility (at least for processed
goods and services) could have important implications for business cycles. The more durable
the good, the more cyclical expenditures and production tend to be. This is true in both
theory and practice (see Bils and Klenow 1998 for one example). Barsky, House and
Kimball (2007) present a model in which monetary non-neutrality is closely connected to
price stickiness for durables, with the stickiness of nondurables of no importance. That said,
we hasten to reiterate that the relationship in the data is not significant if raw good categories
are included.
Durability and cyclicality are not synonymous, of course. We therefore gauged
cyclicality directly for each of 64 BLS Expenditure Classes based on the coefficient from
regressing its NIPA real consumption expenditure growth on NIPA aggregate real
consumption growth. For each Expenditure Class we ran a single OLS regression (with a
constant) for the available NIPA sample from February 1990 through March 2009, which is
close to our CPI-RDB 1988-2009 monthly sample.

Figure 3 shows a clear positive

association between price change frequencies and cyclicality across the Major Groups.
Inside Transportation, for example, Motor Vehicles stands out in terms of its combination of
price flexibility (38% frequency), cyclicality (5.7% higher expenditure growth for every 1%
higher aggregate consumption growth), and sampling weight (16% of the non-shelter

15

sample). Apparel is also fairly flexible (30% frequency if one includes sale prices) and fairly
cyclical (cyclicality coefficient 1.75). In Table 6, the WLS regression coefficient of price
frequency on cyclicality across the 64 Expenditure Classes is 3.23 percentage points
(standard error 1.05). If we look only at the 58 Expenditure Classes for processed goods, the
WLS coefficient is similar at 3.29 (but more precisely estimated, with a standard error of
0.59). The relationship is stronger still for regular price changes across processed goods at
3.79 (standard error 0.48).7
The frequency-cyclicality nexus could arise because cyclicality induces price
changes, the other way around, or because they share driving forces. If price flexibility is
responding to cyclical shocks, then the pattern may suggest more macro price flexibility than
in models where the variation in price change frequency across goods is exogenous, as in
Carvalho (2006), or reflects variation in non-cyclical factors, as in Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008b).

Causality running from frequency to cyclicality would presumably work for

“supply” shocks (for which price flexibility should amplify the response of real expenditure
growth) but not for “demand” shocks (for which price flexibility would dampen the response
of real expenditure growth) – see Bils, Klenow and Kryvtsov (2003).8
Heterogeneity is also evident for producer prices. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a)
report a median implied duration of 8.7 months for finished producer goods, 7.0 months for
intermediate goods, and 0.2 months for crude materials from 1998 to 2005. Within finished

7

Frequency is positively correlated with cyclicality across categories even when controlling for durability.
When we regress the frequency of regular price changes for processed goods on durability and cyclicality across
64 ECs, the coefficient on durability is 0.34 (s.e. 0.05) and the coefficient on cyclicality is 9.24 (s.e. 1.39).

8

We do not know how the analysis would change with shelter. On the one hand, rents and owner equivalent
rents may be sticky. On the other hand, shelter quantities may be just as sticky – contrary to the Keynesian
paradigm of flexible quantities relative to prices. And housing services are presumably less cyclical than
housing construction, for which prices may be more flexible.

16

producer goods, the median frequency of price change ranges from 1.3% for “Lumber and
Wood Products” to 87.5% for “Food Products”. Vermeulen et al. (2007) also document
significant heterogeneity across sectors and investigate the causes. Firms with a higher labor
share in total costs tend to change price less frequently, whereas firms with higher shares of
energy and non-energy intermediate goods change price more frequently. Moreover, they
find that the higher the degree of competition, the higher is the frequency of price changes,
particularly price decreases.
Another dimension of heterogeneity that apparently affects the frequency of price
changes is the type of establishment at which goods are sold. In Europe, consumer prices are
more flexible in large outlets, such as supermarkets and department stores, than in smaller
retail outlets (e.g., Jonker et al. 2004, Dias et al. 2004, and Fabiani et al. 2006). For U.S.
producer prices, Goldberg and Hellerstein (2009) find that large firms change prices two to
three times more frequently than small firms. Survey studies have also reported similar
patterns (e.g., Amirault et al. 2006, Buckle and Carlson 2000, and Fabiani et al. 2005).

3.3 Sales, Product Turnover, and Reference Prices
One lesson from the theoretical price-setting literature is that different types of price
adjustments (e.g., transitory or permanent, selected or random) can have substantially
different macroeconomic implications. Researchers have thus investigated how measures of
the frequency of price change are altered when the data is filtered in different ways, such as
excluding temporary sales and product turnover. It turns out that the answer can vary
considerably depending on how exactly this is done.

17

In the U.S. CPI data, a “sale” price is (a) temporarily lower than the “regular” price,
(b) available to all consumers, and (c) usually identified by a sign or statement on the price
tag. Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) report that roughly 11% of the prices in their sample are
identified as sale prices by BLS price collectors. Another approach is to use a “sales filter”
to identify “V-shaped” patterns in the data as sales. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) report
results for a variety of sales filters, allowing for asymmetric and multi-period V’s.
Concerning product turnover, “forced item substitutions” occur when an item in the sample
has been discontinued from its outlet and the price collector identifies a similar replacement
item in the outlet to price going forward, often taking the form of a product upgrade or model
changeover. The monthly rate of force item substitutions is about 3% in the BLS sample.9
Table 7 demonstrates the impact on the implied duration of prices of applying various
filters to the data. We follow Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) but with a U.S. CPI sample that
extends through October 2009 (rather than January 2005). Depending on the treatment of
sales, the median duration of prices ranges from 3.4 months (all prices included) to 6.9
months (excluding BLS-flagged sales). The one-period V-shape filter – in which every time
a middle price is lower than its identical neighbors it is replaced by its neighbors – produces
an intermediate duration of 5.0 months, reflecting that many sales, such as clearance sales,
are not V-shaped.10 “Like” prices compare a regular price only to the previous regular price
and a sale price only to the previous sale price, thus allowing for the possibility that sale
prices are sticky even if they do not return to the previous regular price. This raises the
implied median duration to 5.9 months. The fact that “like” prices change more frequently

9

See Broda and Weinstein (2007) for the importance of product turnover in AC Nielsen Homescan data.

10

Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) found that removing BLS-flagged sales generated a higher estimate of price
duration than did any of their V-shaped sales filters.

18

than regular prices (every 5.9 months vs. every 6.9 months) indicates a sale price is more
likely to differ from a previous sale price than a regular price is to differ from a previous
regular price.
Table 7 also shows that removing all forced item substitutions from the data increases
the median implied duration to 8.3 months from 6.9 months. Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008)
report that item substitutions display price changes about 80% of the time, much more
frequently than the average over a product’s life cycle. Purging substitution-related price
changes can imply prices have a longer duration than the products themselves: for apparel,
regular prices excluding substitutions change about every 27 months, whereas the average
item lasts only 10 months. Finally, comparing only consecutive regular monthly prices
between substitutions pushes the duration up from 8.3 months to 9.0 months. Price changes
are more frequent after items return to stock, come back into season, or return from sales.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) underscore that sales and forced item substitutions
are much more important in some categories than others in the U.S. CPI. For example, 87%
of price changes in Apparel and 67% in Home Furnishings are sale-related price changes,
while Utilities, Vehicle Fuel, and Services have virtually no sale-related changes. The
monthly rate of forced item substitutions is about 10% in Apparel and in Transportation,
compared to 3% for all goods.

This uneven distribution of sales and substitutions is

important for explaining why excluding them has a sizable impact on the implied median
duration of U.S. consumer prices: the sectors in which sales and substitutions are
concentrated are those with a frequency of price change that is relatively close to the median.
Sales have become more important over time for U.S. consumer prices but continue
to play a small role in other countries. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) document a strong

19

increase in the frequency of U.S. sales from 1988 to 2005, especially in processed food and
apparel where the frequency of sales doubled. Available evidence from European countries
suggests that sales are a less important source of price flexibility. Wulfsberg (2009) reports
that sale prices account for only 3% of price observations in Norwegian CPI data, and
removing these observations increases the mean duration by only 0.3 months. Dhyne et al.
(2006) similarly report that sales have small effects on the estimated frequency of price
change in France and Austria.
As emphasized by Mankiw and Reis (2002), Burstein (2006), Woodford (2009) and
others, price changes may be part of a sticky plan and hence fail to incorporate current macro
information. This can be true of regular price changes, not just movements between regular
and sale prices. One sign of such a plan might be the existence of only a few prices over the
life of an item. In the top three cities of the U.S. CPI, the weighted median (mean) length of
a quote-line is 50 (53) monthly prices. In Table 8 we report the cumulative share of price
quotes represented by the “top” (i.e., most common) 1, 2, 3 and 4 prices over the quote-line.
The median (mean) share of the most common price is 31% (38%). The top four prices over
the typical 4.3 year quote-line together represent a median (mean) of 70% (66%) of all
prices. Table 8 reports the figures for Major Groups as well. There is a natural tendency for
higher shares where there are shorter quote-lines (apparel) or less frequent nominal price
changes (medical care, recreation). Relative to its moderate frequency of price changes,
Food stands out in having a 42% median for the top price and 86% median for the top 4
prices. Even Transportation – which is highly cyclical and exhibits frequent price changes –
has a 16% median share of the top price and 46% median share of the top 4 prices.

20

Given that nominal prices change every four months or so, there are on average
around 13 prices per quote-line. A Taylor model (and perhaps Calvo model as well) would
therefore imply a median top 2 price share of less than 20%, whereas the actual share in the
data is over 50%.11 The disproportionate importance of a few prices appears supportive of
downward-sloping hazards and/or sticky nominal plans.12 In favor of the former, two-thirds
of top price spells are uninterrupted by other prices. Before discarding less common prices,
however, research could explore how aggregate quantities produced and sold relate to
changes in common vs. rare prices. It is conceivable that cyclical quantities are sensitive to
the rare prices (e.g., clearance sales in apparel).
Eichenbaum, Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) usefully propose a way of measuring
sticky “reference” prices amidst shorter-lived new prices. Using weekly price data covering
2004-2006 from a large U.S. supermarket chain, they define the reference price for each UPC
as the modal price in each quarter. They find such reference prices are responsible for 62% of
all weekly prices and 50% of quantities sold. Importantly, they report that reference prices
only change every 11.1 months. This is considerably stickier than regular (non-sale) prices in
the same supermarket, which change about once per quarter. They go on to present a simple
model in which the frequency of reference price changes is the key to monetary nonneutrality, as deviations from reference prices largely reflect idiosyncratic considerations.

11

The prediction of a menu cost model for the top price shares would be more sensitive to the distribution and
timing of large idiosyncratic changes in the desired price. In Golosov and Lucas (2007) high variance shocks are
realized every period, whereas in Gertler and Leahy (2008) they follow a Poisson process.

12

In addition to costs of collecting and processing information and formulating and implementing new plans, the
use of a few prices may reflect “price points.” Levy et al. (2007) find prices ending in 9 are most common
(whether in cents, dollars, or tens of dollars), less likely to change, and change by bigger amounts.

21

Do sticky reference prices exist in the U.S. CPI more broadly? The CPI data is
monthly, so it is not possible to implement the exact Eichenbaum et al. methodology on the
CPI. We instead defined the reference price in each month (for an item) as the most common
price in the 13-month window centered on the current month. We broke ties in favor of the
current price. An advantage of a rolling window is that it allows the reference price to
change every month, whereas the calendar definition imposes at most one reference price
change per quarter. Using this 13-month window, we find that the posted price equals the
reference price 78.5% of the time on average (84.2% median) when looking across weighted
quote-lines. Table 9 provides reference price statistics for all items and Major Groups. The
share of reference prices is modestly higher in Food (88.1% median). The only Major Group
with a reference price share below 70% is Transportation (62.5% median); albeit an
important exception given its cyclicality. We find that the weighted median duration of
reference prices is 11.0 months across ELI’s in the CPI. Note that reference prices change
less frequently than regular prices (median duration 6.9 months), so that some regular price
changes must be temporary deviations from reference prices. The median duration is higher
for Food at 13.5 months, and lower for Transportation at 6.1 months. We conclude that the
Eichenbaum et al. reference price phenomenon extends not only to most food items, but to
most items in the non-shelter CPI more generally.
We add several caveats to our reference price results for the U.S. CPI. First, our
definition of reference prices is not strictly comparable to that of Eichenbaum et al. (2009).
With our definition, a combination of a high share and high duration of references – which we
do observe – is more suggestive of stickiness than either of these without the other. Second,
there is considerable variation in the share of reference prices across quote-lines (weighted

22

standard deviation 41%), even within product categories (see Table 9). Third, it is possible
that cyclical quantities are sensitive to non-reference prices along with reference prices.
A final caveat has to do with the modeling implications that can be drawn from the
reference-price findings. Although reference prices constitute a large share of total prices and
have long durations, our statistics need not imply that sellers choose prices from a small set or
that prices display “memory”. Indeed, in the U.S. CPI, we found that only 30% of deviations
from reference prices ever return to the previous reference price. We next consider two
statistics that may be more directly revealing about these issues.
The first statistic is the fraction of prices which are “novel”, which we define as prices
that do not appear in any of the previous 12 months for the same item (quote-line). For the
top three cities of the U.S. CPI, we find the weighted median (mean) share of prices that are
novel to be 16.1% (25.0%). These fractions are consistent with genuinely new prices every
four to seven months. We take this to mean that deviations from the most common prices
exhibit considerably novelty. Table 10 also breaks the statistic down by Major Group.
Novelty is naturally correlated with the frequency of price changes. Food exhibits less than
average novelty (10.3% median vs. the overall item median of 16.1%, 13.8% average vs. the
overall average of 25.0%) despite having average frequency of price changes. Thus caution
may be warranted in drawing lessons from grocery store scanner datasets. Prices appear more
novel in more cyclical categories (Transportation, Apparel). If cyclical quantities are linked
to these novel prices, they could well contribute to macro price flexibility.
We also compute the fraction of prices that are “comeback” prices. We define the
current price as a comeback price if the same price appeared any time in the previous 12

23

months with a different price occurring at least once in between. As a hypothetical example,
we would label a current price of $10 as a comeback price if the price was stuck at $10 for the
previous six months, was at $11 seven months ago, but was also at $10 eight months ago. For
the top three cities of the U.S. CPI, Table 11 reports the weighted median (mean) share of
comeback prices to be 0.8% (14.0%). The Major Groups with the highest share of comeback
prices are Apparel and Food, which have means of around 25%. The share of comeback
prices for the median quote-line is zero, however, in five of the eight Major Groups.
The upshot is that, outside of Apparel and Food, there appears to be little memory in
monthly U.S. CPI prices. A corollary is that most reference prices are not comeback prices.
The typical non-reference price must be a short-lived (transition) price in between successive
reference prices, at least as far as we can tell. It is possible that monthly observations are
obscuring many temporary price changes we would see if we had weekly or even daily data.
This is most plausible for Apparel and Food, where a nontrivial share of comeback prices
occur after or during sales (roughly ¾ of comeback prices in apparel, and roughly ½ of
comeback prices in food). It would appear less likely for services, such as medical care,
where monthly prices largely go from one reference price to another.

3.4 Determinants of Frequency
Researchers have also investigated factors affecting the frequency of price change.
Some studies have made use of the substantial variation in frequencies along different
dimensions to identify important determinants, while others have directly asked price-setters
to assess the importance of various theories of price stickiness. A (non-exhaustive) list of
determinants include (a) the level and variability of inflation, (b) the frequency and magnitude

24

of cost and demand shocks (broadly construed to include price discrimination), (c) the
structure and degree of market competition (including regulation of discounts), and d) the
price collecting methods of statistical agencies (e.g., do they report temporary sales?).
We begin by looking at the cross-country evidence reported in Table 1. Following
Golosov and Lucas (2007) and Mackowiak and Smets (2008), Figure 4 simply plots the mean
frequency of price change against the average inflation rate for these studies. The OLS
regression coefficient of price frequency on inflation is 17.0 (standard error 6.8). Of course,
this exercise comes with a few well-known caveats. First, the studies differ in many details,
such as sample composition and different price-collecting methodologies. Second, periods of
high inflation are often periods of volatile inflation, so it is unclear whether the relationship in
Figure 4 reflects the importance of the level or the variability of inflation (probably both).
Still, the relationship is provocative.
Dhyne et al. (2006) investigate the impact of inflation (and other factors) on the
frequency of price change by running regressions on European data.

They regress the

frequency of price change across 50 product categories in 9 countries on dummy variables for
product type (unprocessed and processed food, energy, non-energy industrial goods, and
services), country dummies, the mean and standard deviation of inflation at the product
category level, an indicator for whether sale prices occur and are reported, the share of prices
set at attractive levels (“price points”), and an indicator for whether the price is typically
regulated. They find that mean inflation is not significantly correlated with the overall
frequency, but is correlated with the frequency of increases and decreases separately. The
overall frequency (and increases and decreases, respectively) are significantly higher in
sectors in which the variability of inflation is higher. A higher frequency of price change is

25

also found when sales and temporary price cuts are included, when the share of attractive
prices is lower, and when prices are not subject to regulatory control.
For U.S. consumer prices, Bils and Klenow (2004) consider regressions relating the
frequency of price change in different product categories to measures of market structure: the
concentration ratio, wholesale markup, and rate of non-comparable substitutions in those
categories. After controlling for whether a good is raw or processed, they find that the first
two measures do not have statistically significant effects, while the rate of product turnover
remains a robust predictor of the frequency of price changes. They interpret the role of
product turnover and raw materials in explaining the frequency of price changes as reflecting
the importance of the volatility of shocks to the supply of and demand for goods.
Boivin, Giannoni, and Mihov (2009) find a relationship between the volatility of
sectoral shocks and the frequency of price change. Using disaggregated PCE inflation series,
they disentangle inflation fluctuations due to sector-specific conditions from those due to
macroeconomic factors. They find that sectors with more volatile sector-specific shocks have
a higher frequency of price change.
Other studies provide evidence consistent with the importance of cost shocks, as
goods with more sticky input prices tend to change price less frequently. For example,
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) report a high correlation between the frequency of price
changes upstream (PPI) and downstream (CPI), and Eichenbaum et al. (2009) find a similar
pattern using detailed cost and price data for one large U.S. retailer. Looking at Euro Area
producer prices and noting that wages tend to be stickier than goods prices, Vermeulen et al.
(2007) find that goods with a higher labor share in total costs tend to change price less
frequently, whereas firms with a higher share of intermediate goods change prices more

26

frequently. Peneva (2009) matches categories of U.S. consumer goods to the manufacturing
industries in which they are produced and also finds that higher labor intensity is associated
with less frequent price changes.
Survey data also provides useful insights on the determinants of price change.
Fabiani et al. (2005) report the top four reasons Euro area firms refrain from changing prices
include: (1-2) implicit and explicit contracts with customers; (3) cost-based pricing (i.e.,
input costs are slow to change); and (4) coordination failure (not wanting to raise one’s price
out of fear of losing market share to competitors who do not follow suit). These reasons
were also ranked in the top five by firms in the United States (Blinder et al. 1998), United
Kingdom (Hall, Walsh and Yates, 2000), Sweden (Apel, Friberg and Hallsten, 2005) and
Canada (Amirault et al. 2006). On the other hand, physical costs (menu costs) and costly
information are among the reasons least favored by firms. Finally, the main impediments to
more frequent price adjustment do appear to be associated with price changes rather than
price reviews – that is, surveyed firms report reviewing prices much more often than
changing prices.
Drilling down further into the survey evidence for cost-based pricing and, in
particular, the role of labor costs, Álvarez and Hernando (2007a) report that Spanish sectors
with relatively high labor costs tend to contain a small number of firms that change prices
often. Druant et al. (2009) provide insight into the relationship between wage and price
rigidity based on a survey on wage and pricing policies of Euro Area firms. They find that
40 percent of firms indicate a relationship (formal or informal) between the timing of their
wage and price adjustment decisions. Moreover, firms with a higher labor cost share report a
tighter link between wage and price changes and a lower frequency of price adjustment (as

27

wages change less frequently than prices).

Finally, even accounting for the likely

simultaneity between price and wage changes, a statistically significant relationship is found,
running from the frequency of wage changes to that of prices.
Dhyne et al. (2006) try to account for the higher frequency of price changes in the
U.S. than in the Euro Area. The U.S. had somewhat higher level and volatility of inflation,
but to arguably little effect. Differences in consumption patterns do not help at all, as the
expenditure share of more flexible components of the CPI is actually larger in the Euro Area.
Heterogeneity of outlets may play a role: smaller shops, which change prices less frequently,
have a higher market share in Euro area.

Differences in occurrence and treatment of

temporary sales are important. For example, 1 in 5 price changes is related to sales in U.S.,
compared to less than 1 in 8 in France. Many other Euro Area countries do not record sale
prices.

Finally, a higher variability of wages (and other input prices) and less anti-

competitive regulation may help explain the higher frequency of price changes in the U.S.

4. Size of Price Changes
We now move from the extensive margin – how often prices change – to the intensive
margin – how large are the price changes. Again, there is substantial heterogeneity in the
micro data, and it is thus useful to characterize the distribution of the size of price changes.

4.1 Average magnitude
A common finding across studies is that price changes are large on average. For
example, in the U.S. CPI Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) report a mean (median) absolute
change in posted prices of 14% (11.5%), while regular price changes are smaller but still

28

large with a mean (median) of 11% (10%). The average consumer price decrease (increase)
is 10% (8%) in the Euro area (Dhyne et al. 2006), and emerging markets also display large
changes (e.g., Barros et al. 2009, Konieczny and Skrzypacz 2005). For U.S. finished goods
producer prices, Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) report a median magnitude of 7.7%.
Given the low level and volatility of aggregate inflation in the U.S. and Europe, most
price changes are not simply keeping up with overall inflation (i.e., indexed). But perhaps
many micro price changes incorporate idiosyncratic or sectoral considerations, but not
aggregate shocks. See Mackowiak and Smets (2008) for a further discussion of this rational
inattention hypothesis in the context of large micro price changes.

4.2 Increases vs. Decreases
A second feature of the size distribution is that price declines are very common.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) report that around 40% of both CPI and PPI monthly price
changes in the U.S. are decreases, and Dhyne et al. (2006) report similar numbers for the Euro
area. These facts help reconcile the finding of large average absolute price changes with
small average price changes (14% vs. 0.8% according to Klenow and Kryvtsov 2008) and
suggest an important role for idiosyncratic shocks (or price discrimination) in driving price
changes. The prevalence of price declines also varies across sectors; in particular, they are
relatively uncommon in the services sector (Dhyne et al. 2006 and Nakamura and Steinsson
2008a).

4.3 Higher Moments of the Size Distribution
Using scanner data, Midrigan (2009) emphasizes that the distribution of non-zero
price changes has more weight in the vicinity of zero than predicted by a normal distribution,

29

while the tails are somewhat fatter. Formally, the distribution of price changes is leptokurtic
(i.e., has positive excess kurtosis). We have confirmed this pattern in the U.S. CPI data,
where the kurtosis of the price change distribution is 10.0 for posted prices and 17.4 for
regular prices (vs. 3 for a normal distribution). As maintained by Midrigan, fat tails suggest
weaker selection, with more price changes large and therefore infra-marginal. For this
reason, the fraction of price increases vs. decreases can be less sensitive to macro shocks (see
also Gertler and Leahy, 2008).
Other studies have documented the prevalence of small price changes more directly.
In the U.S. CPI, around 44% of regular price changes are smaller than 5% in absolute value,
25% are smaller than 2.5%, and 12% are smaller than 1% (Klenow and Kryvtsov 2008).
Note that this is not just due to frequent shopper cards (as in scanner data that report average
weekly prices inclusive of coupons and frequent shopper discounts). Wulfsberg (2009)
reports that 45% of price changes are smaller than 5% in Norway, while in Brazil, where the
mean absolute size is 13%, over a third of price changes are smaller than 5% (Barros et al.
2009). For producer prices, Vermeulen et al. (2007) find that a quarter of both increases and
decreases are smaller than 1%, compared to a mean price change of 4% in the Euro area.

5. Dynamic Features of Price Changes
In addition to the unconditional statistics that we have highlighted so far, researchers
have documented a number of features concerning how prices change over time. These
include the synchronization of price changes, how the frequency and size of price changes
correlate with the duration of the existing price, and the response of prices to shocks that
would be expected to alter a firm’s desired price. These features are of interest because in the

30

presence of nominal stickiness (like we see in the data), price setters have dynamic decision
problems, and thus, dynamic features of the data are particularly helpful in distinguishing
between the various theories of price setting.

5.1 Synchronization
Since at least Taylor (1980), staggered price-setting has played an important role in
modeling persistent real effects of monetary shocks. The staggering of price adjustments is
readily apparent from the observation that not all prices change in any given period.
Moreover, when price setters do change their price, they often take the prevailing price of
their competition into consideration (Levy et al. 1998), which only makes sense if (at least
some) competitors’ prices are expected to remain active for a period of time. Recent studies
have looked at time variation in the frequency of price changes as a measure of the extent of
synchronization (or, conversely, uniform staggering) in price setting. Time variation also
provides relevant evidence for distinguishing between some time-dependent vs. statedependent pricing models.
Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) decompose monthly inflation (  t ) into the fraction
( frt ) of items with price changes and the average size ( szt ) of those price changes:

 t  frt  szt . In their sample (U.S., 1988-2004), they found the fraction to be relatively
stable and not so correlated with inflation (correlation 0.25), while the average size was more
volatile and had commoved almost perfectly with inflation (correlation 0.99). In addition,
they decompose the variance of inflation over time into an “intensive margin” (IM) and
“extensive margin” (EM) as follows:

31

var  t   var  szt   fr   var  frt   sz  2  fr  sz  cov  frt , szt   Ot .



2

2

IM

EM

This decomposition is interesting because different models of price-setting have
distinct implications for this decomposition. For example, in staggered TDP models, the
intensive margin will account for all of inflation’s variance, whereas the fraction of items
changing price plays a substantial role in some SDP models, such as Dotsey, King and
Wolman (1999). Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) find that the IM term accounts for between
86% and 113% of the variance of inflation, implying that the fraction of items changing price
are a relatively unimportant source of fluctuations in inflation, at least for their sample
period.

Note that other SDP models (such as Golosov and Lucas, 2007), can fit this

decomposition; the key is to include (realistically) large idiosyncratic price changes so that
aggregate shocks have offsetting effects on the frequency of increases vs. decreases.
Gagnon (2009) first emphasized the usefulness of further decomposing inflation into
terms

due

to

price

increases

and

decreases.

Note

that

fr  fr   fr 

and

sz  fr  sz   fr  sz  , where fr  and fr  ( sz  and sz  ) denote the frequency (absolute size)
of price increases and decreases, respectively. So, even if the average size of price increases
and decreases remain constant over time, significant variation in the average size of price
changes could result due to offsetting movements in the frequency of price increases and
decreases, which would also imply little variation in the overall frequency of price changes.
This is the type of pattern we see in the U.S.: Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) report that a 1
percentage point increase in inflation is associated with a 5.5 (-3.1) percentage point change
in the fraction of price increases (decreases), and a 0.6 (-1) percentage point change in the
size of price increases (decreases). When they additively decompose the variance of inflation

32

(splitting the covariance term), they find fluctuations in increases and decreases equally
important to inflation volatility.13
While inflation was relatively low and stable in the United States during the sample
period considered by Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), Gagnon (2009) notes that Mexico
experienced episodes of both high and low inflation from 1994 to 2002. He finds that when
the annual rate of inflation was below 10-15%, the average frequency (size) of price changes
co-moves weakly (strongly) with inflation due to offsetting movements in the frequency of
price increases and decreases. When inflation rises beyond 10-15%, however, few price
decreases are observed and both the frequency and average size are important determinants
of inflation. Thus, over the entire sample period, the extensive margin accounts for more
than half of the variance of inflation.
Wulfsberg (2009) studies Norwegian consumer price data over a 30-year period in
which inflation was at first high and volatile (1975-1989) and then low and stable (19902004). He uses a different metric to assess the importance of the extensive and intensive
margins. Specifically, he constructs the average monthly inflation in year t as the weighed
product-sum of item-specific average frequencies and magnitudes of price changes,

ˆt   i ,t  fri ,t  szi,t  fri ,t  szi,t  , where fri ,t is the average frequency of price increases,
i

and so on. To assess the importance of the extensive (intensive) margin, he computes the
conditional inflation rate where the size (frequency) of price changes are kept constant at
their means while allowing the frequency (size) of price changes to vary. He finds that the

13

Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a), on the other hand, find that the frequency of price increases, and not
decreases, are important for driving inflation movements. They look at the median frequency of price changes
across sectors rather than cross-sector means.

33

extensive margin is strongly correlated with CPI inflation (0.91), while the intensive margin
is negatively correlated with CPI inflation (-0.12) and interprets this as evidence of strong
state dependence in price setting. Restricting his sample to the low and stable inflation
period of 1990-2004, he finds the intensive margin has a higher correlation with CPI
inflation: 0.51 vs. 0.36.
We next consider evidence of price-change synchronization in the U.S. during the
recent recession. Figure 5 plots the average frequency of price changes in the top three cities,
based on regular prices for processed items. We first calculated the monthly frequency of
price changes (the weighted mean across ELIs) from April 1988 through September 2009.
We then took out seasonal (monthly) dummies, and calculated deviations from them.
Finally, we averaged the monthly deviations in each quarter, and added back the mean across
all quarters to produce quarterly data from 1988:2 through 2009:3. The monthly frequency of
price changes increased a couple of percentage points from the end of 2007 onward, from
about 18.5% to about 21%.

We do not have a good metric for whether this is an

economically large shift, but the issue deserves deeper investigation. For example, did the
frequency increase more rapidly for cyclical goods? Did the increase reflect endogenously
more attention given the magnitude of the recession? We do know that the increase holds for
non-raw posted prices as well as all posted prices. Also, the size of increases and decreases
for regular processed items were little changed (if we include raw items, there were some
unusually large energy price declines near the end of the sample).
Another form of synchronization is seasonality. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a)
find that the weighted median frequency of (regular) consumer price changes declines
monotonically over the four quarters of the year, with local spikes in the first month of each

34

quarter. The quarterly seasonal pattern in producer prices mirrors the seasonal pattern in
consumer prices qualitatively, but is substantially larger, with the frequency of price change
in January more than twice the average for the rest of the year. For the Euro area, Dhyne et
al. (2006) emphasize that various goods are more likely to exhibit seasonal patterns:
unprocessed foods due to seasonality in agricultural producer prices, certain industrial goods
due to “end-of-season” sales, and services because they show an inclination to change prices
at the beginning of the year and refrain from changing price at the end of the year.
The Euro area consumer price studies (Dhyne et al. 2006) also investigated
synchronization at the product level using the Fisher–Koniezcny (2000) measure, which
takes a value of 1 in case of perfect synchronization and a value of 0 in the case of uniform
staggering of price changes.

They calculated the measure for each of the 50 product

categories in their common sample. The degree of synchronization was, in general, rather
low except for energy prices, with the median synchronization ratio across products ranging
between 0.13 in Germany and 0.48 in Luxembourg.

The higher ratio observed in

Luxembourg compared to Germany likely reflects the difference in the size of the market
upon which the ratio is computed and the relatively small number of outlets in Luxembourg.
Other studies have focused on the synchronization of prices at the outlet level. Using
scanner data for a number of retailers in the United States, Nakamura (2008) decomposes
price variation for individual products into variation that is common across all stores (16%),
variation that is common only to stores within the same retail chain (65%), and variation that
is completely idiosyncratic to particular stores (17%). These findings suggest that retail-level
shocks, rather than manufacturer-level shocks, may be quite important for understanding
fluctuations in retail prices.

Midrigan (2009) finds the probability a particular product

35

experiences a price change depends on the fraction of other prices within its store that change,
especially those in its own product category. He also finds some evidence, albeit weaker, of
synchronization across stores in a particular city. Related, Lach and Tsiddon (1992, 1996)
analyze prices of different meat products and wines at retail stores in Israel. They find that,
when stores change price, they seem to change price for most of their products at the same
time, but these adjustments occur at different times for different stores.

5.2 Sales, Reference Prices, and Aggregate Inflation
A key question for macroeconomists when thinking about sale-related price changes
is whether they respond to macro shocks or instead reflect entirely idiosyncratic forces.
Midrigan (2009) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) implicitly take the latter view when
they replace sale prices with previous regular prices in their empirical analysis. Guimaraes
and Sheedy (2008) rationalize the latter in a specific model, generating oscillation between
sticky regular and sale prices as an optimal form of price discrimination.

Similarly,

Eichenbaum, Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) describe a model in which sellers choose a
“sticky pair” of prices that they can freely bounce between, but a menu cost applies whenever
the pair is changed. Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) take an intermediate position, modeling
sale-related price changes as subject to (smaller) menu costs and responding to macro as well
as idiosyncratic shocks. Because sale prices tend to revert to previous regular prices (both in
their theory and in the data), their theoretical sale prices contribute notably less to macro
price flexibility than do regular price changes (which can be arbitrarily persistent).
The answer to whether sale-related price changes contribute to macro price flexibility
is ultimately empirical, of course. According to Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), more than
40% of sale price episodes do not return to the previous regular price, opening the door to
36

more macro price flexibility. Klenow and Willis (2007), using bi-monthly data for all cities
in the CPI, find that the magnitude of price discounts indeed correlates with cumulative
inflation since the item last changed price. Another possibility, which has not yet been
investigated, is that clearance sales (more common for apparel and appliances, less common
for food) react to unwanted inventory build-up at the macro level.
To provide some evidence on the macro content of sale prices, we calculated inflation
for posted prices and regular prices separately in the U.S. CPI from February 1988 through
October 2009 for the top three cities. We took out separate monthly dummies for each to
remove seasonal effects. Table 12 summarizes some of the resulting moments for posted vs.
regular price inflation in the U.S. CPI. For the residuals, the variance of regular price
inflation equaled 87.5% of the variance of posted price inflation, so that sale prices
"accounted for" 12.5% of the aggregate variance. By comparison, sale prices represent about
19% of all price changes (see Klenow and Kryvtsov, 2008). When we aggregated up to the
quarterly level, however, sale prices contributed only 7.5% of the variance of quarterly
posted price inflation. Thus sale-related price changes do not fully wash out with crosssectional aggregation, but do significantly cancel out with time aggregation.
The serial correlation of posted price inflation in the U.S. CPI (0.394, standard error
0.053) is similar to that of regular price inflation (0.420, s.e. 0.051) – see also Bils, Klenow
and Malin (2009). The same is true of quarterly inflation rates (0.174 serial correlation for
posted price inflation, 0.142 for regular price inflation). To get at whether price changes
build or fade, we regressed cumulative inflation from month t to t  12 on inflation from
month t to t  1 . As given in Table 12, following a 1% price increase in the first month,
regular prices are 1.48% (s.e. 0.27) higher after 12 months. The aggregate component of

37

sale-related price changes is surprisingly persistent: the difference between posted and
regular prices is 1.09% (s.e. 0.17) higher after 12 months (following a 1% increase in the first
month in the difference between posted and regular price inflation).
Table 13 provides statistics on aggregate reference price inflation, again obtained as
residuals from separate monthly dummies for the top three cities in the U.S CPI. Recall that,
in the spirit of Eichenbaum et al. (2009), we defined the reference price as the most common
price in the 13-month window centered on the current month for each item. As discussed,
reference prices represent about 80% of all prices in the CPI by this definition, and change
every 11 months. By comparison, regular prices represent about 90% of all prices and
change roughly every 7 months.14 Thus, in practice, reference prices more aggressively filter
out short-lived prices (though this need not be the case in principle, as our definition allows
the reference price to conceivably change every month). The variance of aggregate monthly
reference price inflation is 46% of the variance of posted price inflation in the U.S. CPI. The
monthly posted price inflation rate is similarly correlated with reference price inflation (0.69)
and with the deviations from reference price inflation (0.73).

Monthly reference price

inflation is more serially correlated (0.46, standard error 0.05), however, than are the
deviations from reference price inflation (0.12, s.e. 0.06). This is not by construction, as the
deviations from reference prices could have exhibited more persistent changes. Reference
price changes build to 3.07% (s.e. 0.40) after one year, whereas deviations from reference
prices neither build nor fade (coefficient 0.91%, s.e. 0.16).

14

The correlation between monthly regular and reference price inflation rates is 0.69 (standard error 0.03),
whereas that between quarterly regular and reference price inflation rates is 0.79 (0.04).

38

As Table 13 shows, reference price inflation becomes more volatile and persistent
relative to posted price inflation when we aggregate up to the quarterly level. The variance of
reference price inflation rises to about 59% of overall quarterly inflation (from about 46% at
the monthly frequency). At the quarterly level, posted price inflation is more correlated with
reference price inflation (0.82) than with deviations from it (0.64). The serial correlation of
quarterly reference price inflation is 0.44 (standard error 0.09), vs. -0.21 (0.11) for deviations
from quarterly reference price inflation. Figure 6 plots these quarterly series. [Both rates
plunge at the end of 2008 due to energy price declines, but these two quarters do not drive any
of the statistics.] We conclude that reference price inflation picks up responses to more
persistent shocks to inflation, whereas deviations from reference price inflation reflect more
fleeting disturbances.

5.3 Hazard Rates
Another “dynamic” feature that has been documented in many studies is the shape of
the hazard function of price change, i.e., how the probability of changing price varies
depending upon the age of the price. One reason for this is that price-setting models often
have fairly stark predictions for the shape of the hazard function. The original Calvo (1983)
model assumes a flat hazard function, while the deterministic timing of price adjustment in
the Taylor (1980) model predicts a zero hazard except at a single age, where the hazard is
one. Menu-cost models can generate a variety of shapes, depending on, among other things,
the relative importance of transitory and permanent shocks to marginal costs. Permanent
shocks, which accumulate over time, tend to yield an upward sloping hazard function, while
transitory shocks tend to flatten or even produce a downward-sloping hazard (e.g., sellers

39

may be more attentive to getting prices right when revenue is temporarily high for a product
due to idiosyncratic supply or demand considerations).
The general finding in the literature is that hazard rates for individual products are not
upward-sloping.15 Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) find the frequency of (regular) price changes
conditional on reaching a given age is downward sloping if all goods are considered together,
but note that this could simply reflect a mix of heterogeneous flat hazards and survivor bias.
Once they take out decile fixed effects (i.e., average frequencies of price change in each
decile of price change frequency), they characterize the hazard rate as flat (other than a spike
at 12 months). Álvarez (2008) reports a similar pattern in Euro area consumer price data.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) estimate separate hazard functions for each Major Group,
however, and find hazards are downward sloping for the first few months and generally flat
after that. They find similar patterns for producer prices. Finally, Cavallo (2009) finds
initially downward-sloping hazards for daily online prices from a large supermarket in each of
several Latin American countries.

5.4 Size vs. Age
Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) undertake an analogous exercise for the (absolute) size
of price changes. They find that the size of price changes rises with age, but once they
control for heterogeneity across goods, the size of price changes is unrelated to the age of the
price for a given item. Likewise, Eden (2001), using data from Israel and several different
approaches, finds no strong correlation between the size and age, and Álvarez and Hernando

15

One exception is Ikeda and Nishioka (2007), who use a finite mixture model (to allow for heterogeneity across
price setters) and assume price changes occur according to a Weibull distribution (to allow for increasing, flat, or
decreasing hazards). They estimate increasing hazard functions for some Japanese products, and flat or Taylortype spiked hazards for others.

40

(2004), using Spanish data and Heckman’s sample selection correction, report that age does
not significantly contribute to the size of price changes.
In contrast, many models predict a positive relationship between size and age. For
example, models in which shocks accumulate over time and the timing of price changes are
exogenous (Calvo 1983) or driven primarily by having a low menu-cost draw (Dotsey et al.
1999) fall into this category.

5.5 Transitory Relative Price Changes
The persistence of relative price changes can shed light on the relative importance of
idiosyncratic versus aggregate shocks and also help to distinguish between different pricesetting models. Indirect evidence on this aspect of the data comes from investigating the
behavior of sales. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a) report that (a) sales spells are short – the
average length is just 1.8–2.3 months; (b) sales price changes are twice as large as other price
changes on average; and (c) many prices return to their original price following a sale.
Taking these facts together suggests highly transient relative price changes for both sales
prices and all posted prices, as sales are quite common in the U.S. CPI data (representing
about 20% of price changes according to Klenow and Kryvtsov, 2008). Scanner data studies
uncover similar patterns. For example, Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) find that price changes
are large and dispersed and most are of a “temporary” nature, again suggesting transitory
relative price changes.
The transitory nature of relative price changes is not just a sales-related phenomenon,
however, as it has been found after filtering out sales as well. Campbell and Eden (2005)
document that grocers choose, and then quickly abandon, extreme relative prices (rather than

41

arriving at those prices through the gradual erosion of their fixed nominal price by other
sellers’ price adjustments). Midrigan (2009) reports that the probability a firm’s next price
change will have the same sign as the current one is fairly low (between 32% and 41%).
Klenow and Willis (2006) construct relative prices as the ratio of individual prices to the
weighted average of prices in a sector, and report an across-sector weighted mean serial
correlation of new relative prices (i.e., across months with price changes) of 0.32.
To provide a metric for how transitory these relative price changes are, it is useful to
consider what they imply for the persistence of shocks in structural models. The general
finding is that transitory, idiosyncratic shocks are an important input that enables structural
models to replicate pricing patterns in the data. Klenow and Willis (2006) estimate a
monthly persistence of 0.7 for the idiosyncratic technology shock in their model in order to
match the serial correlation of new relative prices. The shocks that trigger price changes in
Midrigan (2009) are similarly transitory and tend to be reversed. Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008a) calibrate the size of the menu cost and the idiosyncratic-shock persistence and
volatility to match the frequency of (regular) price changes, the fraction of changes that are
increases, and the size of changes.

The idiosyncratic shock is large and has a serial

correlation of 0.66. Other models that produce transitory relative price changes include
Burstein and Hellwig (2007) who incorporate transitory demand shocks in addition to
marginal cost shocks, Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) who give firms the option of a “one-period
markdown” at a lower menu cost than a permanent price change, and Eichenbaum et al.
(2009) whose sticky-plan firms can switch between a small number of prices at no cost.

42

5.6 Response to Shocks
Evidence on the response of prices to identified shocks is particularly useful for
shedding light on the nature of firms’ price-setting decisions because most (if not all) theories
of price-setting posit a tight link between (desired) prices and the underlying cost and
demand conditions facing the firm. Of course, precisely identifying shocks in the data is not
an easy task, but recent studies have made use of novel datasets to do just this. These include
studies of the response of import/export prices or of prices on either side of a border to
exchange rate shocks, evidence of price-setting around the time of a significant event like the
Euro changeover or an increase in VAT rates, and studies of scanner data which contain both
wholesale costs and retail prices.
Researchers have made use of well-identified and sizable movements in exchange
rates to evaluate how prices respond to shocks. Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) measure
medium-run exchange rate pass-through as the change in a price in response to the
cumulative change in the exchange rate since the price was last changed and find that the
trade weighted exchange rate pass-through into U.S. import prices is low, at 22%. Gopinath,
Itskhoki and Rigobon (forthcoming) document that non-dollar priced goods display much
higher medium-run pass-through than do dollar priced goods. They present a sticky-price
model in which firms choose their currency based on their average desired pass-through over
the period of price non-adjustment. Incomplete desired pass-through – whether it is driven
by variable mark-ups, imported inputs or decreasing returns to scale in production – is thus
seen as the reason that the majority of U.S. import goods are priced in dollars. Gopinath and
Itskhoki (forthcoming) find further evidence consistent with variable mark-ups or variable
marginal costs in the form of a positive correlation between the frequency of price

43

adjustment and long-run pass-through, the life-long change in the price of a good (relative to
U.S. inflation) on the (real) exchange rate over the same period. Fitzgerald and Haller (2009)
use micro data on domestic and export prices set by Irish producers. Because they have
matched price quotes for the same product produced in the same plant but sold in multiple
markets, they are able to control for changes in marginal costs in addition to exchange rate
movements. They find strong evidence of pricing-to-market for products whose export
prices are invoiced in the destination currency: conditioning on price changes in both
markets, relative prices move one-for-one with exchange rate changes (i.e., zero pass-through
of exchange rate changes).
Other research has found evidence that borders effectively segment markets. Burstein
and Jaimovich (2009) and Gopinath et al. (2009) evaluate scanner data from a major retailer
that has multiple locations in Canada and the US.

Gopinath et al. (2009) find large

discontinuities of retail prices and wholesale costs between adjacent stores on either side of
the border, and note that these border gaps move almost one-for-one with changes in the
nominal exchange rate. Burstein and Jaimovich (2009) document substantial pricing-tomarket for traded goods. Using a dataset of online book prices (and some information on
quantities) for a number of U.S. and Canadian retailers, Boivin, Clark, and Vincent (2009)
conclude that market segmentation is probably behind the lack of exchange rate pass-through
in their sample.
Other identifiable aggregate shocks include changes in tax rates or in the nation’s
currency.

A number of European studies, summarized in Dhyne et al. (2005), have

consistently found that changes in the value-added tax rate lead to temporary increases in the
frequency of CPI price changes. The frequency of price change also increased noticeably

44

after countries converted to the euro in January 2002 (Dhyne et al. 2005). Although the
response of aggregate inflation to the introduction of the euro was not particularly large,
Hobijn et al. (2006) emphasize the dramatic increase in euro area restaurant prices and
explain this increase with a menu-cost model in which firms decide when to adopt the new
currency.
Eichenbaum et al. (2009) are able to provide information on the price response to
(potentially disaggregated) shocks. They investigate the relationship of prices to costs using
scanner data for one large US retailer. Prices typically do not change in the absence of a
change in cost, but a cost change is not sufficient to induce a change in price. This allows
markups (both actual and reference) to display substantial variation. When the retailer does
decide to change its reference price, it almost always re-establishes the unconditional markup
over the reference cost. That is, the retailer passes through 100% of the cumulative change in
reference cost that occurred since the last reference price change.
Nakamura and Zerom (forthcoming) document delayed and incomplete pass-through
of (observable) commodity cost shocks to wholesale/retail prices in the coffee industry.
They estimate that, relative to a CES benchmark, local costs reduce long-run pass-through
(after 6 quarters) by 59% and markup adjustment reduces it by an additional 33%. Barriers
to price adjustment are important for the delayed response of prices to cost but have a
negligible role in incomplete long-run pass-through.
Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2009) do not condition upon identified shocks but instead
document how “reset prices” evolve over time in response to reduced-form impulses. A reset
price for an individual firm is the price it would choose if it implemented a price change in the
current period. Models with sizeable strategic complementarities predict that the impact of a

45

shock to reset prices will build over time, as price setters wait for the average price to
respond. In the U.S. CPI data, however, the reset price actually overshoots – it changes more
on impact than it does in the long-run. At the same time, Klenow and Willis (2007) find some
evidence that micro price changes respond to “old” inflation (i.e., since before the item’s
previous price change), as in sticky information models.

5.7 Higher Moments of Price Changes and Aggregate Inflation
Various authors have investigated the relationship between higher moments of the
distribution of price changes and inflation (i.e., the first moment). Relative price variability
is generally found to be positively correlated with inflation, as predicted by menu cost or
incomplete information models. Lach and Tsiddon (1992) point out that menu cost models
imply that the variability is affected by expected inflation, while incomplete information
models imply a relationship with unexpected inflation. They find that expected inflation had
a stronger effect on variability than unexpected inflation for a sample of foodstuffs in Israel.
Koneiczny and Skrzypacz (2005) reach similar conclusions using data on 52 goods in Poland
from 1990 to 1996.
Ball and Mankiw (1995) focus on the third moment and find that innovations in
inflation are positively associated with the skewness in relative-price changes for four-digit
U.S. PPI data from 1949 to 1989. Indeed, the inflation-skewness relationship is stronger than
the inflation-variance relationship. They show these findings are consistent with a menu-cost
model: when price adjustment is costly, firms adjust to large shocks but not to small shocks,
and therefore large shocks have disproportionate effects on the price level. They also explore
the idea that asymmetric relative-price changes represent aggregate supply shocks.

46

Domberger and Fiebig (1993) look at individual price changes in 80 disaggregated
industry groups in the UK. They also find that an increasing (decreasing) average price is
associated with a rightward (leftward) skew, but note that when the absolute magnitude of
inflation (deflation) increases, the distribution of individual price changes becomes less
skewed. They suggest that the higher the skewness of the price-change distribution, the more
staggered (less synchronized) are changes.
We complement these studies by calculating monthly measures of higher moments of
the distribution of price changes for the top three cities in the U.S. CPI from 1988 to 2009.
We then construct the correlation of the variance, skewness, and kurtosis of (non-zero) price
changes with inflation.

We find few robust significant relationships.

The variance is

negatively correlated with inflation, both for posted prices (-0.16, s.e. 0.06) and for regular
prices (-0.29, s.e. 0.06). These results are fragile, however, being highly influenced by
deflation during the last few months of 2008. Omitting the last 15 months of the sample
(August 2008 – October 2009), the inflation-variance correlation is still statistically
significant for regular prices (-0.15, s.e. 0.06) but not for posted prices (-0.07, s.e. 0.06).
Moreover, the correlation between skewness and inflation becomes significant: correlation of
0.15 (s.e. 0.06) for regular prices and 0.17 (s.e. 0.06) for posted prices. That is, the late-2008
plunge in inflation was accompanied by a spike in the variance of price changes, but no fall
in skewness. We find that skewness is more robustly (if modestly) related to absolute
inflation (0.15, s.e. 0.06 for both posted prices and regular prices).
More study of the relationship between inflation and higher moments thus seems
warranted. For example, Ball and Mankiw’s interpretation of skewness as representing an
aggregate supply shock suggests a more nuanced inflation-skewness relationship than might

47

be picked up by a simple correlation. Indeed, they argue that the absence of asymmetry when
inflation fell in the 1975 and 1982 recessions can be viewed as evidence in favor of their
hypothesis, as it suggests that causation does not run from inflation to skewness.

6. Ten Facts and Implications for Macro Models
We now summarize the findings from the empirical literature on individual price data
with ten stylized facts and their potential lessons for models. These touch on two broad
themes.

The first is the frequency and nature (e.g., state-dependent vs. time-dependent

pricing) of micro price changes. The second is the potential magnitude and source of the
“contract multiplier”, i.e., how long it takes for the macro effects of price stickiness to fade
after a permanent shock relative to the duration of individual prices.

Fact 1: Prices change at least once a year.
In the U.S. CPI, prices change every 4 months or so. Prices appear stickier in the
U.S. PPI (around 6-8 months for the median), and stickier still in the Euro Area (around once
a year for the median). But median price durations in emerging markets (tilted toward food,
as actual household budgets are) are typically closer to the U.S. than the Euro Area.
In contrast, a large literature has estimated that permanent monetary shocks have real
effects lasting several years.16 Real effects of nominal shocks therefore last three to five
times longer than individual prices. Nominal stickiness appears insufficient to explain why
aggregate prices respond so sluggishly to monetary policy shocks. For this reason, nominal
price stickiness is usually combined with a “contract multiplier” (in Taylor’s 1980 phrase).

16

Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1999), Romer and Romer (2004), and Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz
(2005) are a few examples based on U.S. data. Peersman and Smets (2003) report similar Euro Area results.

48

Ball and Romer (1990) and Kimball (1995) are early examples, and Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Evans (2005) a more recent one. Possible sources of big contract multipliers include
strategic complementarities, countercyclical markups, sticky plans, and sticky information
(the latter including rational inattention, for example Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2008).
Of course, prices do not change continuously either. Nominal stickiness is a pervasive
feature of the data in all country-years with moderate inflation rates. Models that generate
persistence in aggregate prices without any nominal stickiness, for example via indexation
(Christiano et al., 2005) or convex costs of price adjustment (Rotemberg 1982), are at odds
with this fact.

Fact 2: Sales and product turnover are often important for micro price flexibility.
Large price discounts and product turnover account for about one-third of consumer
price changes in the United States. Sales are much more frequent for some types of goods
(food and apparel), and usually revert to the previous regular price afterward (more so for
food, less so for apparel). Sales are much less frequent in the Euro Area than in the U.S.
Within the U.S., sales are less prevalent for producer prices than consumer prices.

Product

turnover ushers in nominal price changes, and is much more common for durables (and
apparel) than food or services. Both sales and product turnover exhibit clear seasonal
patterns, suggesting a time-dependent component.
Given their temporary and seasonal nature, sale-related price changes may contribute
more to micro than macro price flexibility. Put differently, the contract multiplier may be
larger for price changes related to sales and product turnover. That said, sale- and turnover-

49

related price changes do not wash out with aggregation in the U.S., consistent with macro
content. It remains an open question whether such prices respond to aggregate shocks.
In addition to interesting empirical questions concerning the macroeconomic
importance of sales and substitutions, more theoretical research is necessary for us to better
understand how these types of price changes affect the monetary transmission mechanism. It
is awkward to simply apply menu cost models to data in which some price changes have been
filtered out. Alternative approaches have been pursued in the literature. Kehoe and Midrigan
(2008) model one-period price discounts as incurring a lower menu cost. They find salesrelated price changes can contribute to macro price flexibility, but not as much as regular
price changes. Guimaraes and Sheedy (2008) build a model in which firms face consumers
with different price sensitivities and therefore choose a pricing strategy with a high price at
some moments and a low price at other moments.

Even though “sales” decisions are

completely flexible at the micro level, this does not translate into flexibility at the macro level
because sales are strategic substitutes: a firm gains little from a sale if its competitors are
having sales.

Thus, different models of sales have different implications for aggregate

flexibility. Empirical work could help distinguish between and refine this theorizing.

Fact 3: Reference prices are stickier and more persistent than regular prices.
Eichenbaum, Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009) document many temporary regular price
changes in a major U.S. grocery store chain. We find a similar pattern of sticky “reference”
prices in most U.S. CPI items. Whereas posted prices change every 4 months and regular
prices every 7 months, reference prices change every 10-11 months.

50

Deviations from reference prices do not cancel out across items, thereby affecting
aggregate inflation. Perhaps not surprising, reference price inflation is considerably more
persistent than either posted or regular price inflation. Changes in reference prices build over
time, whereas other price changes tend to be much more transitory. Reference pricing
behavior may suggest some form of sticky plan and/or sticky information, rather than menu
costs per price change, and hence could explain the sizable contract multiplier. That said, a
novel price (relative to prices in the previous 12 months) tends to appear every six months or
so for a given item. And the vast majority of prices are not “comeback” prices in the sense of
having existed in an earlier price spell in the prior 12 months.
A related fact is that U.S. CPI quote-lines, which typically span over four years, are
dominated by a few prices. The top price alone captures one-third of prices, and the top two
prices more than one-half of prices. This fact may reflect downward-sloping hazards rather
than sticky information or plans, though, given that two-thirds of top prices occur without
interruption by other prices.
Future research could explore whether the reference price phenomenon extends to
U.S. producer prices and to prices in other countries. There might be more frequent reference
price changes in countries and timeframes with more persistent inflation than in recent U.S.
decades. Moreover, a vital question remains: how do reference vs. non-reference prices
respond to aggregate shocks?

Fact 4: There is substantial heterogeneity in the frequency of price change across goods.
Every micro dataset to date has displayed large, persistent heterogeneity in the
frequency of price changes across types of goods. Universally, service prices are stickier

51

than those of goods. Among goods, “raw” goods (energy, fresh produce) are more flexible
than “processed” goods (goods with low intermediate shares and high labor shares).
As stressed by Carvalho (2006) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008b), such
heterogeneity can combine powerfully with strategic complementarities to boost the contract
multiplier. But evidence for strategic complementarities in micro price data is mixed. In the
supportive column, Gopinath and collaborators have consistently found that exchange rate
changes gradually pass-through into import prices. In the skeptical column, Klenow and
Willis (2006) stress that sellers routinely change prices relative to close substitutes (e.g.,
temporary sales are not synchronized among competing brands of a narrow product) and
argue that large relative price movements are inconsistent with strong “micro” real rigidities.
Using evidence on product-level prices and market shares, Burstein and Hellwig (2007) also
conclude that “micro” pricing complementarities are too weak to generate large aggregate real
effects. Kryvtsov and Midrigan (2009) note that strong “macro” complementarities imply
stable markups, and hence are hard to reconcile with countercyclical inventory-sales ratios.
And Bils, Klenow and Malin (2009) find that consumer price changers tend to overshoot,
rather than undershoot as predicted by slow pass-through.

Fact 5: More cyclical goods change prices more frequently.
In the U.S. CPI, prices change more frequently in categories with more procyclical
real consumption growth – in particular transportation (cars, airfares) and apparel. This fact
probably extends to U.S. producer prices, given the high correlation between upstream and
downstream price change frequency (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008a). In other countries,
we also note the strong tendency for durables to change prices more frequently than services.

52

This form of price change heterogeneity could have the opposite effect of
idiosyncratic sources of heterogeneity (such as different-sized menu costs or idiosyncratic
shocks); that is, higher frequency price changes among cyclical goods could reduce the
contract multiplier See, in particular, Barsky, House and Kimball (2007). Natural topics for
further investigation include the source of this connection (does cyclicality cause flexibility or
the other way around?) and its quantitative importance for the contract multiplier in various
models.

Fact 6: Price changes are big on average, but many small changes occur.
Micro price changes are an order of magnitude larger than needed to keep up with
aggregate inflation in the U.S. and Euro Area. Thus idiosyncratic forces dominate macro
shocks. Golosov and Lucas (2007) show that the former can limit the contract multiplier. In
their SDP model, a positive aggregate monetary shock results in more idiosyncratic price
increases (and fewer idiosyncratic price decreases), thereby speeding the response of the
aggregate price level.

Bils, Klenow and Malin (2009) find that “reset price inflation”

behaves as if it strongly affected by such selection.
Many price changes are small, too, so that there is a “missing middle” in the
distribution of price changes emerging from SDP models with a single, large menu cost.
This need not be true if menu costs are variable (as in Dotsey, King and Wolman, 1998) or are
small but shocks arrive infrequently (as in Gertler and Leahy, 2008).
Meanwhile, Midrigan (2009) makes the point that TDP models can easily fit the whole
size distribution. He argues that the missing middle in SDP models is a byproduct of
overstated selection. Alternatively, the small price changes generated by his SDP model with
multiproduct firms reflect weakened selection and hence greater departures from monetary
53

neutrality, akin to TDP models. Woodford (2009) lays out a model in which information
constraints can lead to small price changes as well (costly information updating results in little
change ex post sometimes, though not on average). As in TDP, the result of information
constraints can be a bigger contract multiplier than under SDP.

Fact 7: Relative price changes are transitory.
A corollary to large idiosyncratic price changes is big relative price movements.
Even within narrower categories of the CPI (Expenditure Classes, ELIs) and U.S. grocery
scanner data, these relative price changes are large. Such relative price movements tend to
fade over time – they are far less persistent than a random walk. This is true across stores of
different chains, but also across competing brands within chains. It is also true even for
regular prices, i.e., excluding the (often temporary) sale price discounts from regular prices.
This fact is a corollary to many regular price changes being temporary in nominal terms.
The persistence of relative prices can matter for macroeconomic questions. First, in
menu cost models the Ss band for non-adjustment is narrower when firms are selling more
and wider when firms are selling less. Thus the selection effect of macro shocks can change
with the persistence of idiosyncratic shocks. Second, big transitory movements in relative
prices require either that micro complementarities be weak, or that idiosyncratic shocks be
large. Weaker complementarities imply a smaller contract multiplier in response to monetary
shocks. Third, transitory movements may reflect micro flexibility amidst a sticky macro
plan/information (i.e., firms frequently respond to big, temporary idiosyncratic shocks within
the plan, but less frequently change the macro plan/information given that persistent macro
shocks are smaller).

54

Fact 8: Price changes are typically not synchronized over the business cycle.
The contract multiplier can be lower if sellers accelerate price increases in response to
positive monetary shocks and postpone them in response to negative monetary shocks. For
moderate inflation episodes such as the last two decades in the U.S., sellers do not seem to
synchronize their timing in this way. This is consistent with time-dependent pricing, but
need not nullify the selection effect of state-dependent pricing completely. As predicted by
state-dependent models and time-dependent models alike, the composition of price increases
vs. decreases correlates positively with inflation movements. But lack of synchronization
may mean weaker selection, or even a preoccupation with idiosyncratic over aggregate
shocks (e.g., rational inattention).
Staggered nominal price stickiness is also critical for how strategic complementarities
can help produce a big contract multiplier. Synchronized price changes are not subject to
coordination failure in magnitude. The less price changes are synchronized, the more sellers
may slow their adjustment as they wait for other prices (of competitors and input suppliers)
to adjust. That said, the evidence for strategic complementarities appears mixed. The lack of
synchronization even among closely competing brands, itself, is hard to understand if micro
real rigidities are strong.
Periods of greater macro volatility may exhibit more synchronization. In Mexico in
recent decades, the frequency of price changes moved up and down with aggregate inflation
movements. In the recent U.S. recession, the frequency of consumer price changes appears
to have surged. Intriguingly, both price increases and decreases became more common,
perhaps because of more frequent updating of sticky plans or sticky information.

55

Fact 9: Neither frequency nor size is increasing in the age of a price.
In both the U.S. and Euro Area, and for both consumer and producer prices, the
hazard rate of price changes is falling over the first few months and largely flat afterward.
The exception is a spike in price change frequency for services, suggestive of annual
updating for the stickiest category of products.

The downward slope is much less

pronounced if one looks at regular prices (i.e., excludes sale-related price changes), and may
be flat if one fully controls for survivor bias.
For a state-dependent pricing model, standard intuition would have the hazard of
price changes increasing in the time since a price change as shocks accumulate and the
desired price drifts farther away from the current price. This force can be weakened by
thicker-tailed or Poisson shocks, and by periods with wider vs. narrower Ss bands (which
create an intertemporal form of survivor bias). Scanner studies find clear evidence of statedependence in rising hazards in distance from the average markup. Again, state-dependence
can imply a smaller contract multiplier than time-dependent pricing.
For a time-dependent model, analogous intuition would imply that the size of price
changes is increasing in the duration of stickiness, as more shocks accumulate the longer the
spell between price changes. Evidence on this question is somewhat more limited, but there
seems to be little connection between the size of price changes and the duration of price
spells. This pattern is consistent with state-dependent pricing, under which spell length is
endogenous to the shocks accumulated. A long spell without a price change may signal that
the desired price did not move much, so that it need not change unduly when the spell ends.
This question could use more study in the U.S. and elsewhere.

56

Fact 10: Price changes are linked to wage changes.
Recent research has revealed a noticeable link between price and wage rigidity. In
the cross-section, firms (or categories of goods) with a higher share of labor costs in total
costs make less frequent price adjustments, potentially resulting from the fact that wages
adjust less frequently than other input prices. Survey evidence also suggests synchronization
between wage and price adjustments over time, as well as a cross-sectional correlation
between wage flexibility and price flexibility.
Wage stickiness can contribute directly to a high contract multiplier, of course. But
the aforementioned evidence suggests it may be contributing indirectly, as well, by lowering
the frequency of price changes. This relationship is all the stronger where production is laborintensive. Moreoever, wage adjustment exhibits a substantial degree of time-dependence.
Firms tend to concentrate wage changes in a specific month, mostly January in a majority of
European countries (Druant et al. 2009). This could lend a degree of time-dependence into
price-setting, further contributing to a higher contract multiplier.

Summary: Model features and the facts.
Table 14 provides a quick summary of how some common features of macro models
of price-setting stack up against the stylized facts about micro price setting. Most of the
entries should be self-explanatory given the preceding discussion, but a few warrant
elaboration. Take the fact that many consumer price changes are reversed (i.e., prices
sometimes exhibit “memory”, particularly after sales in food and apparel in the U.S.). This
pattern is consistent with sellers periodically choosing a “sticky set” of a few prices which

57

they bounce between, a form of sticky plan advocated by Eichenbaum et al. (2009). A fuller
explanation might be price discrimination a la Guimaraes and Sheedy (2008).
Probably the most robust fact across all micro pricing studies is that goods
persistently differ in their frequency of price changes. The variation is far from random, as
“raw” goods (fresh produce, energy) change price more frequently than do services in
country after country. Thus price flexibility appears to respond to economic fundamentals
(e.g. the average size of sectoral shocks and the trend rate of inflation). And, in the U.S. at
least, more cyclical categories exhibit more consumer price flexibility.
Another consistent finding is that most micro price changes are much larger than
needed to keep up with average inflation. This fact would seemingly point to a combination
of big idiosyncratic shocks and big menu costs. But rational inattention could co-exist with
these ingredients. At the same time, the number of small price changes in the data is far from
trivial. This may be because smaller menu costs are combined with sticky information
(sellers sometimes find only a small price change is needed after a periodic information
update) or with sticky plans (sellers periodically update a path of prices, as in Burstein, 2006).

7. Conclusion
We review the recent empirical literature on individual price data and distill ten salient
facts for macro models. Prices change quite frequently, although much of this flexibility is
associated with price movements that are temporary in nature. Even if all short-lived prices
are excluded, however, the resulting nominal stickiness, by itself, appears insufficient to
account for the sluggish movement of aggregate prices. These findings point to the need for a
large contract multiplier to bridge the gap between micro flexibility and macro inertia.

58

Other micro price facts provide evidence on the plausibility of various mechanisms for
generating a large contract multiplier. The lack of synchronization in the timing of price
changes provides scope for strategic complementarities to amplify the real effects of nominal
stickiness. The presence of substantial heterogeneity across goods in the average frequency
of price change can bolster this channel, although the fact that more cyclical goods exhibit
greater price flexibility may work in the opposite direction. The presence of many large,
transitory price changes raises concerns about the relevance of real rigidities at the individualitem level, but is consistent with macro rigidities or with rationally inattentive sellers who
respond to sizeable idiosyncratic shocks but not to smaller aggregate impulses. Finally, the
fact that the size of price changes does not increase with the age of a price provides evidence
for state-dependent pricing and thus selection. The stronger the selection effect, the smaller
the contract multiplier, although the presence of many small price changes suggests the
selection effect may be muted.
A number of open empirical (and related theoretical) questions remain. How do
temporary price changes (related to sales, product turnover, or a movement to a non-reference
price) respond to aggregate shocks? How should these temporary movements be modeled,
and what impact do they have on the contract multiplier? What drives the relationship
between the cyclicality of goods and the frequency with which prices change? Related, what
aspects of micro heterogeneity in price-setting are important to consider in macro models?
Finally, what evidence can be used to distinguish between different sources of the contract
multiplier, such as rational inattention, sticky plans, or strategic complementarities?

59

Table 1
Monthly Mean Frequency of CPI Price Changes
Country

Paper

Sample Period

Frequency ( in %)

Austria

Baumgartner et al. (2005)

1996:01 – 2003:12

15.1

Belgium

Aucremanne and Dhyne (2004)

1989:01 – 2001:01

16.9

Brazil

Barros et al. (2009)

1996:03 – 2008:12

37.2

Gouvea (2007)

1996:01 – 2006:12

37.0

Chile

Medina et al. (2007)

1999:01 – 2005:07

46.1

Denmark

Hansen and Hansen (2006)

1997:01 – 2005:12

17.3

Euro Area

Dhyne et al. (2006)

1996:01 – 2001:01

15.1

Finland

Vilmunen and Laakkonen (2005)

1997:01 – 2003:12

16.5

France

Baudry et al. (2007)

1994:07 – 2003:02

18.9

Germany

Hoffmann and Kurz-Kim (2006)

1998:02 – 2004:01

11.3

Hungary

Gabriel and Reiff (2008)

2001:12 – 2007:06

15.1

Israel

Baharad and Eden (2004)

1991:01 – 1992:12

24.5

Italy

Fabiani et al. (2006)

1996:01 – 2003:12

10.0

Japan

Saita et al. (2006)

1999:01 – 2003:12

23.1

Luxembourg

Lunnemann and Matha (2005)

1999:01 – 2004:12

17.0

Mexico

Gagnon (2009)

1994:01 – 2004:12

29.4

Netherlands

Jonker et al. (2004)

1998:11 – 2003:04

16.5

Norway

Wulfsberg (2009)

1975:01 – 2004:12

21.3 (21.9)

Portugal

Dias et al. (2004)

1992:01 – 2001:01

22.2

Sierra Leone

Kovanen (2006)

1999:01 – 2003:04

51.5

Slovakia

Coricelli and Horvath (2006)

1997:01 – 2001:12

34.0

South Africa

Creamer and Rankin (2008)

2001:12 – 2006:02

16.0

Spain

Álvarez and Hernando (2006)

1993:01 – 2001:12

15.0

United Kingdom

Bunn and Ellis (2009)

1996:01 – 2006:01

15 (19)

United States

Bils and Klenow (2004)

1995:01 – 1997:12

26.1

Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008)

1988:02 – 2005:01

29.9 (36.2)

Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a)

1988:01 – 2005:12

21.1 (26.5)

Notes: Source: Álvarez (2008) with three additional studies, Barros et al. (2009), Bunn and Ellis (2009) and
Wulfsberg (2009), and updated versions of Gagnon (2009), Creamer and Rankin (2008), and Klenow and
Kryvtsov (2008). For studies that report frequencies of both regular (i.e., non-sale) and posted prices, the
figures in parentheses correspond to posted prices. Frequencies for Nakamura and Steinsson (2008a)
correspond to the 1998-2005 sample period (for contiguous observations, excluding substitutions). For
Germany, frequencies refer to the sample considering item replacements and non-quality adjusted data. The
Spanish sample excludes energy products, which lowers the aggregate frequency.

60

Table 2
Monthly Mean Frequency of PPI Price Changes
Country

Paper

Sample Period

Belgium
Colombia
Euro Area
France
Germany
Italy
Portugal
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States

Cornille and Dossche (2008)
Julio and Zarate (2008)
Vermuelen et al. (2007)
Gautier (2008)
Stahl (2006)
Sabbatini et al. (2006)
Dias et al. (2004)
Creamer (2008)
Álvarez et al. (2008)
Bunn and Ellis (2009)
Nakamura-Steinsson (2008a)
Goldberg-Hellerstein (2009)

2001:01 – 2005:01
1999:06 – 2006:10
Various
1994:01 – 2005:06
1997:01 – 2003:09
1997:01 – 2002:12
1995:01 – 2001:01
2001:12 – 2006:02
1991:01 – 1999:02
2003:01 – 2007:12
1988:01 – 2005:12
1987:01 – 2008:10

Frequency (in %)
24
20.2
21
25
22
15
23
19.5
21
26
24.7
33.3

Note: Source: Álvarez (2008), Bunn and Ellis (2009), Goldberg and Hellerstein (2009) and the published
versions of Cornille and Dossche (2008) and Gautier (2008). Frequencies for Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008a) correspond to finished goods. The Italian sample excludes energy products, while the French sample
does not include business services.

61

Table 3
Frequency of Price Change in Scanner Data Sets
Data Source

Paper

Sample Period Frequency (in %)

Dominick’s

Midrigan (2009)
1989 – 1997
Burstein and Hellwig (2007)

45 (23)
41 (26)

Large U.S. Retailer

Eichenbaum et al. (2009)

2004 – 2006

43

AC Nielsen ERIM Database Campbell and Eden (2005)
Midrigan (2009)

1985 – 1987

47
36 (25)

AC Nielsen ScanTrak

Nakamura (2008)

2004

44 (19)

AC Nielsen Homescan

Broda and Weinstein (2007)

1994 – 2003

NA

Note: For most studies, weekly data is collected, but a monthly frequency of price change is reported.
Eichenbaum et al. (2009) report a weekly frequency of price change. Frequencies are for posted prices, and
numbers in parentheses are for regular (i.e., non-sale) prices. Frequencies vary across studies using the same
data set because of different sample choices and reported measures (e.g., for Dominick’s, Midrigan (2009)
reports mean frequencies for one store, while Burstein and Hellwig (2007) consider many stores and report
the frequency of the median product category).

62

Table 4
Number of Price Changes per year (%) in Survey Data
Country

Paper

Austria
Belgium
Canada
Estonia
Euro Area
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States

Kwapil et al. (2005)
Aucremanne and Druant (2005)
Amirault et al. (2006)
Dabusinskas and Randveer (2006)
Fabiani et al. (2005)
Loupias and Ricart (2004)
Stahl (2005)
Fabiani et al. (2007)
Nakagawa et al. (2000)
Lunnemann and Matha (2006)
Castanon et al. (2008)
Hoeberichts and Stokman (2006)
Martins (2005)
Copaciu et al. (2007)
Álvarez and Hernando (2007a)
Apel, Friberg and Hallsten (2005)
Sahinoz and Saracoglu (2008)
Hall, Walsh and Yates (2000)
Blinder et al. (1998)

<1
24
18
8
14
27
21
44
20
23
15
10
24
14
29
6
10

1

2-3 ≥4 Median

51
55
27
43
39
46
14
50
52
31
60
51
57
43
37
39

15
18
23
25
20
24
21
19
11
27
19
14
15
6
44
29

11
8
44
18
14
9
21
11
14
27
11
12
14
20
14
22

1
1
2-3
1
1
1
1
1
1
2-3
1
1
1
1
2-3
1

Mean
(in months)
12.7
11.9
6.8
10.0
12.3
11.8
13.5
11.9
12.5
9.0
5.7
10.7
12.7
4.1
11.1
12.7
3.0
8.2
8.8

Note: Source: Álvarez (2008), Table 3. Mean implicit durations obtained from the interval-grouped data
using the following assumptions: for firms declaring “at least four price changes per year”, 8 price changes
are considered (i.e. mean duration of 1.33 months); for those declaring “two or three price changes per year”,
2.5 price changes are considered (i.e., 4.8 months); for those declaring "one change per year” a duration of 12
months, and for those declaring “less than one price change per year”, a change every two years is considered
(i.e., 24 months).

63

Table 5
Price Durations by Category in the U.S. CPI
Durations in Months

Posted

Regular

Median Mean

Median Mean

% of
CPI

All Items

3.4

6.2

6.9

8.0

100.0%

Durable Goods
Nondurable Goods
Services

1.8
3.4
7.6

3.0
5.8
9.4

1.8
7.3
7.6

5.0
8.3
9.6

21.7
48.6
29.7

Raw Goods
Processed Goods

1.0
4.4

1.1
6.9

1.0
7.7

1.2
8.9

12.0
88.0

Apparel
Education and Communication
Food
Home Furnishings
Medical Care
Recreation
Transportation
Other Goods and Services

2.8
5.4
3.4
1.9
10.0
6.3
1.8
8.6

2.9
6.2
6.9
3.5
14.2
7.5
3.7
14.7

9.2
6.7
8.5
2.0
12.6
9.4
1.8
12.1

10.1
6.3
9.3
5.4
14.7
9.8
3.8
16.7

7.0
7.3
22.4
17.0
7.8
8.5
24.5
5.5

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) from February 1988
through October 2009. Durations are weighted medians or means of implied durations from weighted average
frequencies within ELIs. Durables, Nondurables, and Services coincide with U.S. National Income and Product
Account classifications. Raw goods include gasoline, motor oil and coolants, fuel oil and other fuels, electricity,
natural gas, meats, fish, eggs, fresh fruits, fresh vegetables, and fresh milk and cream. Apparel, etc. are Major
Groups in the CPI (1998-onward definition).

64

Table 6
Frequency vs. Durability and Cyclicality
Across U.S. CPI Categories

WLS of Frequency on 

Durability

Cyclicality

Posted Prices

0.60
(0.69)

3.23
(1.05)

Regular Prices

0.49
(0.71)

3.77
(1.07)

Posted Prices

1.47
(0.41)

3.29
(0.58)

Regular Prices

1.42
(0.39)

3.79
(0.48)

All Items

Processed ltems

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) from January 1988
through October 2009. Entries are Weighted Least Square (WLS) Coefficients across Expenditure Classes,
where the weights are based on average shares of consumer expenditure. Regressions include a constant.
Coefficient standard errors are in parentheses. We were able to match estimates of durability (cyclicality) for 65
(64) BLS Expenditure Classes (1998-onward definition) for All Items, and 59 (58) for Processed Items.
Frequency is calculated as the weighted mean across ELIs (with each ELI mean itself a weighted average across
quotes within the ELI). Durability is based on estimates reported in Bils and Klenow (1998). Cyclicality is
based on an OLS regression coefficient for each Expenditure Class of real monthly consumption growth on
aggregate real monthly consumption growth, using seasonally adjusted Detailed Expenditure data from the U.S.
National Income and Product Accounts, January 1990 through May 2009.

65

Table 7
U.S. CPI Price Durations under Various Exclusions

Case

Implied
Median
Duration

Implied
Mean
Duration

Posted Prices

3.4 months

6.2 months

No V Shapes

5.0

7.1

Like Prices

5.9

7.2

Regular Prices

6.9

8.0

No Substitutions

8.3

10.1

Adjacent Prices

9.0

11.2

1988‐1997 Posted

3.6

6.3

1998‐2009 Posted

3.4

6.6

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) from January 1988
through October 2009. The implied durations are inverses of the monthly frequencies. Means and
medians use ELI weights based on the BLS consumer expenditure surveys and unpublished weights for each
quote based on BLS point-of-purchase surveys.
No V shapes: lower middle prices are replaced with identical neighbors.
Like prices: regular (sale) price is compared only to the previous regular (sale) price.
Regular prices: posted prices excluding sale prices.
No substitutions: only regular prices in between item substitutions are compared.
Adjacent prices: only consecutive monthly regular prices in between substitutions.
1988–1997 only: sample is confined to 1988–1997 (posted prices).
1998–2009 only: sample is confined to 1998–2009 (posted prices).

66

Table 8
Share of “Top” Prices in Each U.S. CPI Quote-Line
Median %
(Mean %)

Top
Price

Top 2
Prices

Top 3
Prices

Top 4
Prices

# of
Quotes

All Items

31.4
(37.6)

50.9
(53.2)

62.7
(61.3)

70.1
(66.2)

50
(53.1)

Apparel

36.7
(41.2)

58.3
(59.9)

71.4
(70.5)

79.0
(77.0)

38
(41.2)

Education and Communication

29.2
(33.1)

47.4
(50.1)

61.3
(61.7)

73.0
(69.3)

42
(52.3)

Food

42.4
(47.0)

66.7
(66.7)

79.2
(76.3)

85.5
(81.3)

51
(51.7)

Home Furnishings

24.0
(30.5)

40.0
(43.5)

50.0
(50.4)

56.9
(54.7)

56
(63.4)

Medical Care

48.9
(53.3)

72.1
(71.1)

82.8
(79.0)

88.0
(84.1)

50
(49.5)

Recreation

40.4
(46.2)

64.9
(65.4)

77.6
(75.4)

85.1
(81.2)

49
(48.9)

Transportation

16.3
(22.6)

28.6
(34.8)

38.0
(43.1)

45.9
(49.8)

49
(53.1)

Other Goods and Services

50.0
(54.1)

70.6
(68.5)

79.3
(74.6)

84.0
(78.2)

51
(52.6)

By Major Group

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) from January 1988
through October 2009. Both regular and sale prices are included. Entries are weighted medians (means) across
quotelines of the top (most common) n prices in each quote-line as a share of all prices in the quote-line.

67

Table 9
Share of “Reference” Prices in Each U.S. CPI Quote-Line
Median Mean
%
%

All Items

S.D.
%

Median
Duration
(Months)

84.2

78.5

41.0

11.0

Apparel

77.8

77.1

35.1

11.0

Education and Communication

93.1

83.0

57.4

7.3

Food

88.1

82.2

27.2

13.5

Home Furnishings

82.1

77.9

46.8

6.9

Medical Care

100.0

93.7

27.1

18.8

Recreation

92.3

87.4

36.3

14.6

Transportation

62.5

64.2

70.4

6.1

Other Goods and Services

96.3

89.4

36.9

19.3

By Major Group

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) from January 1988
through October 2009. Both regular and sale prices are included. “Reference” prices are the most common
prices in the 13 month window centered on the current month within each quote-line. The share of reference
prices in all prices was calculated for each quote-line, and then the weighted median (mean) and standard
deviation of this % was calculated across quote-lines. We calculated the weighted median duration of reference
prices across Major Groups using MLE as in Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008).

68

Table 10
Share of Prices that are “Novel”
in Each U.S. CPI Quote-Line
Median

Mean

16.1

25.0

Apparel

21.2

26.3

Education and Communication

23.3

28.3

Food

10.3

13.8

Home Furnishings

23.6

35.9

Medical Care

6.7

8.2

Recreation

9.9

12.9

Transportation

35.0

38.3

Other Goods and Services

7.1

10.7

All Items
By Major Group

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) from January 1988
through October 2009. Both regular and sale prices are included. “Novel” prices are prices that did not appear
in any of the previous 12 months for the same quote-line.

69

Table 11
Share of “Comeback” Prices
in Each U.S. CPI Quote-Line
Median

Mean

0.8

14.0

19.5

25.2

0

4.8

Food

14.9

24.7

Home Furnishings

6.3

16.4

Medical Care

0

3.7

Recreation

0

11.0

Transportation

0

6.2

Other Goods and Services

0

8.8

All Items
By Major Group
Apparel
Education and Communication

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) from January 1989
through October 2009. Both regular and sale prices are included. “Comeback” prices are current prices that
both occurred and were interrupted in the previous 12 months for the same quote-line.

70

Table 12
Posted vs. Regular Price Inflation in the U.S. CPI
Posted Price


Regular Price


Sale‐
Related


Variance relative to that of Posted Price 

1

0.875

0.125

Correlation with Posted Price 

1

0.963
(0.005)

0.365
(0.054)

Serial Correlation

0.394
(0.053)

0.420
(0.051)

‐0.076
(0.062)

Cumulative Inflation After 1 Year

1.507
(0.270)

1.480
(0.267)

1.089
(0.168)

Variance relative to that of Posted Price 

1

0.925

0.075

Correlation with Posted Price 

1

0.979
(0.005)

0.285
(0.100)

0.174
(0.106)

0.142
(0.108)

‐0.017
(0.110)

Monthly

Quarterly

Serial Correlation

Source: CPI-RDB. Inflation rates are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago). Monthly
series go from February 1988 through October 2009, and quarterly series from 1988:2 through 2009:3. Posted
Prices include sale prices, whereas Regular Prices replace sale prices with the previous regular price. Monthly
(seasonal) dummies are removed separately from Posted Price Inflation and Regular Price Inflation before
moments are calculated. “Sale-related inflation” refers to the series obtained by subtracting Regular Price
Inflation from Posted Price Inflation. The “Cumulative Inflation After 1 Year” is obtained from regressing
ln Pt 12  ln Pt on ln Pt 1  ln Pt .

71

Table 13
Posted vs. Reference Price Inflation in the U.S. CPI
Posted Price


Reference Price


Non‐
Reference


Variance relative to that of Posted Price 

1

0.462

0.538

Correlation with Posted Price 

1

0.689
(0.033)

0.734
(0.029)

Serial Correlation

0.398
(0.054)

0.461
(0.050)

0.119
(0.063)

Cumulative Inflation After 1 Year

1.569
(0.281)

3.067
(0.395)

0.906
(0.162)

Variance relative to that of Posted Price 

1

0.592

0.408

Correlation with Posted Price 

1

0.822
(0.037)

0.642
(0.066)

0.175
(0.109)

0.441
(0.091)

‐0.217
(0.107)

Monthly

Quarterly

Serial Correlation

Source: CPI-RDB. Inflation rates are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago). Monthly
series go from August 1988 through April 2009, and quarterly series from 1988:3 through 2009:1. Reference
Prices represent the most common price in the 13 month window centered on the current month for each item.
Monthly (seasonal) dummies are removed separately from Posted Price Inflation and Reference Price Inflation
before moments are calculated. “Non-reference Inflation” refers to the series obtained by subtracting Reference
Price Inflation from Posted Price Inflation. The “Cumulative Inflation After 1 Year” is obtained from regressing
ln Pt 12  ln Pt on ln Pt 1  ln Pt .

72

Table 14
Model Features and the Facts

Consistent Features

Inconsistent Features

Menu costs;

Price indexation;

Sticky input prices

Convex adjustment costs

Sticky set;

Menu costs with

Price discrimination

flexible marginal cost

Menu costs;

Exogenous frequency

Sticky information

of price changes

Big menu costs;

Small idiosyncratic shocks with

Rational inattention

strong complementarities

Sticky information;

Large menu costs for changing

Sticky path

each individual price

Transitory

Strong micro

Idiosyncratic shocks

complementarities

Big idiosyncratic

Small idiosyncratic shocks with

shocks

strong complementarities

Menu costs;

Time‐dependent pricing with

Lumpy shocks

persistent shocks

Half of prices change only a few times a year

Temporary price changes are common

Frequency differs persistently across goods

Price changes are large on average

Many price changes are small

Relative price changes are transitory

Price changes are not well synchronized

Old prices do not change by bigger amounts

73

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) January 1988
through October 2009. Each bar corresponds to an ELI product category (weighted by expenditure), and price
change frequency is calculated as the weighted average across quotes within the ELI. Prices include sales and
regular prices.

74

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) January 1988
through October 2009. Each circle is one of eight Major Groups in the CPI (1998-onward definition), with the
area proportional to the average expenditure weight over the sample. Prices include sales and regular prices.
Frequency is calculated as the weighted mean across ELIs (with each ELI mean itself a weighted average across
quotes within the ELI). Durability is based on estimates reported in Bils and Klenow (1998).

75

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) January 1988
through October 2009. Each circle is one of eight Major Groups in the CPI (1998-onward definition), with the
area proportional to the average expenditure weight over the sample. Prices include sales and regular prices.
Frequency is calculated as the weighted mean across ELIs (with each ELI mean itself a weighted average across
quotes within the ELI). Cyclicality is based on an OLS regression coefficient for each Major Group of real
monthly consumption growth on aggregate real monthly consumption growth, using seasonally adjusted Detailed
Expenditure data from the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts, January 1990 through May 2009.

76

Notes: Each data point represents one study from Table 1, with the Gouvea (2007) study excluded because of its
overlap with the Barros et al. (2009) study. The monthly frequency of price change is as reported in Table 1,
while the monthly rate of inflation is based on authors’ calculations.

77

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago), based on regular
prices for processed items. We first calculated the monthly frequency of price changes (weighted mean across
ELIs) from April 1988 through September 2009. We then took out seasonal (monthly) dummies, and calculated
deviations from them. Finally, we averaged the monthly deviations in each quarter, and added back the mean
across all quarters, to produce quarterly data from 1988:2 through 2009:3.

78

Source: CPI-RDB. Data are for the top three cities (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago) for the quarters
1988:3 through 2009:1. Posted price inflation includes sale and regular prices. Reference price inflation is
based on replacing the current posted price with the modal price in the 13-month window centered on the current
month (for each micro datapoint). Inflation rates were calculated at the monthly level, and monthly (seasonal)
dummies were removed for each series separately. The monthly residuals were summed to create quarterly data.

79

References
Álvarez, Luis J. (2008), “What Do Micro Price Data Tell Us on the Validity of the New
Keynesian Phillips Curve?” Economics – The Open-Access, Open-Assessment EJournal 2(19).
Álvarez, Luis J. and Ignacio Hernando (2004), “Price Setting Behaviour in Spain: Stylized
Facts using Consumer Price Micro-data,” Banco de España Working Paper 0422.
Álvarez, Luis J. and Ignacio Hernando (2006), “Price Setting Behaviour in Spain. Evidence
from Consumer Price Micro-data,” Economic Modelling 23: 699-716.
Álvarez, Luis J. and Ignacio Hernando (2007a), “The Price Setting Behaviour of Spanish
Firms: Evidence from Survey Data,” Pricing Decisions in the Euro Area: How Firms
Set Prices and Why, Oxford University Press, S. Fabiani, C. Loupias, F. Martins, and R.
Sabbatini, eds.
Álvarez, Luis J. and Ignacio Hernando (2007b), “Competition and Price Adjustment in the
Euro Area,” Pricing Decisions in the Euro Area: How Firms Set Prices and Why,
Oxford University Press, S. Fabiani, C. Loupias, F. Martins, and R. Sabbatini, eds.
Álvarez, L.J., P. Burriel and Ignacio Hernando (2008), “Price Setting Behaviour in Spain:
Evidence From Micro PPI Data,” forthcoming in Managerial and Decision Economics.
Amirault, D., C. Kwan, and G. Wilkinson (2006), “Survey of Price-Setting Behaviour of
Canadian Companies,” Bank of Canada Working Paper 2006-35.
Apel, Mikael, Richard Friberg, and Kerstin Hallsten (2005), “Microfoundations of
Macroeconomic Price Adjustment: Survey Evidence from Swedish Firms,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 37 (April): 313-338.
Aucremanne, Luc and Emmanuel Dhyne (2004), “How Frequently Do Prices Change?
Evidence Based on the Micro Data Underlying the Belgian CPI,” ECB Working Paper 331.
Aucremanne, Luc and Martine Druant (2005), “Price-Setting Behaviour in Belgium: What
Can be Learned from an Ad Hoc Survey,” ECB Working Paper 448.
Baharad, Eyal and Benjamin Eden (2004), “Price Rigidity and Price Dispersion: Evidence
from Micro Data,” Review of Economic Dynamics 7 (July): 613-641.
Ball, Laurence and N. Gregory Mankiw (1995), “Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate
Supply Shocks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (February): 161-193.
Ball, Laurence and David Romer (1990), “Real Rigidities and the Non-neutrality of Money,”
Review of Economic Studies 57 (April): 183-203.

80

Barro, Robert J. (1977), “Long-term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 3 (July): 305-316.
Barros, Rebecca, Marco Bonomo, Carlos Carvalho, and Silvia Matos (2009), “Price Setting in
a Variable Macroeconomic Environment: Evidence from Brazilian CPI,” unpublished
paper, Getulio Vargas Foundation and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Barsky, Robert, Christopher L. House, and Miles Kimball (2007), “Sticky-Price Models and
Durable Goods,” American Economic Review 97 (June): 984-998.
Baudry, Laurent, Hervé Le Bihan, Patrick Sevestre and Sylvie Tarrieu (2007), “What Do
Thirteen Million Price Records Have to Say about Consumer Price Rigidity?” Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 69 (2): 139-183.
Baumgartner, Josef, Ernst Glatzer, Fabio Rumler, and Alfred Stiglbauer (2005), “How
Frequently Do Consumer Prices Change in Austria? Evidence from Micro CPI Data,” ECB
Working Paper 523.
Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz (2005), “Measuring the Effects of Monetary
Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120 (February): 387-422.
Bils, Mark (2004), “Studying Price Markups from Stockout Behavior,” unpublished paper,
University of Rochester (December).
Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow (1998), “Using Consumer Theory to Test Competing
Business Cycle Models,” Journal of Political Economy 103 (April): 233-261.
Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow (2004), “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Political Economy 112 (October): 947-985.
Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Oleksiy Kryvtsov (2003), “Sticky Prices and Monetary
Policy Shocks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review (Winter): 2-9.
Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin (2009), “Reset Price Inflation and the
Impact of Monetary Policy Shocks,” NBER Working Paper 14787.
Blinder, Alan S., Elie Canetti, David Lebow, and Jeremy Rudd (1998), Asking About Prices:
A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Boivin, Jean, Robert Clark and Nicolas Vincent (2009), “Virtual Borders: Online Nominal
Rigidities and International Market Segmentation,” unpublished paper, HEC Montreal.
Boivin, Jean, Marc Giannoni and Ilian Mihov (2009), “Sticky Prices and Monetary Policy:
Evidence from Disaggregated U.S. Data,” American Economic Review 99 (March): 350384.

81

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein (2007), “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence
and Price Implications,” NBER Working Paper 13041.
Buckle, Robert A. and John A. Carlson (2000), “Menu Costs, Firm Size and Price Rigidities,”
Economics Letters, 66 (January): 59-63.
Bunn, Philip and Colin Ellis (2009), “Price-Setting Behaviour in the United Kingdom: A
Microdata Approach,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2009 Q1.
Burstein, Ariel (2006), “Inflation and Output Dynamics with State Dependent Pricing
Decisions,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (7/October): 1235-1257.
Burstein, Ariel and Christian Hellwig (2007), “Prices and Market Shares in a Menu Cost
Model,” unpublished paper, UCLA.
Burstein, Ariel and Nir Jaimovich (2009), “Understanding Movements in Aggregate and
Product-Level Real-Exchange Rates,” unpublished paper, UCLA and Stanford University.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983), “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 12 (September): 383-398.
Campbell, Jeffrey R. and Benjamin Eden (2005), “Rigid Prices: Evidence from U.S. Scanner
Data,” unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and Vanderbilt University.
Carlton, Dennis W. (1986), “The Rigidity of Prices,” American Economic Review 76
(September): 637-658.
Carvalho, Carlos (2006), “Heterogeneity in Price Stickiness and the Real Effects of Monetary
Shocks,” Frontiers of Macroeconomics 2(1), Article 1.
Castanon, Vicente, José Antonio Murillo, and Javier Salas (2008), “Formacion de precios en
la industria manufacturer de Mexico,” El Trimestre Economico, 75(1): 143-181.
Cavallo, Alberto (2009), “Scraped Online Data and Sticky Prices: Frequency, Hazards and
Synchronization,” unpublished paper, Harvard University.
Cecchetti, Stephen G. (1986), “The Frequency of Price Adjustment: a Study of Newsstand
Prices of Magazines,” Journal of Econometrics 31 (April): 255-274.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (1999), “Monetary Policy
Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?,” Handbook of Macroeconomics,
volume 1A, Elsevier: New York, John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.

82

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Effects of Shocks to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy
113 (February): 1-45.
Copaciu, Mihai, Florian Neagu and Horia Braun-Erdei (2007), “Survey Evidence on Price
Setting Patterns of Romanian Firms,” unpublished paper, National Bank of Romania.
Cornille, David and Maarten Dossche (2008), “Some Evidence on the Adjustment of
Producer Prices,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 110 (September): 489-518.
Creamer, Kenneth (2008), “Price Setting Behaviour in South Africa – Stylised Facts using
Producer Price Microdata,” unpublished paper, University of the Witwatersrand.
Creamer, Kenneth and Neil A. Rankin (2008), “Price Setting in South Africa 2001–2007 stylised facts using consumer price micro data,” Journal of Development Perspectives,
1(4): 93-118.
Dabusinskas, Aurelijus and Martti Randveer (2006), “Comparison of Pricing Behaviour of
Firms in the Euro Area and Estonia,” Bank of Estonia Working Paper 2006-08.
Dhyne, Emmanuel, Luis J. Álvarez, Hervé Le Bihan, Giovanni Veronese, Daniel Dias,
Johannes Hoffmann, Nicole Jonker, Patrick Lünnemann, Fabio Rumler and Jouko
Vilmunen (2005), “Price Setting in the Euro Area: Some Stylized Facts from Individual
Consumer Price Data,” ECB Working Paper 524.
Dhyne, Emmanuel, Luis J. Alvarez, Hervé Le Bihan, Giovanni Veronese, Daniel Dias,
Johannes Hoffmann, Nicole Jonker, Patrick Lunnemann, Fabio Rumler and Jouko
Vilmunen (2006), “Price Changes in the Euro Area and the United States: Some Facts from
Individual Consumer Price Data,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (Spring): 171192.
Dias, Mónica, Daniel Dias and Pedro D. Neves (2004), “Stylised Features of Price Setting
Behaviour in Portugal: 1992-2001,” ECB Working Paper 332.
Domberger, Simon and Denzil G. Fiebig (1993), “The Distribution of Price Changes in
Oligopoly,” The Journal of Industrial Economics 41 (September): 295-313.
Dotsey, Michael, Robert King and Alexander Wolman (1999), “State-Dependent Pricing and
the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114 (May): 655-690.
Druant, Martine, Silvia Fabiani, Gabor Kezdi, Ana Lamo, Fernando Martins, and Roberto
Sabbatini (2009), “How are Firms’ Wages and Prices Linked: Survey Evidence in Europe,”
ECB Working Paper 1084 (August).
Eden, Benjamin (2001), “Inflation and Price Adjustment: An Analysis of Microdata,” Review
of Economic Dynamics 4 (October): 607 - 636.
83

Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, and Sergio Rebelo (2009), “Reference Prices and
Nominal Rigidities,” unpublished paper, Northwestern Univserity and Stanford University.
Fabiani, Silvia, Martine Druant, Ignacio Hernando, Claudia Kwapil, Bettina Landau, Claire
Loupias, Fernando Martins, Thomas Y. Mathä, Roberto Sabbatini, Harald Stahl, and Ad C.
J. Stokman (2005), “The Pricing Behavior of Firms in the Euro Area: New Survey
Evidence,” ECB Working Paper 535.
Fabiani, Silvia, Angela Gatulli, and Roberto Sabbatini (2007), “The Pricing Behavior of
Italian Firms. New Survey Evidence on Price Stickiness,” Pricing Decisions in the Euro
Area: How Firms Set Prices and Why, Oxford University Press, S. Fabiani, C. Loupias,
F. Martins, and R. Sabbatini, eds.
Fabiani, Silvia, Angela Gattulli, Roberto Sabbatini and Giovanni Veronese (2006),
“Consumer Price Setting in Italy,” Giornale degli Economisti e Annali di Economia 65
(1): 31-74.
Fisher, Timothy C.G. and Jerzy D. Konieczny (2000), “Synchronization of Price Changes by
Multiproduct Firms: Evidence from Canadian Newspaper Prices,” Economics Letters, 68:
271-277.
Fitzgerald, Doireann and Stefanie Haller (2009), “Pricing-to-Market: Evidence From
Producer Prices,” unpublished paper.
Gabriel, Peter and Adam Reiff (2008), “Price setting in Hungary – a Store-level Analysis,”
unpublished paper, Magyar Nemzeti Bank.
Gagnon, Etienne (2009), “Price Setting during Low and High Inflation: Evidence from
Mexico,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (August): 1221 – 1263.
Gautier, Erwan (2008), “The Behaviour of Producer Prices: Some Evidence from the French
PPI Micro Data,” Empirical Economics, 35 (September): 301-332.
Gertler, Mark and John Leahy (2008), “A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation,” Journal of
Political Economy 116 (June): 533-572.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Rebecca Hellerstein (2009), “How Rigid are Producer Prices,”
FRBNY Staff Report 407.
Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (2007), “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves,”
Journal of Political Economy 115 (April): 171–199.
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nicholas Li (2009),
“Estimating the Border Effect: Some New Evidence,” unpublished paper, Harvard
University, University of California at Berkeley and University of Chicago.

84

Gopinath, Gita and Oleg Itskhoki (forthcoming), “Frequency of Price-Adjustment and Passthrough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon (forthcoming), “Currency Choice and
Exchange Rate Pass-through,” American Economic Review.
Gopinath, Gita and Roberto Rigobon (2008), “Sticky Borders,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123 (May): 531-575.
Gouvea, Solange (2007), “Price Rigidity in Brazil: Evidence from CPI Micro Data,” Central
Bank of Brazil Working Paper 143.
Hall, Simon, Mark Walsh and Anthony Yates (2000), “Are UK Companies’ Prices Sticky?”
Oxford Economic Papers 52 (3): 425-446.
Guimaraes, Bernardo and Kevin D. Sheedy (2008), “Sales and Monetary Policy,” CEPR
Discussion Paper 6940.
Hansen, Bo William and Niels Lynggard Hansen (2006), “Price Setting Behavior in
Denmark: A Study of CPI Micro Data 1997-2005,” Danmarks Nationalbank Working
Paper 39.
Hobijn, Bart, Federico Ravenna, and Andrea Tambalotti (2006), “Menu Costs at Work:
Restaurant Prices and the Introduction of the Euro,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121
(August): 1103 – 1131.
Hoeberichts, Marco and Ad Stokman (2006), “Pricing Behaviour of Dutch Companies:
Results of a Survey,” ECP Working Paper 607.
Hoffmann, Johannes and Jeong-Ryeol Kurz-Kim (2006), “Consumer Price Adjustment under
the Microscope: Germany in a Period of Low Inflation,” ECB Working Paper 652.
Horvath, Roman and Fabrizio Coricelli (2006), “Price Setting Behaviour: Micro Evidence on
Slovakia,” CEPR Discussion Papers 5445.
Ikeda, Daisuke, and Shinichi Nishioka (2007), “Price Setting Behavior and Hazard Functions:
Evidence from Japanese CPI Micro Data,” Bank of Japan Working Paper 07-E-19.
Jonker, Nicole, Carsten Folkertsma, and Harry Blijenberg (2004), “Empirical Analysis of
Price Setting Behaviour in the Netherlands in the Period 1998-2003 using Micro Data,”
ECB Working Paper 413.
Julio, Juan Manuel and Hector Manuel Zárate (2008), “The Price Setting Behaviour in
Colombia: Evidence from PPI Micro Data,” Borradores de Economía. Banco de la
República. Colombia.

85

Kashyap, Anil K. (1995), “Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail Catalogues,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 110 (February): 245-274.
Kehoe, Patrick J. and Virgiliu Midrigan (2008), “Temporary Price Changes and the Real
Effects of Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department
Staff Report 413 (September).
Kimball, Miles S. (1995), “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27 (November): 1241-1277.
Klenow, Peter J. and Kryvtsov, Oleksiy (2008), “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent
Pricing: Does It Matter For Recent U.S. Inflation?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123
(August): 863-904.
Klenow, Peter J. and Jonathan L. Willis (2006), “Real Rigidities and Nominal Price
Changes,” unpublished paper, Stanford University and Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City.
Klenow, Peter J. and Jonathan L. Willis (2007), “Sticky Information and Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (September): 79-99.
Konieczny, Jerzy D. and Andrzej Skrzypacz (2005), “Inflation and Price Setting in a Natural
Experiment,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (April): 621-632.
Kovanen, Arto (2006), “Why Do Prices in Sierra Leone Change so Often? A Case Study
using Micro-level Price Data,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 06/53.
Kryvtsov, Oleksiy and Virgiliu Midrigan (2009), “Inventories, Markups, and Real Rigidities
in Menu Cost Models,” unpublished paper, Bank of Canada.
Kwapil, Claudia, Josef Baumgartner and Johann Scharler (2005), “The Price-setting
Behaviour of Austrian Firms: Some Survey Evidence,” ECB Working Paper 464.
Lach, Saul and Daniel Tsiddon (1992), “The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An Empirical
Analysis of Disaggregated Price Data,” Journal of Political Economy 100 (April): 349 –
389.
Lach, Saul and Daniel Tsiddon (1996), “Staggering and Synchronization in Price-Setting:
Evidence from Multiproduct Firms,” American Economic Review 86 (December): 1175 –
1196.
Levy, Daniel, Shantanu Dutta, Mark Bergen, and Robert Venable (1998), “Price Adjustment
and Multiproduct Retailers,” Managerial and Decision Economics 19: 81-120.

86

Levy, Daniel, Dongwon Lee, Haipeng (Allan) Chen, Robert J. Kauffman, and Mark Bergen
(2007), “Price Points and Price Rigidity,” Working Paper 04-07, The Rimini Center for
Economic Analysis.
Loupias, Claire and Roland Ricart (2004), “Price Setting in France: New Evidence from
Survey Data,” ECB Working Paper 423.
Lünnemann, Patrick and Thomas Y. Mathä (2005), “Consumer Price Behaviour in
Luxembourg: Evidence from Micro CPI Data,” ECB Working Paper 541.
Lünnemann, Patrick and Thomas Y. Mathä (2006), “New Survey Evidence on the Pricing
Behavior of Luxenbourg Firms,” ECB Working Paper 617.
Lünnemann, Patrick and Ladislav Wintr (2006), “Are Internet Prices Sticky?” ECB Working
Paper 645.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Frank Smets (2008), “Implications of Micro Price Data for
Macroeconomic Models,” CEPR Discussion Paper 6961.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt (2008), “Business Cycle Dynamics Under
Rational Inattention,” unpublished paper, European Central Bank and Northwestern
University.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2002), “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A
Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (November), 1295-1328.
Martins, Fernando (2005), “The Price Setting Behavior of Portuguese Firms: Evidence from
Survey Data,” ECP Working Paper 562.
Medina, Juan Pablo, David Rappoport, and Claudio Soto (2007), “Dynamics of Price
Adjustment: Evidence from Micro Level Data for Chile,” Central Bank of Chile Working
Paper 432.
Midrigan, Virgiliu (2009), “Menu Costs, Multiproduct Firms, and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
unpublished paper, New York University.
Nakagawa, Shinobu, Ryota Hattori, and Izumi Takagawa (2000), “Price Setting Behavior of
Japanese Companies,” research paper, Bank of Japan.
Nakamura, Emi (2008), “Pass-Through in Retail and Wholesale,” American Economic
Review 98 (May): 430-437.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2008a), “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of
Menu Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (November): 1415-1464.

87

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2008b), “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multi-Sector
Menu Cost Model,” NBER Working Paper 14001 (May).
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2009), “Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and
Pricing to Market,” unpublished paper, Columbia University.
Nakamura, Emi and Dawit Zerom (forthcoming), “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through,”
Review of Economic Studies.
Peersman, Gert and Frank Smets (2003), “The Monetary Transmission Mechanism in the
Euro Area: More Evidence from VAR Analysis,” Monetary Policy Transmission in the
Euro Area, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, I. Angeloni, A. Kashyap, and B.
Mojon, eds.
Peneva, Ekaterina (2009), “Factor Intensity and Price Rigidity: Evidence and Theory,” FEDS
Working Paper No. 2009-07 (January).
Romer, David H. and Christina D. Romer (2004), “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks:
Derivation and Implications,” American Economic Review 94 (September): 1055-1084.
Rotemberg, Julio J. (1982), “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” Review
of Economic Studies, 49 (October): 517-531.
Sabbatini, Roberto, Silvia Fabiani, Angela Gatulli, and Giovanni Veronese (2006), “Producer
Price Behaviour in Italy: Evidence From Micro PPI Data,” unpublished paper, Banca
d’Italia.
Sahinoz, Saygin and Bedriye Saracoglu (2008), “Price Setting Behaviour in Turkish
Industries: Evidence from Survey Data,” Turkish Economic Association Discussion Paper
2008/3.
Saita, Yumi, Izumi Takagawa, Kenji Nishizaki, and Masahiro Higo (2006), “Price Setting in
Japan: Evidence from Individual Retail Price Data,” Bank of Japan Working Paper Series,
No. 06-J-02, (in Japanese).
Stahl, Harald (2005), “Price Setting in German Manufacturing: New Evidence from New
Survey Data”, Discussion Paper 43/2005, Deutsche Bundesbank.
Stahl, Harald (2006), “Producer Price Adjustment at the Micro Level: Evidence from
Individual Price Records Underlying the German PPI”, unpublished paper, Deutsche
Bundesbank.
Taylor, John B. (1980), “Aggregated Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of
Political Economy 88 (February): 1-24.

88

Vermeulen, Philip, Daniel Dias, Maarten Dossche, Erwan Gautier, Ignacio Hernando,
Roberto Sabbatini and Harald Stahl (2007), “Price Setting in the Euro Area: Some Stylized
Facts from Individual Producer Price Data,” ECB Working Paper 727.
Vilmunen, Jouko and Helinä Laakkonen (2005), “How Often Do Prices Change in Finland?
Micro-level Evidence from the CPI,” unpublished paper, Bank of Finland.
Woodford, Michael (2009), “Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 56 (October): S100-S124.
Wolman, Alexander (2007), “The Frequency and Costs of Individual Price Adjustment,”
Managerial and Decision Economics 28 (6): 531-552.
Wulfsberg, Fredrik (2009), “Price Adjustments and Inflation: Evidence from Consumer Price
Data in Norway 1975-2004,” Norges Bank WP 2009/11.

89

