                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    LIMITS OF ARBITRAGE:
                                  THE STATE OF THE THEORY

                                            Denis Gromb
                                           Dimitri Vayanos

                                        Working Paper 15821
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15821


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




We thank Suleyman Basak, Bruno Biais, Bernard Dumas, Vincent Fardeau, Robin Greenwood, Harald
Hau, Peter Kondor, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Anna Pavlova, Christopher Polk, Ana-Maria Santacreu,
Yuki Sato and Pierre-Olivier Weill for helpful comments, and the Paul Woolley Centre at the LSE
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Denis Gromb and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Limits of Arbitrage: The State of the Theory
Denis Gromb and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 15821
March 2010
JEL No. D6,D8,G1,G2

                                              ABSTRACT

We survey theoretical developments in the literature on the limits of arbitrage. This literature investigates
how costs faced by arbitrageurs can prevent them from eliminating mispricings and providing liquidity
to other investors. Research in this area is currently evolving into a broader agenda emphasizing the
role of financial institutions and agency frictions for asset prices. This research has the potential to
explain so-called "market anomalies" and inform welfare and policy debates about asset markets. We
begin with examples of demand shocks that generate mispricings, arguing that they can stem from
behavioral or from institutional considerations. We next survey, and nest within a simple model, the
following costs faced by arbitrageurs: (i) risk, both fundamental and non-fundamental, (ii) short-selling
costs, (iii) leverage and margin constraints, and (iv) constraints on equity capital. We finally discuss
implications for welfare and policy, and suggest directions for future research.


Denis Gromb
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontanebleau
France
denis.gromb@insead.edu

Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, A350
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk
1       INTRODUCTION

Standard models of asset pricing assume a representative agent who participates in all markets
costlessly. Equilibrium prices in these models are tied to the representative agent’s consumption,
which coincides with the aggregate consumption in the economy. The relationship between prices
and consumption is summarized in the consumption CAPM, according to which an asset’s expected
return in excess of the riskfree rate is proportional to the asset’s covariance with aggregate con-
sumption. Intuitively, assets that correlate positively with consumption add to the risk borne by
the representative agent and must offer high expected return as compensation.

        The relationship between risk and expected return predicted by standard models appears to
be at odds with a number of stylized facts commonly referred to as market anomalies. Leading
anomalies include (i) short-run momentum, the tendency of an asset’s recent performance to con-
tinue into the near future, (ii) long-run reversal, the tendency of performance over a longer history
to revert, (iii) the value effect, the tendency of an asset’s ratio of price to accounting measures of
value to predict negatively future returns, (iv) the high volatility of asset prices relative to mea-
sures of discounted future payoff streams, and (v) post-earnings-announcement drift, the tendency
of stocks’ earning surprises to predict positively future returns.1 Reconciling these anomalies with
standard models requires explaining variation in asset risk: for example, in the case of short-run
momentum, one would have to explain why good recent performance renders an asset riskier and
more positively correlated with aggregate consumption. A recent literature pursues explanations
along these lines by introducing more general utility functions for the representative agent. Yet,
reconciling standard models with all the anomalies, and in a way consistent with their quantitative
magnitude remains elusive.

        The anomalies listed above concern the predictability of asset returns based on past prices and
earnings. An additional set of anomalies concern the relative prices of assets with closely related
payoffs. For example, (i) “Siamese-twin” stocks, with claims to almost identical dividend streams,
can trade at significantly different prices, (ii) stocks of a parent and a subsidiary company can trade
at prices under which the remainder of the parent company’s assets has negative value, and (iii)
newly issued “on-the-run” bonds can trade at significantly higher prices than older “off-the-run”
bonds with almost identical payoffs.2 Anomalies concerning relative prices have been documented
    1
     See, for example, Jegadeesh & Titman (1993) for evidence on short-run momentum, DeBondt & Thaler (1985)
for long-run reversal, Fama & French (1992) for the value effect, LeRoy & Porter (1981) & Shiller (1981) for excess
volatility, and Bernard & Thomas (1989) for post-earnings-announcement drift. See also the surveys by Fama (1991)
and Schwert (2003).
   2
     See, for example, Rosenthal & Young (1990) and Dabora & Froot (1999) for evidence on Siamese-twin stocks,


                                                        1
for a more limited set of assets, partly because of the scarcity of asset pairs with closely related
payoffs. At the same time, these anomalies are particularly hard to reconcile with standard models.
Indeed, while standard models may offer slightly different predictions as to how risk and expected
returns are related, they all imply the law of one price, i.e., assets with identical payoffs must
trade at the same price. In the previous examples, however, differences in payoffs appear to be
insignificant relative to the observed price differences.

    Understanding why anomalies exist and are not eliminated requires a careful study of the
process of arbitrage: who are the arbitrageurs, what are the constraints and limitations they face,
and why arbitrage can fail to bring prices close to the fundamental values implied by standard
models. This is the focus of a recent literature on the limits of arbitrage. This article surveys
important theoretical developments in that literature, nests them within a simple model, and
suggests directions for future research.

    Limits of arbitrage are commonly viewed as one of two building blocks needed to explain anoma-
lies. The other building block are demand shocks experienced by investors other than arbitrageurs.
Anomalies are commonly interpreted as arising because demand shocks push prices away from fun-
damental values and arbitrageurs are unable to correct the discrepancies. Such “non-fundamental”
shocks to demand are often attributed to investor irrationality. In this sense, research on the lim-
its of arbitrage is part of the behavioral finance agenda to explain anomalies based on investors’
psychological biases.3

    This article departs from the conventional view in two related respects. First, it argues that
research on the limits of arbitrage is relevant not only for behavioral explanations of anomalies but
also for the broader study of asset pricing. Indeed, psychological biases are not the only source
of non-fundamental demand shocks: such shocks can also arise because of institutional frictions
relating to contracting and agency, as the examples in the next section show. Research on the
limits of arbitrage characterizes how non-fundamental demand shocks, whether behavioral or not,
impact prices.

    According to the conventional view, non-fundamental demand shocks concern investors other
than arbitrageurs, and therefore can be understood independently of the limits of arbitrage. Our
second departure is to argue that many non-fundamental demand shocks can be understood jointly
with limits of arbitrage within a setting that emphasizes financial institutions and agency. Indeed,
Mitchell et al. (2002) and Lamont & Thaler (2003) for the relative pricing of parent and subsidiary companies, and
Amihud & Mendelson (1991), Warga (1992) and Krishnamurthy (2002) for the on-the-run phenomenon.
   3
     Behavioral explanations for the anomalies include Barberis et al. (1998), Daniel et al. (1998), Hong & Stein
(1999) and Barberis & Shleifer (2003). See also the survey by Barberis & Thaler (2003).



                                                        2
arbitrage is often performed by specialized institutions such as hedge funds and investment banks,
and the trading strategies of these institutions are constrained by agency frictions. At the same
time, financial institutions and agency frictions are the source of many non-fundamental demand
shocks. In this sense, financial institutions do not necessarily correct anomalies, but can also cause
them. Research on the limits of arbitrage is currently evolving into a broader agenda emphasizing
the role of financial institutions and agency frictions for asset prices. This agenda has the potential
to offer a unified explanation of many anomalies.

     The emphasis on financial institutions and agency frictions is fruitful for the analysis of welfare
and public policy. Crises, including the recent one, show that government intervention can be
important for the smooth functioning of financial markets. In standard models, however, there is
no scope for such intervention because the equilibrium is Pareto optimal. Research on the limits of
arbitrage has the potential to deliver a more useful framework for designing and assessing public
policy. Indeed, this research takes a two-tiered view of financial markets: a core of sophisticated
arbitrageurs trade against mispricings, and in doing so provide liquidity to a periphery of less
sophisticated investors. Under this view, the financial health of arbitrageurs is crucial for the
smooth functioning of markets and the provision of liquidity. Understanding how financial health
is affected by arbitrageurs’ trading decisions, and whether these decisions are socially optimal, can
guide public policy.

     This article proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents examples of non-fundamental demand
shocks, emphasizing that they often stem from institutional considerations. Section 3 surveys im-
portant theoretical developments in the literature on the limits of arbitrage, and nests them within
a simple model. It emphasizes the following costs faced by arbitrageurs: (i) risk, both fundamental
and non-fundamental, (ii) costs of short-selling, (iii) leverage and margin constraints, and (iv) con-
straints on equity capital.4 While these are not the only costs faced by real-life arbitrageurs, they
are among the most important and have received significant attention in the literature. Besides
examining the implications of each type of cost for asset price behavior, Section 3 sketches how
these costs can be integrated into richer models that incorporate multiple assets and dynamics.
Such models have the potential to address a variety of anomalies—both of the type concerning
violations of the law of one price, and of the type concerning return predictability—and are the
subject of a rapidly growing literature. Finally, Section 4 discusses implications for welfare and
public policy.
   4
     Risk is a cost when arbitrageurs are not fully diversified and bear a disproportionate share of the risk of arbitrage
trades. Undiversification is related to financial constraints, which we treat separately.




                                                            3
2     DEMAND SHOCKS

Models of limited arbitrage typically assume that some investors experience demand shocks that
can drive prices away from fundamental values. This section presents examples of such shocks and
their effects on prices. Shocks in the first example are probably best interpreted as arising from
behavioral considerations, while in the other examples they more likely arise from institutional
frictions.


2.1     Palm-3Com

Lamont & Thaler (2003) study the sale of Palm by its parent company 3Com and the behavior of
the two companies’ stock prices around this event. On March 2, 2000, 3Com sold 5% of its stake
in Palm through an initial public offering (IPO). 3Com also announced that it would spin off its
remaining stake in Palm to 3Com shareholders before the end of the year. Under the terms of the
spin off, 3Com shareholders would receive 1.525 shares of Palm for each share of 3Com they owned.

      The law of one price implies that prior to the spin off, 3Com shares should have been trading
at a price exceeding 1.525 times the price of Palm shares. This is because one 3Com share was
equivalent to 1.525 shares of Palm plus an equity claim to 3Com’s remaining (non-Palm) assets,
and the latter claim had non-negative value because of limited liability. The law of one price was,
however, violated for a period of approximately two months starting from the IPO. For example, on
the day of the IPO, Palm closed at $95.06 per share, implying a lower bound of 1.525×95.06=$145
for the share price of 3Com. 3Com, however, closed at $81.81 per share, having dropped from
$104.13 on the previous day. Under these prices the implied value of 3Com’s non-Palm assets was
-$22 billion, implying an economically significant violation of the law of one price.

      Explaining the mispricing between Palm and 3Com is a challenge to standard models of asset
pricing. One must explain, in particular, why some investors were willing to buy Palm shares for
$95.06, while they could acquire them at a lower cost by buying 3Com shares. The most plausible
explanations are based on investors’ psychological biases and cognitive limitations. Investors buying
Palm were possibly not sophisticated enough to appreciate the opportunity of buying it through
3Com. Moreover, because Palm was a manufacturer of a relatively new product (handheld devices),
it was possibly associated with the “new economy” to an extent higher than 3Com. This might have
led investors overly optimistic about the new economy to be willing to pay a disproportionately
high price for Palm.


                                                  4
2.2     Index Effects

Index effects stem from a stock’s addition to or deletion from prominent market indices. Starting
with Harris & Gurel (1986) and Shleifer (1986), a number of papers document that addition to the
Standard and Poor (S&P)’s 500 index raises the price of a stock, while deletion lowers its price.
For example, Chen et al. (2004) find that during 1989-2000, a stock’s price would increase by an
average 5.45% on the day of the announcement that the stock would be added to the index, and a
further 3.45% from the announcement day to the day of the actual addition. Conversely, a stock’s
price would decrease by an average 8.46% on the day of the announcement that the stock would
be deleted from the index, and a further 5.97% from the announcement day to the deletion day.
These effects are economically significant.

      Standard models can account for index effects only if additions and deletions convey information
about assets’ fundamental values. Even if one is to accept, however, that S&P has an informational
advantage relative to the market, it is hard to explain why this advantage (i) grew larger after 1989,
which is when index effects became the most significant, and (ii) can be so large to account for
the observed index effects. A more plausible explanation is that index additions and deletions
trigger changes in the demand by mutual funds. Indeed, passively managed mutual funds track
indices mechanically, while actively managed funds benchmark their performance against indices.
If, therefore, a stock is added to the S&P500 index, funds that track or are benchmarked against the
index are eager to buy the stock, and this can raise the stock’s price. The institutional explanation
is consistent with the growth of index effects in recent decades since this parallels the growth of
institutional investing, index tracking and benchmarking.

      Boyer (2007) provides further evidence consistent with the institutional explanation. He focuses
on the BARRA value and growth indices, which consist of value and growth stocks, respectively.
Unlike the S&P500 index, BARRA indices are constructed using publicly disclosed rules, so addi-
tions and deletions do not signal any private information. Boyer finds that “marginal value” stocks,
defined as those that just switched from the growth into the value index, comove significantly more
with the value than with the growth index, while the opposite is true for “marginal growth” stocks.
These effects are hard to explain within standard models because marginal value stocks have very
similar characteristics to marginal growth stocks. On the other hand, it is plausible that these
effects arise from shifts in demand by mutual funds. For example, inflows into funds tracking the
value index trigger purchases of all stocks in that index, and this can raise the prices of these stocks
simultaneously. The institutional explanation is further strengthened by Boyer’s finding that the



                                                   5
effects appear only after 1992, which is when the BARRA indices were introduced.5



2.3     Fire Sales by Mutual Funds


Mutual funds respond to outflows by selling stocks in their portfolios. Coval & Stafford (2007) study
the behavior of stock prices around sales driven by large outflows. They define fire sales as the sales
by the 10% of funds that experience the largest outflows within a given quarter. For each stock,
they compute the fraction of average volume generated by fire sales, and they focus on the 10% of
stocks for which this fraction is largest. These stocks exhibit a V-shaped price pattern. During the
fire-sale quarter and the quarter immediately preceding, their average cumulative abnormal return
is -7.9%. This price decline is followed by a recovery: during the year following the fire-sale quarter,
the average cumulative abnormal return is 6.1%. This return rises to 9.7% during the 18 months
following the fire-sale quarter.6

      The slow and predictable price recovery is a challenge to standard models. Indeed, standard
models can account for an increase in expected return only through an increase in the covariance
with aggregate consumption. Explaining why this covariance increases for stocks sold by distressed
mutual funds, and why such an increase can account for an annual abnormal return of 6% is
difficult. A more plausible explanation is that sales by distressed mutual funds generate price
pressure, pushing prices below fundamental values and raising expected returns going forward.
This explanation is related to institutional frictions: distressed sales are likely to be triggered by
investors who lose confidence in the quality of managers running underperforming funds.



2.4     U.K. Pension Reform and the Term Structure

Demand shocks are likely to also affect prices outside the U.S. and for assets other than stocks, as
our last example illustrates. It concerns the impact of the U.K. pension reform on the term structure
of interest rates, an episode described in greater detail in Greenwood & Vayanos (2010a). A major
objective of U.K. pension reform over the past twenty years has been to ensure the transparency and
solvency of pension funds; indeed, the reform was motivated partly by the failure of the Maxwell
pension fund in the early 1990s. The reform stipulated that pension funds had to meet a minimum
ratio of assets to liabilities. Pension-fund assets, such as stocks and bonds, are publicly traded and
   5
     Earlier evidence linking index membership to comovement is in Vijh (1994) and Barberis et al. (2005). Both
papers focus on the S&P 500 index.
   6
     Related evidence suggesting that fund outflows have large price effects is in Anton & Polk (2008), Jotikasthira
et al. (2009), Greenwood & Thesmar (2009) and Lou (2009).


                                                         6
can be valued using market prices. On the other hand, pension-fund liabilities are not traded, and
their valuation requires a suitable discount rate. Under the Pensions Act of 2004, this discount rate
had to be the yield on long-term inflation-linked government bonds, on the grounds that pension
liabilities are long term and indexed to inflation.

      Pension funds responded to the reform by buying large amounts of long-term bonds. Indeed,
because long-term bonds were providing the discount rate to calculate the value of pension liabilities,
they were also the best hedge for these liabilities. Pension-fund purchases had a significant impact
on the term structure, especially at the long end. For example, in late 2003, the inflation-indexed
bonds maturing in 2016 and 2035 had approximately the same yield. During 2004 and 2005,
however, the yield of the 2035 bond fell relative to that of the 2016 bond, with the spread reaching
an all-time low of -0.49% in January 2006. At that time, the 2035 and 2055 bonds had yields of
0.72% and 0.48%, respectively, which are extremely low relative to the historical average of 3% of
long real rates in the U.K. In accordance with the generally-held view that long yields had decreased
because of demand by pension funds, the government agreed in 2005 to issue bonds with maturities
of up to 50 years, while also shifting the overall mix of maturities towards the long term.

      The inversion at the long end of the U.K. term structure is hard to rationalize within standard
representative-agent models. Indeed, in these models the interest rate for maturity T is determined
by the willingness of the representative agent to substitute consumption between times 0 and T .
Therefore, these models would attribute the drop in the 30-year interest rate to the unlikely scenario
that the pension reform signalled a drop in aggregate consumption 30 years into the future. In a
similar spirit, the expectations hypothesis of the term structure would attribute the drop in the
2035-2016 yield spread to expectations about short-term interest rates past 2016 decreasing sharply
during 2004 and 2005. A more plausible explanation is that the reform triggered high demand for
long-term bonds by pension funds, and that generated price pressure.



2.5     Summary

The examples in this section describe a variety of demand shocks that had significant and long-
term price effects. A natural question is why arbitrageurs are unable to absorb such shocks and
bring prices back to fundamental values. For example, why don’t arbitrageurs eliminate the abnor-
mally high expected returns following fire sales by buying the stocks in question? And why were
arbitrageurs unable to eliminate the Palm-3Com mispricing by shorting Palm and buying 3Com?
Using a simple model, we next examine the constraints faced by arbitrageurs and the implications


                                                  7
for asset prices.



3     A SIMPLE MODEL

3.1     Cross-Asset Arbitrage and Intertemporal Arbitrage

We consider an economy where assets are traded in Period 1 and pay off in Period 2. The riskless
rate is exogenous and equal to zero. There are two risky assets, A and B, paying off dA and dB ,
respectively. We denote by d¯i and σi , respectively, the mean and standard deviation of di , i = A, B,
and by ρ the correlation between dA and dB . For tractability, we assume that dA and dB are jointly
normal, and modify this assumption in Section 3.4. The price pB of asset B is exogenous and
equal to the asset’s expected payoff d¯B . The price pA of asset A is endogenously determined in
equilibrium. Our focus is on how shocks to the demand for asset A affect pA .

      There are two types of agents: outside investors and arbitrageurs. Outside investors’ demand
for asset A is inelastic and equal to u shares. We refer to u as the demand shock: it is a constant
parameter in this section, but becomes a stochastic shock in Section 3.2 where we introduce an
initial Period 0. Arbitrageurs are competitive, risk averse and maximize expected utility of wealth
W2 in Period 2. For tractability, we assume that utility is exponential. By possibly reinterpreting
the demand shock u as net demand, we normalize the supply of asset A to zero. Under this
normalization, the price of asset A in the absence of the demand shock (u = 0) equals the asset’s
expected payoff d¯A .

      A demand shock u 6= 0 can push the price of asset A away from the expected payoff. Ar-
bitrageurs trade to profit from this discrepancy. Doing so, they also provide liquidity to outside
investors. Suppose, for example, that u is positive, in which case outside investors wish to buy asset
A. Arbitrageurs provide liquidity because they take the opposite side of this transaction, shorting
the asset and limiting the price rise. Liquidity is high when the demand shock’s price impact is
small: if, for example, u is positive, high liquidity means that the price rise is small.

      The model has two interpretations, capturing different but closely related real-life arbitrage
situations. In the first “cross-asset arbitrage” interpretation, assets A and B are different and
arbitrageurs use asset B to hedge their position in asset A. In the second “intertemporal arbitrage”
interpretation, arbitrageurs exploit discrepancies between the prices of the same asset at different
points in time. In that interpretation, the arbitrageurs’ positions in assets A and B represent trades


                                                   8
that arbitrageurs execute in the same asset in different periods. The two interpretations yield the
same basic insight: the price effects of demand shocks depend on the risk aversion of arbitrageurs
and on the risk that they cannot hedge away.


Cross-Asset Arbitrage

     In Period 1, the arbitrageurs choose positions xA and xB in assets A and B to maximize
expected utility

      −E1 [exp(−αW2 )]                                                                                            (1)

subject to the budget constraint

      W2 = W1 + xA (dA − pA ) + xB (dB − pB ),                                                                    (2)

where α denotes the risk aversion of arbitrageurs and W1 their wealth in Period 1.7 Substituting
(2) into (1), and using normality and the assumption that pB = d¯B , we find that arbitrageurs
maximize the mean-variance objective

                       α¡ 2 2                          ¢
      xA (d¯A − pA ) −   xA σA + x2B σB
                                      2
                                        + 2xA xB ρσA σB .                                                         (3)
                       2

The optimal demand for asset B is xB = −(ρσA /σB )xA , i.e., arbitrageurs choose a position in asset
B to hedge that in asset A. The optimal demand for asset A is

               d¯A − pA
      xA =       2 (1 − ρ2 ) .                                                                                    (4)
              ασA

Since asset A is in zero supply, the market-clearing condition is

      xA + u = 0.                                                                                                 (5)

Combining (4) and (5), we find the equilibrium price of asset A:

      pA = d¯A + ασA
                   2
                     (1 − ρ2 )u.                                                                                  (6)

Eq. (6) highlights a number of properties. First, larger demand shocks have a larger price impact
(∂pA /∂u > 0). Second, a given demand shock u has a larger price impact when arbitrageurs are
   7
     Our analysis of cross-asset arbitrage is related to Wurgler & Zhuravskaya (2002). As in our model, they take the
price of asset B to be exogenous and equal to the asset’s expected payoff. Unlike in our model, however, they restrict
arbitrageurs’ aggregate dollar investment in assets A and B to be zero.


                                                          9
more risk averse (large α) and asset A has a more uncertain payoff (large σA ) because in both cases
arbitrageurs require more compensation to bear its risk. The shock’s impact is also larger when
the payoff of asset A is less correlated with that of asset B (small |ρ|) because arbitrageurs are less
able to hedge their position in asset A using asset B. Thus, assets with higher idiosyncratic risk
and fewer substitutes are more sensitive to demand shocks. Note that in the extreme case where
assets A and B have identical payoffs (dA = dB , i.e., ρ = 1), the demand shock has no effect and
the two assets trade at the same price. Arbitrageurs are able to align the price of asset A fully with
that of asset B because they bear no risk in exploiting price discrepancies between the two assets.


Intertemporal Arbitrage

      In cross-asset arbitrage, arbitrageurs exploit discrepancies between the prices of two assets
at a given point in time. We next consider intertemporal arbitrage, where arbitrageurs exploit
discrepancies between the prices of the same asset at different points in time. To interpret our
model as one of intertemporal arbitrage, we split Period 1 into two subperiods, and assume that
positions in assets A and B represent trades in the same asset in the first and second subperiods,
respectively. The model so derived is a simplified version of Grossman & Miller (1988).

      We denote by 1 and 1+ , respectively, the first and second subperiod of Period 1, by d ≡ dA = dB
the common payoff of assets A and B, by d¯ and d¯+ the expectation of d as of subperiod 1 and
1+ , respectively, and by σ and σ + the respective standard deviation of d. The expectation d¯+
is random as of subperiod 1 if new information arrives between subperiods 1 and 1+ , and has
conditional variance σ 2 − (σ + )2 .8

      Since in subperiod 1+ arbitrageurs can trade asset B, and at a price equal to its expected
payoff, they are not compensated for bearing risk. Therefore, their aggregate position in subperiod
1+ is zero, which means that their trade in subperiod 1+ , i.e., in asset B, is the opposite of that in
subperiod 1, i.e., in asset A. Using dA = dB = d, pB = d¯+ and xA = −xB , we can write (2) as

        W2 = W1 + xA (d¯+ − pA ).                                                                  (7)

Substituting (7) into (1), we find that arbitrageurs choose their position in asset A in subperiod 1
to maximize the mean-variance objective

                       α £               ¤
        xA (d¯ − pA ) − x2A σ 2 − (σ + )2 .
                       2
  8
                                     £             ¤      £          ¤
      This follows from V ar(d|1) = E V ar(d|1+ )|1 + V ar E(d|1+ )|1 .


                                                         10
The optimal demand for asset A is

                  d¯ − pA
      xA =                       .                                                                               (8)
              α [σ 2 − (σ + )2 ]

Combining (8) with the market-clearing condition (5), we find the equilibrium price of asset A:

                 £             ¤
      pA = d¯ + α σ 2 − (σ + )2 u.                                                                               (9)

The demand shock has a larger price impact when arbitrageurs are more risk averse (large α)
and bear more risk. The relevant risk is that between subperiods 1 and 1+ , and is measured by
σ 2 − (σ + )2 . This is because arbitrageurs offset their risky position in subperiod 1 by an opposite
position in subperiod 1+ . In the extreme case where subperiods 1 and 1+ coincide, σ = σ + and
the demand shock has no effect. As Grossman & Miller emphasize, the time between subperiods
1 and 1+ can be interpreted as the time it takes for enough risk-bearing capacity to arrive in
the market and fully eliminate the effect of the demand shock.9 The two interpretations of our
model correspond to different real-life arbitrageur situations and, accordingly, to different strands
of empirical studies. From an asset-pricing theory viewpoint, however, they are isomorphic. From
now on, we focus on the cross-asset arbitrage interpretation of the model, and enrich it in ways
that illustrate developments in the literature on the limits of arbitrage. The results we derive carry
through to the intertemporal arbitrage interpretation.



3.2    Non-Fundamental Risk

In our baseline model, the risk borne by arbitrageurs is “fundamental risk,” arising from asset
payoffs. An additional type of risk stems from demand shocks when these affect prices. DeLong
et al. (DSSW 1990) label this type of risk “noise-trader risk.” We use instead the term “non-
fundamental risk” to emphasize that while demand shocks may be unrelated to asset payoffs, they
can be generated from rational behavior as the examples in Section 2 illustrate. To introduce
non-fundamental risk in our model, we assume that the variables d¯A , d¯B and u, which are constant
parameters as of Period 1, are random as of an initial Period 0. Fundamental risk in Period 0 arises
because prices in Period 1 depend on d¯A and d¯B . Non-fundamental risk arises because asset A’s
price in Period 1 depends on u. We assume that fundamental risk in Period 0 is the same as in
   9
     A recent literature derives the slow arrival of new investors from search costs. See, for example, Weill (2007),
Duffie et al. (2008), Duffie & Strulovici (2009) and Lagos et al. (2009). See also He and Xiong (2008), who derive
capital immobility and segmentation from agency frictions: preventing traders from moving across assets can provide
their employer with a better signal of their effort.


                                                         11
Period 1, i.e., the standard deviation of d¯i , i = A, B, is σi , and the correlation between d¯A and d¯B
is ρ. We denote the standard deviation of u by σu , and assume that u is independent of d¯A and
d¯B .

        Eq. (6) implies that the standard deviation, as of Period 0, of asset A’s price in Period 1 is
              q
         σA               2 (1 − ρ2 )2 σ 2 .
                  1 + α2 σA                                                                         (10)
                                        u


Eq. (10) shows that non-fundamental risk σu increases asset A’s volatility. The effect is through the
second term inside the square root, which is the ratio of non-fundamental variance (α2 σA
                                                                                        4 (1−ρ2 )2 σ 2 )
                                                                                                    u
                          2 ). This ratio is larger when the demand shock is less predictable (large
to fundamental variance (σA
σu ) and when a given demand shock u has a larger price impact in Period 1. Consistent with (6),
price impact is larger when arbitrageurs are more risk averse (large α), and the payoff of asset A is
more uncertain (large σA ) and less correlated with the payoff of asset B (small |ρ|).

        Eqs. (6) and pB = d¯B imply that the correlation, as of Period 0, between the prices of assets
A and B in Period 1 is

                   ρ
         q                         .                                                                (11)
                  2 (1 − ρ2 )2 σ 2
          1 + α2 σA             u


Eq. (11) shows that non-fundamental risk lowers the correlation between assets A and B. This is
because it increases the volatility of asset A without affecting asset B.

        Consider next an arbitrageur who takes a position in assets A and B in Period 0 in response
to a demand shock in that period. Since non-fundamental risk increases asset A’s volatility and
lowers its correlation with asset B, it increases the volatility of the arbitrageur’s return in Period
1. This volatility matters when the arbitrageur has a short horizon and must close his position in
Period 1. Price volatility caused by demand shocks in Period 1 deters such an arbitrageur from
absorbing demand shocks in Period 0. DSSW build on this idea to show that non-fundamental
risk can be self-fulfilling. They assume a discrete-time infinite-horizon economy with an exogenous
riskless rate r and an asset paying a constant dividend r in each period. Since one share of the
second asset yields the same payoff as an investment of one dollar in the first asset, the law of
one price implies that the price of the second asset should be one. DSSW show, however, that
when arbitrageurs have a one-period horizon an equilibrium exists in which this price is stochastic.
Intuitively, if arbitrageurs expect the price to be stochastic, demand shocks have an effect, and this
renders the price stochastic.

                                                     12
      The stochastic equilibrium of DSSW hinges on a number of assumptions. One is that arbi-
trageurs have short horizons: if they were infinitely lived, they would enforce the law of one price
through buy-and-hold strategies. Short horizons can be viewed as a reduced form for financial
constraints, as we show in Sections 3.4 and 3.5. A second critical assumption is that of an infinite
horizon: with a finite horizon, the law of one price would hold.10 Lowenstein & Willard (2006)
show that even under these two assumptions, the law of one price would hold in DSSW if interest
rates were endogenized, prices were precluded from becoming negative, or borrowing limits were
imposed. But while DSSW’s result on the failure of the law of one price may not be robust, their
broader point that non-fundamental risk is an impediment to arbitrage remains important.


3.3     Short-Selling Costs

In our analysis so far, the only cost arbitrageurs face is risk. Additional costs, however, stem from
the way arbitrageur positions are established and financed. Arbitrageurs often establish their po-
sitions in the repo market. For example, an arbitrageur wishing to establish a long position in an
asset can borrow some of the needed cash by posting the asset as collateral—a repo transaction.
Conversely, an arbitrageur wishing to establish a short position in an asset can borrow (to subse-
quently sell) the asset by posting cash as collateral—a reverse repo transaction. The interest rate
earned on the cash, known as the repo rate, can differ across assets and this can be a source of
arbitrage costs. For example, shorting an asset that carries a low repo rate relative to other assets
is costly because the cash collateral posted by the short-seller earns a below-market interest rate.

      Costs involved in establishing and financing positions are often referred to as holding costs.
Tuckman & Vila (1992, 1993) introduce exogenous holding costs and show that they prevent arbi-
trageurs from eliminating mispricings. Arbitrageurs trade against mispricings only when these are
large enough to compensate them for the holding costs they incur. Dow & Gorton (1994) show
that holding costs can have disproportionately large effects when they are incurred by a sequence
of short-horizon arbitrageurs.

      Short-selling costs are holding costs associated with short positions. We introduce short-selling
costs in our model by assuming that shorting asset A involves a cost c per share. Arbitrageurs
maximize the objective

                        α¡ 2 2                          ¢
       xA (d¯A − pA ) −   xA σA + x2B σB
                                       2
                                         + 2xA xB ρσA σB − c|xA |1{xA <0} ,                                        (12)
                        2
   10
      Our model confirms this: if assets A and B have the same payoff, the correlation ρ is one, and the non-fundamental
risk in (10) and (11) disappears.


                                                          13
where 1S is equal to one if condition S is satisfied and zero otherwise. Eq. (12) is derived from (3) by
subtracting the cost c|xA | of holding a short position xA in asset A. Solving for the optimal demand
for asset A and combining with the market-clearing condition (5), we find that the equilibrium price
of asset A is given by
      pA = d¯A + ασ 2 (1 − ρ2 )u
                      A               if u ≤ 0,                                                   (13a)

      pA = d¯A + ασA
                   2
                     (1 − ρ2 )u + c if u > 0.                                                     (13b)

Short-selling costs affect the price only when the demand shock u is positive because this is when
arbitrageurs hold a short position. The price increases by an amount equal to the short-selling cost
c, so that arbitrageurs are compensated for incurring c.

    Short-selling costs have an effect even when the assets have identical payoffs, and in that case
they cause the law of one price to be violated. Setting ρ = 1 in (13b), we find pA = d¯ + c, where d¯
denotes the expected payoff of the two assets (d¯ ≡ d¯A = d¯B ). Therefore, when the demand shock
u is positive, the price of asset A is higher than the price of the identical-payoff asset B by an
amount equal to the short-selling cost c. This analysis maps to the Palm-3Com example: c can
be interpreted as the cost of shorting Palm and u as the demand by investors eager to hold Palm
over 3Com. D’Avolio (2002) and Lamont & Thaler (2003) report that c was large and prevented
arbitrageurs from exploiting the mispricing.

    In our model, the short-selling cost c is an exogenous deadweight loss. A number of papers
seek to endogenize c based on frictions in the repo market. In Duffie (1996), short-sellers have the
choice between two assets with identical payoffs but different exogenous transaction costs. They
prefer to short the low transaction cost asset, and their demand to borrow that asset in the repo
market lowers the repo rate, driving up the short-selling cost. The friction in the repo market
is that asset owners must incur an exogenous transaction cost to lend their asset. Unlike in our
model, the short-selling cost c is not a deadweight loss, but accrues to asset owners. Therefore,
it is an additional payoff earned from holding the asset and increases the asset price—even in the
absence of any positive demand shock u. Krishnamurthy (2002) uses a similar model to show that
a price premium arising from short-selling costs can coexist with a premium arising from an asset’s
superior liquidity.

    Duffie et al. (2002) model the repo market as a search market in which asset borrowers and
lenders negotiate bilaterally. The search friction generates a short-selling cost, which increases in
the demand for short-selling. Vayanos & Weill (2008) show that the combination of a search spot
market and a search repo market yields violations of the law of one price—even in the absence of

                                                  14
any exogenous differences in transaction costs. Short-sellers concentrate on the more liquid asset,
and their activity is what renders the asset more liquid. The more liquid asset carries a price
premium both because of its superior liquidity and because high demand for short-selling drives up
short-selling costs.

      In the extreme case where short-selling costs are infinite, they amount to short-sale constraints,
whose implications for asset prices are examined in a number of papers. Miller (1977) shows that
when short-sales are not allowed, pessimistic investors are unable to trade and prices reflect the
valuation of the most optimistic investors. Harrison & Kreps (1978) show that with multiple trading
periods, prices even exceed the valuation of investors who are currently the most optimistic. Indeed,
these investors have the option to resell the asset should other investors become more optimistic
in future periods. Scheinkman & Xiong (2003) determine asset prices and the value of the resale
option in a continuous-time model where differences in beliefs stem from overconfidence. Hong
et al. (2006) show that overpricing and the value of the resale option are highest for assets with
low float. Diamond & Verrecchia (1987) show that short-sale constraints do not cause overpricing
when differences in beliefs stem from private signals rather than an agreement to disagree. Indeed,
the market adjusts rationally for the fact that investors with negative private signals are unable
to trade. Bai et al. (2006) show that short-sale constraints can cause underpricing because they
generate uncertainty about the extent of negative private information. Hong & Stein (2003) show
that the occasional release of negative private information can be the source of market crashes.



3.4     Leverage Constraints

In our analysis so far, there is no role for arbitrageur capital: while portfolio decisions and asset
prices depend on arbitrageur risk aversion, they are independent of arbitrageur wealth. Wealth does
not matter because of the simplifying assumption that arbitrageurs have exponential utility, i.e.,
their coefficient of absolute risk aversion is independent of wealth. Yet, the capital available to real-
life arbitrageurs appears to be an important determinant of their ability to eliminate mispricings
and provide liquidity to other investors.

      The study of arbitrageur wealth effects is related to that of financial constraints. Indeed, an
important theme in the literature on the limits of arbitrage is that arbitrageurs are sophisticated
traders, better able to identify mispricings than other, less sophisticated investors. Since capital
in the hands of arbitrageurs can earn higher return, other investors can gain by investing their
capital with arbitrageurs. If, however, arbitrageurs could access external capital frictionlessly, they


                                                   15
would be able to eliminate mispricings, and asset prices and allocations would be as in standard
models. Thus, while arbitrageur capital can exceed the arbitrageurs’ personal wealth, it appears
to be limited by financial constraints.

    In this section we study constraints on arbitrageurs’ ability to acquire leverage by raising
margin debt. We assume that assets A and B have identical payoffs. This isolates the effects of
leverage constraints from those of risk: arbitrageurs bear no risk when exploiting a price discrepancy
between assets A and B, and such a discrepancy can arise solely because of leverage constraints.
To model leverage constraints, we focus on the mechanics of collateral in the repo market, following
Geanakoplos (1997; 2003). We also assume that arbitrageurs must collateralize their positions in
each asset separately. The model so derived is a simplified version of Gromb & Vayanos (2002;
2010).

    Consider an arbitrageur wishing to establish a long position xi in asset i. The arbitrageur can
borrow some of the needed cash by posting asset i as collateral. The borrowed cash is typically
less than the market value xi pi of the asset collateral; otherwise, a drop in the asset price would
cause the value of the collateral to drop below that of the loan. To determine the size of the loan,
we assume for simplicity that margin loans have to be riskless and that competitive lenders set
the rate equal to the riskless rate (which is zero). Riskless loans are not feasible when the payoff
d of the two assets is normal, and we assume instead that d is distributed symmetrically over the
bounded support [d¯ − ², d¯ + ²], where d¯ ≥ ². An arbitrageur wishing to establish a long position xi
in asset i can thus borrow a maximum of xi (d¯ − ²), and must pay the remainder

        ¡           ¢
      xi pi − d¯ + ² ≡ xi m+
                           i .                                                                                  (14)

out of his wealth. The parameter m+
                                  i is the margin (or haircut) for a long position in asset i.
                                                                                              11



    Consider next an arbitrageur wishing to establish a short position xi in asset i. The arbitrageur
can borrow (and subsequently sell) asset i posting cash as collateral. The cash collateral typically
exceeds the proceeds |xi |pi from the sale of the borrowed asset; otherwise, an increase in the asset
price would cause the value of the loan to rise above that of the collateral. As for long positions,
we assume that margin loans have to be riskless and that competitive asset lenders pay the riskless
rate on the cash collateral.12 An arbitrageur wishing to establish a short position xi in asset i must
  11
     An alternative to requiring margin loans to be riskless is to allow for default and impose an upper bound on its
probability. This would yield a constraint of the same form as (14), which would be interpreted as a value-at-risk
constraint.
  12
     This assumption eliminates the short-selling costs of Section 3.3.



                                                         16
post |xi |(d¯ + ²) units of cash as collateral. Selling the asset yields |xi |pi units, and the remainder

           ¡           ¢
      |xi | d¯ + ² − pi ≡ |xi |m−
                                i .                                                                  (15)

must be drawn from the arbitrageur’s wealth. The parameter m−
                                                            i is the margin (or haircut) for

a short position in asset i. Note that the margin requirements m+      −
                                                                i and mi are increasing in the

parameter ², which is a measure of the volatility of asset i. Indeed, volatility increases the maximum
loss that a long or short position can experience.

    From (14) and (15), the positions xA and xB of an arbitrageur with wealth W1 must satisfy
the following leverage constraint:

              X           ¡                         ¢
      W1 ≥           |xi | m+             −
                            i 1{xi >0} + mi 1{xi <0} .                                               (16)
             i=A,B


Arbitrageurs maximize expected utility (1) subject to the budget constraint (2) and the leverage
constraint (16).

    When can arbitrageurs eliminate price discrepancies between assets A and B, thus enforcing the
law of one price? The market-clearing condition (5) requires that arbitrageurs absorb the demand
shock u, i.e., take a position xA = −u. If, in addition, assets A and B trade at a price equal to
                      ¯ then it is optimal for arbitrageurs not to bear risk and hold an offsetting
their expected payoff d,
position xB = u in asset B. Since for pA = pB = d¯ the margins m+      −
                                                                i and m1 are equal to ², the

leverage constraint (16) is satisfied if

      W1 ≥ 2|u|².                                                                                    (17)

Arbitrageurs can enforce the law of one price if their wealth W1 is large relative to the demand shock
u and the margin requirement ². In that case, the demand shock has no effect on the price of asset
A and the market is perfectly liquid. Intuitively, arbitrageurs can provide perfect liquidity when
their wealth is large because the leverage constraint is not binding. When, however, arbitrageur
wealth is small, the leverage constraint is binding and liquidity is imperfect.

    Leverage constraints can give rise to amplification, whereby the effects of an exogenous shock
are amplified through changes in arbitrageur positions. Amplification can be derived in our model
by assuming that arbitrageurs enter Period 1 with a position from Period 0, and that outside
investors’ demand is elastic. If, for example, arbitrageurs enter Period 1 with a long position, then
a negative demand shock u lowers the price pA , thus lowering arbitrageur wealth W1 and tightening

                                                     17
the leverage constraint (16). This can force arbitrageurs to liquidate positions, amplifying the
price drop. Note that when liquidating their positions, arbitrageurs consume rather than provide
liquidity. The liquidity providers are the outside investors, and their demand must be assumed
elastic so that they are willing to buy from arbitrageurs.

     Leverage constraints and amplification have been studied in macroeconomic settings, starting
with Bernanke & Gertler (1989), Shleifer & Vishny (1992) and Kiyotaki & Moore (1997). In these
papers, an adverse shock to economic activity depresses collateral values, and this can amplify the
drop in activity. Geanakoplos (1997; 2003) defines the concept of a collateral equilibrium, where
margin contracts are derived endogenously. He shows that margins are tied to asset volatility as in
(14) and (15), and provides examples where margins increase following adverse shocks.

     In a financial market context, Gromb & Vayanos (2002) study how leverage constraints af-
fect the ability of arbitrageurs to eliminate mispricings and provide liquidity to outside investors.
They show, within a dynamic setting, that liquidity increases in arbitrageur capital and that arbi-
trageurs can amplify exogenous shocks.13 Brunnermeier & Pedersen (2009) and Gromb & Vayanos
(2009a) extend this analysis to multiple assets in a static and dynamic setting, respectively. With
multiple assets, leverage constraints generate not only amplification, but also contagion, whereby
shocks to one asset are transmitted to otherwise unrelated assets through changes in arbitrageur
positions. Pavlova & Rigobon (2008) derive a contagion result in an international-economy model
with portfolio constraints, of which leverage constraints are a special case. Kondor (2009) shows
that amplification can arise even in the absence of exogenous shocks, purely as a consequence of
arbitrage activity. Indeed, if a price discrepancy between two assets were to remain constant or
decrease over time, arbitrageurs would exploit it and reduce it to a level from which it could in-
crease. Garleanu & Pedersen (2009) show that all else equal, assets with lower margin requirements
can trade at higher prices. Related results are derived in Cuoco (1997), Basak & Croitoru (2000;
2006) and Geanakoplos (2003). Other dynamic models with leverage constraints include Aiyagari
& Gertler (1999), Allen & Gale (2000), Anshuman & Viswanathan (2005), Geanakoplos & Fostel
(2008), Adrian et al. (2009), Chabakauri (2009), Danielsson et al. (2009) and Rytchkov (2009).14
  13
     Weill (2007) derives a link between arbitrageur capital and liquidity provision in a search model. See also Duffie &
Strulovici (2009), who use a search model to study the gradual flow of arbitrage capital across trading opportunities.
  14
     See also Yuan (2005) for a model in which leverage constraints hamper the revelation of private information, and
Grossman & Vila (1992), Liu & Longstaff (2004), Jurek & Yang (2007) and Milbradt (2009) for partial-equilibrium
models of portfolio choice by leverage-constrained investors. Amplification and contagion can also be derived in
models without explicit leverage constraints but where arbitrageur risk aversion depends on wealth. This is done in
Kyle & Xiong (2001) and Xiong (2001), who endow arbitrageurs with logarithmic utility, under which the coefficient
of absolute risk aversion decreases in wealth. Following adverse shocks, arbitrageurs reduce their positions because
they become more risk averse and not because they hit leverage constraints.




                                                           18
3.5     Constraints on Equity Capital

In addition to constraints on margin debt, arbitrageurs often face constraints in raising equity.
For example, the equity of a mutual fund is determined by the flow of investors into the fund,
and could be lower than the level at which the fund’s profitable investment opportunities are fully
exploited. Moreover, poor returns by the fund could trigger outflows by investors, and so render the
fund more constrained. Shleifer & Vishny (1997) study the implications of constraints on equity
capital for arbitrageurs’ ability to exploit mispricings. They show that constraints give rise to
amplification, via a mechanism akin to that for leverage constraints. Suppose that arbitrageurs
hold long positions in an asset. A negative shock to the asset lowers its price and triggers outflows
by investors in arbitrage funds. As a consequence, arbitrageurs are forced to reduce their positions,
amplifying the price drop. These results can be derived in our model by assuming that (i) part of
arbitrageur wealth belongs to other investors, and is withdrawn following poor returns in Period
1, (ii) arbitrageurs cannot borrow, (iii) arbitrageurs enter Period 1 with a position from Period 0,
and (iv) outside investors’ demand is elastic.

      Shleifer & Vishny show additionally that constraints have an effect not only when they are
binding, but also because of the possibility that they might bind in the future. Indeed, suppose
that arbitrageurs with ample capital in Period 0 identify an underpriced asset. Investing heavily
in that asset exposes them to the risk of large outflows by investors were the underpricing to
worsen in Period 1. This would deprive arbitrageurs of capital when they need it the most since
this is when the underpricing is the most extreme. As a consequence, arbitrageurs could refrain
from investing heavily in the underpriced asset in Period 0, keeping instead some capital in cash.
Arbitrageurs’ strategy of seeking to match capital with profitable investment opportunities amounts
to risk management. Risk management by arbitrageurs is also derived in models with leverage
constraints, e.g., Gromb & Vayanos (2002), Liu & Longstaff (2004), Brunnermeier & Pedersen
(2009) and Kondor (2009), and is further emphasized in Acharya et al. (2009) and Bolton et al.
(2009). Holmstrom & Tirole (2001) explore the implications of risk management by firms for the
cross-sectional pricing of assets. They show that assets paying off in states where firms’ financial
constraints bind are more expensive than assets paying off in other states because they provide
capital when it is needed the most.

      A number of papers integrate constraints on the equity capital available to arbitrage funds—
and especially its dependence on past performance—into dynamic settings. In Vayanos (2004),
fund managers face the constraint that their fund will be liquidated following poor performance,


                                                 19
and this makes them unwilling to hold illiquid assets at times of high volatility. In He & Krish-
namurthy (2008; 2009), the capital available to fund managers cannot exceed a fixed multiple of
their personal wealth—a constraint derived from optimal contracting under moral hazard. When
managers underperform, the constraint becomes binding and causes volatility and risk premia to
increase. Guerrieri & Kondor (2009) derive amplification effects from managers’ reputation con-
cerns.15 In Vayanos & Woolley (2008), investors withdraw capital following underperformance by
fund managers because they infer rationally that managers might be inefficient. If, in addition,
withdrawals have to be gradual, they generate short-run momentum and long-run reversal in asset
returns.16


3.6      Summary and Next Steps

Sections 3.1-3.5 show how an array of costs faced by arbitrageurs limit their ability to eliminate
mispricings and provide liquidity to outside investors. We next sketch what we view as two impor-
tant next steps in this research agenda: (i) derive the financial constraints of arbitrageurs within an
optimal contracting framework, and (ii) integrate limits-of-arbitrage ideas into richer models that
incorporate multiple assets and dynamics and that can be used to address empirical puzzles.

       As Sections 3.4 and 3.5 emphasize, arbitrageurs face financial constraints stemming from agency
problems with their providers of capital. Most of the papers referenced in these sections do not fully
endogenize the constraints. For example, papers on leverage constraints typically rule out equity
and papers on equity constraints typically rule out debt. Deriving financial constraints within an
optimal contracting framework is an important next step. Indeed, while the constraints studied in
the literature take a variety of forms, they tend to generate results in common, e.g., amplification,
contagion, and risk management by arbitrageurs. Endogenizing the constraints would help identify
whether the common results are driven by a single underlying friction, or whether the constraints
are fundamentally different. Identifying the frictions that underlie the constraints would also be
useful for policy analysis, as it would clarify what a regulator can and cannot do to alleviate the
effects of the constraints.

       Starting with Kehoe and Levine (1993), a macroeconomic literature explores the asset pric-
ing implications of financial constraints when these derive from limited commitment by borrowers.
  15
     Reputation concerns are also explored in Dasgupta & Prat (2008), Dasgupta et al. (2008), and Malliaris & Yan
(2009).
  16
     Other papers studying general equilibrium implications of delegated portfolio management include Cuoco &
Kaniel (2009), Petajisto (2009), Basak & Pavlova (2010) and Kaniel & Kondor (2010).



                                                       20
Limited commitment is also the source of the constraints in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), while Holm-
strom & Tirole (2001) derive the constraints from moral hazard. Constrained agents in these papers
are real-economy firms having access to productive technologies not available to other investors.
The interpretation of constrained agents as financial firms is made explicit in He & Krishnamurthy
(2008; 2009), who derive constraints on fund managers uniquely able to invest in a subset of traded
assets. The constraints derive from moral hazard and contracts are restricted to be static.17 Ex-
tending this line of research to dynamic contracts, while retaining the tractability that is necessary
to compute asset prices in general equilibrium, would be an important step forward. A recent
literature on optimal dynamic financial contracting in continuous time, e.g., Biais et al. (2007)
and DeMarzo & Fishman (2007), could be useful in this respect. The result of that literature
that investors punish underperforming managers by scaling down their firms fits with the idea that
investors reduce their stakes in underperforming funds.18

       Our understanding of the costs faced by arbitrageurs has greatly benefited from papers explor-
ing these costs in simple stylized settings. An important next step is to integrate limits-of-arbitrage
ideas more squarely into asset pricing theory by developing tractable dynamic multi-asset models
that can address empirical puzzles. Work along these lines could take constraints as given and so
proceed in parallel with work on optimal contracting—although an important long-term objective
is that the two lines of research eventually merge.

       A number of papers explore dynamic multi-asset equilibrium settings under the assumption that
the only cost faced by arbitrageurs is risk. In Greenwood (2005) and Hau (2009a), arbitrageurs
absorb demand shocks of index investors following index redefinitions. In Gabaix et al. (2007),
arbitrageurs are uniquely able to hold mortgage-backed securities, and while they can hedge interest-
rate risk in the government bond market, they bear prepayment risk. In Garleanu et al. (2009),
arbitrageurs absorb demand shocks in the options market, and while they can hedge delta risk in
the stock market, they bear jump and volatility risk. In Vayanos & Vila (2009) and Greenwood &
Vayanos (2010b), arbitrageurs absorb shocks to the demand and supply of government bonds with
specific maturities, and hedge by trading bonds with other maturities. A common theme in these
papers is that arbitrageurs transmit shocks to the demand for one asset to other assets, with the
effects being largest for assets that covary the most with the original asset. This has implications
for phenomena as diverse as index effects in the stock market, the pricing of prepayment risk in
  17
    See also Acharya & Viswanathan (2009), who derive constraints from asset substitution, and Hombert and
Thesmar (2009) and Stein (2009), who study arbitrageurs’ choice between short- and long-term financing.
 18
    Bolton & Scharfstein (1990) and Gromb (1994) derive this result in finite-horizon discrete-time settings, and
Heinkel & Stoughton (1994) derive the result in a two-period fund-management setting. See also Biais et al. (2010),
who show the converse result that investors reward overperforming managers by scaling up their firms.


                                                        21
the mortgage market, the behavior of implied volatility surfaces in the options market, and the
behavior of risk premia in the government bond market. Hau (2009b), Jylha & Suominen (2009)
and Plantin & Shin (2009) pursue similar themes for the foreign exchange market, and Naranjo
(2009) does so for the futures market.

     Other papers explore dynamic multi-asset equilibrium settings under the assumption that ar-
bitrageurs face financial constraints. These papers are referenced in the last paragraph of Section
3.4 for the case of leverage constraints and Section 3.5 for the case of constraints on equity capital.
They constitute a rapidly growing literature which has the potential to explain a variety of market
anomalies based on limits of arbitrage and institutional frictions more broadly.



4     WELFARE AND POLICY

Financial crises, including the recent one, provide a painful reminder that government intervention
can be important for the smooth functioning of financial markets. Arguments for intervention often
center around the idea that failing financial institutions can cause disruptions in asset markets and
the effects can propagate to other institutions. Standard models of asset pricing cannot be used
to evaluate the merits of such arguments because they abstract away from financial frictions and
institutions. In these models equilibrium is Pareto optimal and there is no scope for intervention.19
Research on the limits of arbitrage has the potential to deliver a more useful framework for designing
and assessing public policy. Indeed, this research emphasizes the role of specialized institutions in
providing liquidity in asset markets. Understanding how the financial health of these institutions
is affected by their trading decisions, and whether trading decisions are socially optimal, can guide
public policy. Despite its relevance, the welfare analysis of asset markets with limited arbitrage is
still in its infancy. In this section we survey the existing work and highlight what we view as the
main issues, challenges and promises.

     We start by clarifying some methodological issues. Several papers study whether constrained
arbitrageurs stabilize or destabilize asset prices, i.e., decrease or increase volatility. This is only
indirectly a welfare question; assessing welfare by means of a utility-based criterion, such as Pareto,
is preferable. Given a welfare criterion, a natural question is whether constraints lower efficiency,
i.e., is unconstrained arbitrage better than constrained arbitrage?20 This question, however, is
  19
     The same is true for models in which arbitrageur wealth effects derive from wealth-dependent risk aversion rather
than explicit financial constraints (e.g., Kyle & Xiong (2001) and Xiong (2001)).
  20
     A related question is whether the presence of arbitrageurs is beneficial, i.e., is constrained arbitrage better than
no arbitrage at all? One would expect the two questions to generally have a positive answer: relaxing constraints
should be desirable because arbitrageurs provide liquidity.


                                                           22
of limited relevance for assessing policy. Indeed, if arbitrageurs face constraints, one should not
assume that a regulator could remove or even relax them. A more suitable criterion is constrained
efficiency: can a regulator increase welfare relative to the equilibrium by choosing new allocations
that are nevertheless subject to the constraints? At this juncture, the literature has taken two
routes, which we discuss next.

     The first route is to retain a traditional dynamic equilibrium asset pricing model, but not fully
endogenize the constraints. This is done in Gromb & Vayanos (2002), who study how leverage
constraints affect arbitrageurs’ ability to provide liquidity. The main result in terms of welfare is
that equilibrium can fail to be constrained efficient and a reduction in arbitrageur positions can
make all agents better off. The intuition is as follows. Following an adverse shock, arbitrageurs
incur capital losses and are forced to liquidate positions because their leverage constraints tighten.
As a result, they find themselves more constrained and less able to provide liquidity—at a time
where liquidity is low and its provision profitable. Ex-ante, arbitrageurs account for this possibility
and engage in risk management by keeping some capital in cash to exploit episodes of low liquidity.
However, they fail to account for the impact of their liquidations on other arbitrageurs during such
episodes. Indeed, liquidation by one arbitrageur hurts other arbitrageurs because it lowers the price
at which they can liquidate. This can hurt not only arbitrageurs but also outside investors because
of the reduced liquidity that they receive.

     The second route has been followed by papers in macroeconomics and international economics,
e.g., Caballero & Krishnamurthy (2001), Lorenzoni (2008), Acharya et al. (2009), Hombert (2009),
Korinek (2009). These papers derive financial constraints endogenously from contracting frictions
in three-period settings. The constraints, however, concern real-economy firms having access to
productive technologies, rather than financial firms such as arbitrageurs. Inefficiencies in these
papers arise because of a similar mechanism as in the previous paragraph: firms do not account for
the impact of their liquidations on the prices at which other firms can liquidate.21

     The mechanism causing the inefficiencies is a pecuniary externality operating through price
changes and the redistribution of wealth that these generate. A redistribution of wealth cannot be
Pareto improving when markets are complete because marginal rates of substitution across time
and states of nature are identical for all agents. However, when markets are incomplete, as is
the case with financial constraints, marginal rates of substitution differ and Pareto improvements
are possible. Geanakoplos & Polemarchakis (1986) show this mechanism in a general incomplete-
  21
     See also Biais & Mariotti (2009) for a similar inefficiency in a labor economics context, and Nikolov (2009) for a
calibration of the inefficiency.



                                                          23
markets setting.22

     This constrained inefficiency of limited arbitrage opens the door for an analysis of policy (see
Gromb & Vayanos (2002; 2009b) for a discussion). Suppose, for example, that arbitrageurs take
excessive risk. A regulator might decrease their risk-taking incentives by tightening their financial
constraints with a risk-based capital requirement. Alternatively, better risk-management could be
enforced directly by taxing arbitrageurs in good times and possibly subsidizing them in bad times,
in effect managing part of their resources for them. Subsidies in bad times can be implemented
through lender of last resort policies or asset purchase programs.23 Last, imperfect competition
among arbitrageurs might lead them to internalize part of the price effects of their investment
decisions, possibly leading them to adopt more socially desirable investment policies. This research
agenda has the potential to inform debates on systemic risk, macro-prudential regulation, and
lending of last resort, topics that are highly relevant in the context of financial crises.




  22
     See also Stiglitz (1982), who shows that in incomplete financial markets, the competitive equilibrium may fail to
be constrained efficient.
  23
     For a discussion of such policies, see Krishnamurthy (2009) and the references therein. Krishnamurthy argues
that such policies are desirable because they can move the market to a more efficient equilibrium.


                                                         24
                                       Literature Cited


Acharya V, Shin H, Yorulmazer T. 2009. A theory of slow-moving capital and contagion. Work.
     Pap., New York Univ.

Acharya V, Viswanathan V. 2009. Moral hazard, collateral and liquidity. Work. Pap., New York
     Univ.

Adrian T, Etula E, Shin H. 2009. Risk Appetite and Exchange Rates. Work. Pap., Princeton Univ.

Aiyagari R, Gertler M. 1999. “Overreaction” of asset prices in general equilibrium. Rev. Econ.
     Dynam. 2:3-35.

Allen F, Gale D. 2000. Bubbles and crises. Econ. J. 110:236-55.

Amihud Y, Mendelson H. 1991. Liquidity, maturity, and the yield on U.S. treasury securities. J.
     Finance 46:479-86.

Anshuman R, Viswanathan V. 2005. Costly collateral and liquidity. Work. Pap., Duke Univ.

Anton M, Polk C. 2008. Connected stocks. Work. Pap., London Sch. Econ.

Bai Y, Chang E, Wang J. 2006. Asset prices under short-sale constraints. Work. Pap., Mass. Inst.
     Tech.

Barberis N, Shleifer A. 2003. Style investing. J. Finan. Econ. 68:161-99.

Barberis N, Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1998. A model of investor sentiment. J. Finan. Econ. 49:307-43.

Barberis N, Shleifer A, Wurgler J. 2005. Comovement. J. Finan. Econ. 75:283-317.

Barberis N, Thaler R. 2003. A survey of behavioral finance. In Handbook of the Economics of
     Finance, ed. G Constantinides, M Harris, R Stulz, 1:1051-121. London/New York: Elsevier.

Basak S, Croitoru B. 2000. Equilibrium mispricing in a capital market with portfolio constraints.
     Rev. Finan. Stud. 13:715-48.

Basak S, Croitoru B. 2006. On the role of arbitrageurs in rational markets. J. Finan. Econ.
     81:143-73.

Basak S, Pavlova A. 2010. Asset Prices and Institutional Investors. Work. Pap., London Bus. Sch.

Bernanke B, Gertler M. 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations. Am. Econ. Rev.
     79:14-31.

                                                25
Bernard V, Thomas J. 1989. Post-earnings-announcement drift: delayed price response or risk
     premium? J. Accounting Res. 27(Suppl.):1-48.

Biais B, Mariotti T. 2009. Credit, wages, and bankruptcy laws. J. Europ. Econ. Assoc. 7:939-73.

Biais B, Mariotti T, Plantin G, Rochet J-C. 2007. Dynamic security design: convergence to con-
     tinuous time and asset pricing implications. Rev. Econ. Stud. 74:345-90.

Biais B, Mariotti T, Rochet J-C, Villeneuve S. 2010. Large risks, limited liability, and dynamic
     moral hazard. Econometrica. 78:73-118.

Bolton P, Santos T, Scheinkman J. 2009. Outside and inside liquidity. Work. Pap., Columbia Univ.

Bolton P, Scharfstein D. 1990. A theory of predation based on agency problems in financial con-
     tracting. Amer. Econ. Rev. 80:93-106.

Boyer B. 2007. Comovement among stocks with similar book-to-market ratios. Work. Pap., Brigham
     Young Univ.

Brunnermeier M, Pedersen L. 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Rev. Finan. Stud.
     22:2201-38.

Caballero R, Krishnamurthy A. 2001. International and domestic collateral constraints in a model
     of emerging market crises. J. Monet. Econ. 48:513-48.

Chabakauri G. 2009. Asset pricing in general equilibrium with constraints. Work. Pap., London
     Sch. Econ.

Chen H, Noronha G, Singal V. 2004. The price response to S&P 500 index additions and deletions:
     evidence of asymmetry and a new explanation. J. Finance. 59:1901-29.

Coval J, Stafford E. 2007. Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets. J. Finan. Econ.
     86:479-512.

Cuoco D. 1997. Optimal consumption and equilibrium prices with portfolio constraints and stochas-
     tic income. J. Econ. Theory. 72:33-73.

Cuoco D, Kaniel R. 2009. Equilibrium prices in the presence of delegated portfolio management.
     Work. Pap., Univ. Pennsylvania.

D’Avolio G. 2002. The market for borrowing stock. J. Finan. Econ. 66:271-306.

Dabora E, Froot K. 1999. How are stock prices affected by the location of trade? J. Finan. Econ.
     53:189-216.

                                               26
Daniel K, Hirshleifer D, Subrahmanyam A. 1998. A theory of overconfidence, self-attribution, and
     security market under and over-reactions. J. Finance. 53:1839-85.

Danielsson J, Shin H, Zigrand J-P. 2009. Risk appetite and endogenous risk. Work. Pap., London
     Sch. Econ.

Dasgupta A, Prat A. 2008. Information aggregation in financial markets with career concerns. J.
     Econ. Theory. 143:83-113

Dasgupta A, Prat A, Verardo M. 2008. The price impact of institutional herding. Work. Pap.,
     London Sch. Econ.

DeBondt W, Thaler R. 1985. Does the stock market overreact? J. Finance. 40:793-805.

DeLong B, Shleifer A, Summers L, Waldmann R. 1990. Noise trader risk in financial markets. J.
     Polit. Economy. 98:703-38.

DeMarzo P, Fishman M. 2007. Optimal long-term financial contracting. Rev. Finan. Stud. 20:2079-
     128.

Diamond, D, Verrecchia R. 1987. Constraints on short-selling and asset price adjustment to private
     information. J. Finan. Econ. 18:277-311.

Dow J, Gorton G. 1994. Arbitrage chains. J. Finance. 49:819-849.

Duffie D. 1996. Special repo rates. J. Finance. 51:493-526.

Duffie D, Garleanu N, Pedersen L. 2002. Securities lending, shorting, and pricing. J. Finan. Econ.
     66:307-39.

Duffie D, Garleanu N, Pedersen L. 2008. Valuation in over-the-counter markets. Rev. Finan. Stud.
     20:1865-1900.

Duffie D, Strulovici B. 2009. Capital mobility and asset pricing. Work. Pap., Stanford Univ.

Fama E. 1991. Efficient capital markets: II. J. Finance. 46:1575-617.

Fama E, French K. 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. J. Finance. 47:427-65.

Fostel A, Geanakoplos J. 2008. Leverage cycles and the anxious economy. Am. Econ. Rev. 98:1211-
     44.

Gabaix X, Krishnamurthy A, Vigneron O. 2007. Limits of arbitrage: theory and evidence from the
     mortgage-backed securities market. J. Finance. 62:557-95.


                                                27
Garleanu N, Pedersen L. 2009. Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the law of one price.
     Work. Pap., UC Berkeley.

Garleanu N, Pedersen L, Poteshman A. 2009. Demand-based option pricing. Rev. Finan. Stud. In
     press

Geanakoplos J. 1997. Promises, promises. In The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, ed.
     B Arthur, S Durlauf, D Lane, 285-320. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Geanakoplos J. 2003. Liquidity, default and crashes: endogenous contracts in general equilibrium.
     In Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications II, Econometric So-
     ciety Monographs: Eighth World Congress, ed. M Dewatripont, L Hansen, S Turnovsky,
     170-205. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Geanakoplos J, Polemarchakis H. 1986. Existence, regularity, and constrained suboptimality of
     competitive allocations when the asset market is incomplete. In Uncertainty, Information and
     Communication, Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, ed. W Heller, R Starr, D Starrett,
     3:65-96. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Greenwood R. 2005. Short- and long-term demand curves for stocks: theory and evidence on the
     dynamics of arbitrage. J. Finan. Econ. 75:607-649.

Greenwood R, Thesmar D. 2009. Stock price fragility. Work. Pap., Harvard Univ.

Greenwood R, Vayanos D. 2010a. Bond supply and excess bond returns. Work. Pap., Harvard Univ.

Greenwood R, Vayanos D. 2010b. Price pressure in the government bond market. Am. Econ. Rev.
     P.&P. In press.

Gromb D. 1994. Renegotiation in debt contracts. Work. Pap., INSEAD.

Gromb D, Vayanos D. 2002. Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially constrained
     arbitrageurs. J. Finan. Econ. 66:361-407.

Gromb D, Vayanos D. 2009a. Financially constrained arbitrage and cross-market contagion. Work.
     Pap., INSEAD.

Gromb D, Vayanos D. 2009b. Leverage and liquidity dry-ups: a framework and policy implications.
     Work. Pap., INSEAD.

Gromb D, Vayanos D. 2010. A model of financial market liquidity based on arbitrageur capital. J.
     Europ. Econ. Assoc. P.&P. In press.

                                                 28
Grossman S, Miller M. 1988. Liquidity and market structure. J. Finance. 43:617-37.

Grossman S, Vila J-L. 1992. Optimal dynamic trading with leverage constraints. J. Finan. Quant.
     Anal. 27:151-168.

Guerreri V, Kondor P. 2009. Fund managers and defaultable debt. Work. Pap., Univ. Chicago.

Harris L, Gurel E. 1986. Price and volume effects associated with changes in the S&P 500 list: new
     evidence for the existence of price pressures. J. Finance. 41:815-29.

Harrison M, Kreps D. 1978. Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with heterogeneous
     expectations. Quart. J. Econ. 92:323-36.

Hau H. 2009a. Global versus local asset pricing: evidence from arbitrage of the MSCI index change.
     Work. Pap., INSEAD.

Hau H. 2009b. The exchange rate effect of multi-currency risk arbitrage. Work. Pap., INSEAD.

He Z, Krishnamurthy A. 2008. Intermediary asset pricing. Work. Pap., Univ. Chicago.

He Z, Krishnamurthy A. 2009. A model of capital and crises. Work. Pap., Univ. Chicago.

He Z, Xiong W. 2008. Multi-market delegated asset management. Work. Pap., Univ. Chicago.

Heinkel R, Stoughton N. 1994. The dynamics of portfolio management contracts. Rev. Finan.
     Stud. 7:351-87.

Holmstrom B, Tirole J. 2001. LAPM: A liquidity-based asset pricing model. J. Finance. 56:1837-
     67.

Hombert J. 2009. Solvency shocks, liquidity shocks, and fire sales. Work. Pap., HEC.

Hombert J, Thesmar D. 2009. Limits of limits of arbitrage: theory and evidence. Work. Pap.,
     HEC.

Hong H, Scheinkman J, Xiong W. 2006. Asset float and speculative bubbles. J. Finance. 61:1073-
     1117.

Hong H, Stein J. 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction in
     asset markets. J. Finance. 54:2143-84.

Hong H, Stein J. 2003. Differences of opinion, short-sales constraints, and market crashes. Rev.
     Finan. Stud. 16:487-525.



                                                29
Jegadeesh N, Titman S. 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: implications for stock
      market efficiency. J. Finance. 48:65-91.

Jotikasthira P, Lundblad C, Ramadorai T. 2009. Asset fire sales and purchases and the international
      transmission of financial shocks. Work. Pap., Univ. of Oxford.

Jurek J, Yang H. 2007. Dynamic portfolio selection in arbitrage. Work. Pap., Princeton Univ.

Jylha P, Suominen M. 2009. Speculative capital and currency carry trades. J. Finan. Econ. In
     press

Kaniel R, Kondor P. 2010. A delegated Lucas tree. Work. Pap., Duke Univ.

Kehoe T, Levine D. 1993. Debt-constrained asset markets. Rev. Econ. Stud. 60:865-88.

Kiyotaki N, Moore J. 1997. Credit cycles. J. Polit. Economy. 105:211-48.

Kondor P. 2009. Risk in dynamic arbitrage: price effects of convergence trading. J. Finance.
      64:638-58.

Korinek A. 2009. Systemic risk taking: amplification effects, externalities, and regulatory responses.
      Work. Pap., Univ. Maryland.

Krishnamurthy A. 2002. The bond/old-bond spread. J. Finan. Econ. 66:463-506.

Krishnamurthy A. 2009. Amplification mechanisms in liquidity crises. Amer. Econ. J.: Macroecon.
      forthcoming.

Kyle A, Xiong W. 2001. Contagion as a wealth effect of financial intermediaries. J. Finance.
      56:1401-40.

Lamont O, Thaler R. 2003. Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs.
      J. Polit. Economy 111:227-268.

Lagos R, Rocheteau G, Weill P-O. 2009. Crises and liquidity in over the counter markets. Work.
      Pap., New York Univ.

LeRoy S, Porter R. 1981. The present value relation: tests based on implied variance bounds.
      Econometrica. 49:555-74.

Liu J, Longstaff F. 2004. Losing money on arbitrage: optimal dynamic portfolio choice in markets
      with arbitrage opportunities. Rev. Finan. Stud. 17:611-41.

Lorenzoni G. 2008. Inefficient credit booms. Rev. Econ. Stud. 75:809-33.

                                                 30
Loewenstein M, Willard G. 2006. The limits of investor behavior. J. Finance. 61:231-58.

Lou D. 2009. A flow-based explanation for return predictability. Work. Pap., London Sch. Econ.

Malliaris S, Yan H. 2009. Nickels versus black swans: reputation, trading strategies and asset prices.
      Work. Pap., Yale Univ.

Milbradt K. 2009. Trading and valuing toxic assets. Work. Pap., Mass. Inst. Tech.

Miller E. 1977. Risk, uncertainty and divergence of opinion. J. Finance. 32:1151-68.

Mitchell M, Pulvino T, Stafford E. 2002. Limited arbitrage in equity markets. J. Finance. 57:551-
      84.

Naranjo L. 2009. Implied interest rates in a market with frictions. Work. Pap., ESSEC.

Nikolov K. 2009. Is private leverage excessive? Work. Pap., London Sch. Econ.

Pavlova A, Rigobon R. 2008. The role of portfolio constraints in the international propagation of
      shocks. Rev. Econ. Stud. 75:1215-1256.

Petajisto A. 2009. Why do demand curves for stocks slope down? J. Finan. Quant. Anal. 44:1013-
      44.

Plantin G, Shin H. 2009. Carry trades and speculative dynamics. Work. Pap., Toulouse Sch. Econ.

Rosenthal L, Young C. 1990. The seemingly anomalous price behavior of Royal Dutch/Shell and
      Unilever N.V./PLC. J. Finan. Econ. 26:123-41.

Rytchkov O. 2009. Dynamic margin constraints. Work. Pap., Temple Univ.

Scheinkman J, Xiong W. 2003. Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. J. Polit. Economy.
      111:1183-1219.

Schwert W. 2003. Anomalies and market efficiency. In Handbook of the Economics of Finance, ed.
      G Constantinides, M Harris, R Stulz, 1:939-74. London/New York: Elsevier.

Shiller R. 1981. Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in dividends?
      Amer. Econ. Rev. 71:421-36.

Shleifer A. 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? J. Finance. 41:579-90.

Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1992. Liquidation values and debt capacity: a market equilibrium approach.
      J. Finance. 47:1343-66.


                                                 31
Shleifer A, Vishny R. 1997. The limits of arbitrage. J. Finance. 52:35-55.

Stein J. 2009. Presidential address: sophisticated investors and market efficiency. J. Finance.
     64:1517-48.

Stiglitz J. 1982. The inefficiency of the stock market equilibrium. Rev. Econ. Stud. 49:241-61.

Tuckman B, Vila J-L. 1992. Arbitrage with holding costs: a utility-based approach. J. Finance.
     47:1283-1302.

Tuckman B, Vila J-L. 1993. Holding costs and equilibrium arbitrage. Work. Pap., Mass. Inst. Tech.

Vayanos D. 2004. Flight to quality, flight to liquidity and the pricing of risk. Work. Pap., London
     Sch. Econ.

Vayanos D, Vila J-L. 2009. A preferred-habitat theory of the term structure of interest rates. Work.
     Pap., London Sch. Econ.

Vayanos D, Weill P-O. 2008. A search-based theory of the on-the-run phenomenon. J. Finance.
     63:1361-98.

Vayanos D, Woolley P. 2008. An institutional theory of momentum and reversal. Work. Pap.,
     London Sch. Econ.

Vijh A. 1994. S&P 500 trading strategies and stock betas. Rev. Finan. Stud. 7:215-51.

Warga A. 1992. Bond returns, liquidity, and missing data. J. Finan. Quant. Anal. 27:605-17.

Weill P-O. 2007. Leaning against the wind. Rev. Econ. Stud. 74:1329-54.

Wurgler J, Zhuravskaya E. 2002. Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks? J. Bus. 75:583-
     608.

Xiong W. 2001. Convergence trading with wealth effects. J. Finan. Econ. 62:247-292.

Yuan K. 2005. Asymmetric price movements and borrowing constraints: a REE model of crisis,
     contagion, and confusion. J. Finance. 60:379-411.




                                                32
