                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT BEFORE AGE FIVE

                                          Douglas Almond
                                            Janet Currie

                                        Working Paper 15827
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15827


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




We thank Maya Rossin and David Munroe for excellent research assistance, participants in the Berkeley
Handbook of Labor Economics Conference in November 2009 for helpful comments, and Christine
Pal and Hongyan Zhao for proofreading the equations. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Douglas Almond and Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Human Capital Development Before Age Five
Douglas Almond and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 15827
March 2010, Revised January 2011
JEL No. I12,I21,J13,J24,Q53

                                             ABSTRACT

This chapter seeks to set out what Economists have learned about the effects of early childhood influences
on later life outcomes, and about ameliorating the effects of negative influences. We begin with a brief
overview of the theory which illustrates that evidence of a causal relationship between a shock in early
childhood and a future outcome says little about whether the relationship in question biological or
immutable. We then survey recent work which shows that events before five years old can have large
long term impacts on adult outcomes. Child and family characteristics measured at school entry do
as much to explain future outcomes as factors that labor economists have more traditionally focused
on, such as years of education. Yet while children can be permanently damaged at this age, an important
message is that the damage can often be remediated. We provide a brief overview of evidence regarding
the effectiveness of different types of policies to provide remediation. We conclude with a list of some
of (the many) outstanding questions for future research.


Douglas Almond
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
da2152@columbia.edu

Janet Currie
International Affairs Building
Department of Economics
Columbia University - Mail code 3308
420 W 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jc2663@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
The last decade has seen a blossoming of research on the long term effects of early
childhood conditions across a range of disciplines. In economics, the focus is on how hu-
man capital accumulation responds to the early childhood environment. In 2000, there
were no articles on this topic in the Journal of Political Economy, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, or the American Economic Review (excluding the Papers and Proceedings),
but there have been five or six per year in these journals since 2005. This work has
been spurred by a growing realization that early life conditions can have persistent and
profound impacts on later life. Table 1 summarizes several longitudinal studies which
suggest that characteristics that are measured as of age 7 can explain a great deal of the
variation in educational attainment, earnings as of the early 30s, and the probability of
employment. For example, McLeod and Kaiser [2004] use data from the National Longi-
tudinal Surveys and find that children’s test scores and background variables measured
as of ages 6 to 8 predict about 12% of the variation in the probability of high school
completion and about 11% of the variation in the probability of college completion.
Currie and Thomas [1999a] use data from the 1958 British Birth Cohort study and find
that 4 to 5% of the variation in employment at age 33 can be predicted, and as much
as 20% of the variation in wages. Cunha and Heckman [2008] and Cunha, Heckman,
and Schennach [forthcoming] estimate structural models in which initial endowments
and investments feed through to later outcomes; they arrive at estimates that are of a
similar order of magnitude for education and wages. To put these results in context,
labor economists generally feel that they are doing well if they can explain 30% of the
variation in wages in a human capital earnings function.
    This chapter seeks to set out what economists have learned about the importance
of early childhood influences on later life outcomes, and about ameliorating the effects
of negative influences. We begin with a brief overview of the theory which illustrates
that evidence of a causal relationship between a shock in early childhood and a future
outcome says little about whether the relationship in question biological or immutable.
Parental and social responses are likely to be extremely important in either magnifying
or mitigating the effects of a shock. Given that this is the case, it can sometimes be
difficult to interpret the wealth of empirical evidence that is accumulating in terms of
an underlying structural framework.
    The theoretical framework is laid out in Section 3 and followed by a brief discussion
of methods in Section 4. We do not attempt to cover issues such as identification and
instrumental variables methods which are covered in some depth elsewhere (cf Angrist
and Pischke [2009]). Instead, we focus on several issues that come up frequently in the

                                            2
early influences literature, including estimation using small samples and the potentially
high return to better data.
         The fifth section of the paper discusses the evidence for long term effects of early
life influences in greater detail, while the sixth focuses on the evidence regarding reme-
diation programs.           The discussion of early life influences is divided into two sections
corresponding to in utero influences and after birth influences. The discussion of reme-
diation programs starts from the most general sort of program, income transfers, and
goes on to discuss interventions that are increasingly targeted at specific domains. In
surveying the evidence we have attempted to focus on recent papers, and especially
those that propose a plausible strategy for identifying causal effects. We have focused
on papers that emphasize early childhood, but in instances in which only evidence re-
garding effects on older children is available, we have sometimes strayed from this rule.
A summary of most of the papers discussed in these sections is presented in Tables 4
through 13. A list of acronyms used in the tables appears in Appendix A. We conclude
with a summary and a discussion of outstanding questions for future research in Section
7.



2          Conceptual Framework
Grossman [1972] models health as a stock variable that varies over time in response to
investments and depreciation. Because some positive portion of the previous period’s
health stock vanishes in each period (e.g., age in years), the effect of the health stock and
health investments further removed in time from the current period tends to fade out.
As individuals age, the early childhood health stock and the prior health investments
that it embodies become progressively less important.
         In contrast, the “early influences” literature asks whether health and investments
in early childhood have sustained effects on adult outcomes. The magnitude of these
effects may persist or even increase as individuals age because childhood development
occurs in distinct stages that are more or less influential of adult outcomes.
         Defining h as health or human capital at the completion of childhood, we can retain
the linearity of h in investments and the prior health stock as in Grossman [1972], but
leave open whether there is indeed “fade out” (i.e. depreciation). For simplicity, we will
consider a simple two-period childhood.1 We can consider production of h:

                                         h = A[γI1 + (1 − γ)I2 ],                                    (1)
     1
         See Zweifel, Breyer, and Kifmann [2009] for a two period version of the Grossman [1972] model.


                                                      3
where:          (
                    I1 ∼
                       = investments during childhood through age 5
                    I2 ∼
                       = investments during childhood after age 5.
   For a given level of total investments I1 + I2 , the allocation of investments between
period 1 and 2 will also affect h for γ 6= .5. If γ > .5, then health at the end of period
1 is more important to h than investments in the second period, and if γA > 1, h may
respond more than one-for-one with I1 . Thus, (1) admits the possibility that certain
childhood periods may exert a disproportionate effect on adult outcomes that does not
necessarily decline monotonically with age. This functional form says more than “early
life” matters; it suggests that early-childhood events may be more influential than later
childhood events.


2.1      Complementarity
The assumption that inputs at different stages of childhood have linear effects is common
in economics. While it opens the door to “early origins”, perfect substitutability between
first and second period investments in (1) is a strong assumption. The absence of
complementarity implies that all investments should be concentrated in one period (up
to a discount factor) and no investments should be made during the low-return period.
In addition, with basic preference assumptions, perfect substitutability “hard-wires” the
optimal investment response to early-life shocks to be compensatory, as seen in Section
2.3.
   As suggested by Heckman [2007], a more flexible “developmental” technology is the
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function:
                                   h                i1/φ
                                      φ           φ
                              h = A γI1 + (1 − γ)I2      ,                              (2)

For a given total investment level I1 + I2 , how the allocation between period 1 and
2 will also affect h depends on the elasticity of substitution,1/(1 − φ),and the share
parameter,γ. For φ = 1 (perfect substitutability of investments), (2) reduces to (1).
   Heckman [2007] highlights two features of “capacity formation” beyond those cap-
tured in (2). First, there may be “dynamic complementarities” which imply that in-
vestments in period t are more productive when there is a high level of capability in
period t − 1. For example, if the factor productivity term A in (2) were an increasing
function of h0 , the health endowment immediately prior to period 1, this would raise
the return to investments during childhood. Second, there may be “self-productivity”
which implies that higher levels of capacity in one period create higher levels of capacity


                                            4
in future periods. This feature is especially noteworthy when h is multidimensional, as
it would imply that “cross-effects” are positive, e.g. health in period 1 leads to higher
cognitive ability in period 2. “Self-productivity” is more trivial in the unidimensional
case like Grossman [1972] – even though the effect of earlier health stocks tends to fade
out as the time passes, there is still memory as long as depreciation in each period is
less than total (i.e., when δ < 1 in Zweifel, Breyer, and Kifmann [2009]).
       Here, we will use the basic framework in (2) to consider the effect of exogenous shocks
µg to health investments that occur during the first childhood period.2 We begin with
the simplest case, where investments do not respond to µg (and denote these investments
I¯1 and I¯2 ). Net investments in the first period are:

                                              I¯1 + µg .

We assume that µg is independent of I¯1 . While µg can be positive or negative, we
assume I¯1 + µg > 0. We will then relax the assumption of fixed investments, and
consider endogenous responses to investments in the second period, i.e. δI2∗ /δµg , and
how this investment response may mediate the observed effect on h.


2.2       Fixed Investments
Conceptually, we can trace out the effect of µg while holding other inputs fixed, i.e., we
assume no investment response to this shock in either period. Albeit implicitly, most
biomedical and epidemiological studies in the “early origins” literature aim to inform us
about this ceteris paribus, “biological” relationship.
       In this two-period CES production function adopted from Heckman [2007], the im-
pact of an early-life shock on adult outcomes is:

                    δh      h
                               ¯                  ¯
                                                     i(1−φ)/φ
                                        φ          φ
                        = γA γ(I1 + µg ) + (1 − γ)I2          (I¯1 + µg )φ−1 .                   (3)
                    δµg
       The simplest production technology is the perfect substitutability case where φ = 1.
In this case:

                                            δh
                                                = γA.
                                            δµg
Damage to adult human capital is proportional to the share parameter on period 1
investments, and is unrelated to the investment level I¯1 .
   2
   We include the subscript here because environmental influences at some aggregated geographic level
g may provide exogenous variation in early childhood investments.



                                                  5
       For less than perfect substitutability between periods, there is diminishing marginal
productivity of the investment inputs. Thus, shocks experienced at different baseline
investment levels have heterogenous effects on h. Other things equal, those with higher
baseline levels of investment will experience more muted effects in h than those where
baseline investment is low. A recurring empirical finding is that long-term damage due
to shocks is more likely among poorer families [Currie and Hyson, 1999]. This is in part
due to the fact that children in poorer families are subject to more or larger early-life
shocks [Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson, 2002, Currie and Stabile, 2003].                     However, it is
also possible that the same shock will have a greater impact among children in poorer
families if these children have lower period t investment levels to begin with. This occurs
because they are on a steeper portion of the production function. Ceteris paribus, this
would tend to accentuate the effect of an equivalent-sized µg shock on h among poor
families.3,4

2.2.1      Remediation

Is it possible to alter “bad” early trajectories? In other words, what is the effect of a
           0
shock µg > 0 experienced during the second period on h? Remediation is of interest to
the extent that (3) is substantially less than zero. However, large damage to h from µg
per se says little about the potential effectiveness of remediation in the second period
as both initial damage and remediation are distinct functions of the three parameters
A, γ, and φ.
       The effectiveness of remediation relative to initial damage is:

                                         0
                                                                    !1−φ
                                  δh/δµg   1−γ          I¯1 + µg
                                         =                                 .                           (4)
                                  δh/δµg    γ           I¯2 + µ0g

    Thus, for I¯1 > I¯2 and a given value of γ, a unit of remediation will be more effective
at low elasticities of substitution – the lack of I¯2 was the more critical shortfall prior
to the shock. If I¯1 < I¯2 high elastiticites of substitution increase the effectiveness of
remediation – adding to the existing abundance of I¯2 remains effective.
       Fortunately, it is not necessary to observe investments and estimate all three pa-
rameters in order to assess the scope for remediation. In some cases, we merely need
   3
     i.e. δ 2 h/δµg δI1 < 0. On the other hand, δ 2 h/δµg δI2 > 0 so lower period two investments would
tend to reduce damage to h from µg . The ratio of the former effect to the latter is proportional to
γ/(1 − γ) [Chiang, 1984]. Thus, damage from a period 1 shock is more likely to be concentrated among
poor families when the period-1 share parameter (γ) is high.
   4
     The cross-effect δ 2 h/δµg δI2 is similar to dynamic complementarity, but Heckman [2007] reserves
this term for the cross-partial between the stock and flow, i.e. δ 2 h/δh0 δIt for t=1, 2 in the example of
Section 2.1.


                                                    6
                                                       0
to observe how a shock in the second period, µg , affects h. Furthermore, this does not
necessarily require a distinct shock in addition to µg . In an overlapping generations
framework, the same shock, µg = µg 0 could affect one cohort in the first childhood pe-
riod (but not the second) and an older cohort in the second period (but not the first).
For a small, “double-barrelled” shock, we would have a reduced form estimates of both
the damage in (3) and the potential to alter trajectories in (4).5 For example, in addi-
tion to observing how income during the prenatal period affects newborn health [Kehrer
and Wolin, 1979], we might also be able to see how parental income affects the health
of pre-school age children to gain a sense of what opportunities there are to remediate
negative income shocks experienced during pregnancy.


2.3       Responsive Investments
Most analyses of “early origins” focus on estimating the reduced form effect, δh/δµg .
Whether this empirical relationship represents a purely biological effect or also includes
the effect of responsive investments is an open question. In general, to the extent that
“early origins” are important, so too will any response of childhood investments to µg .
For expositional purposes, we will consider µg < 0 and responses that either magnify or
attenuate initial damage.
      Unless the investment response is costless, damage estimates which monetize δh/δµg
alone will tend to understate total damage. In the extreme, investment responses could
fully offset the effect of early-life shocks on h but this would not mean that such shocks
were costless [Deschnes and Greenstone, 2007]. More generally, the damage from early-
life shocks will be understated if we focus only on long-term effects and there are com-
pensatory investments (i.e. investments that are negatively correlated with the early-life
shock (δI2∗ /δµg < 0)). The cost of investments which help remediate damage should be
included. But even when the response is reinforcing (δI2∗ /δµg > 0), total costs can still
be understated by focussing on the reduced form damage to h alone (see below).
      To consider correlated investment responses more formally, we assume parents ob-
serve µg at the end of the first period. The direction of the investment response –
whether reinforcing or compensatory – will be shaped by how substitutable period 2
investments are for those in period 1. If substitutability is high, the optimal response
will tend to be compensatory, and thereby help offset damage to h.
      A compensatory response is readily seen in the case of perfect substitutability. Cunha
and Heckman [2007] observed that economic models commonly assume that production
  5
      How parameters of the production function might be recovered is discussed in Appendix D.




                                                  7
at different stages of childhood are perfect substitutes. When φ = 1, (2) reduces to:

                                                           
                               h = A γ(I1 + µg ) + (1 − γ)I2 .                                 (5)

      This linear production technology is akin to that used in a previous Handbook chapter
on intergenerational mobility [Solon, 1999], which likewise considered parental invest-
ments in children’s human capital. Further, Solon [1999] assumed parent’s utility trades
off own consumption against the child’s human capital:


                                         Up = U (C, h),                                        (6)

where p denotes parents and C their consumption. The budget constraint is:

                                   Yp = C + I1 + I2 /(1 + r).                                  (7)

      With standard preferences, changes to h through µg will “unbalance” the marginal
utilities in h versus C.6 If µg is negative, the marginal utility of h becomes too high
relative to that in consumption. The technology in (5) permits parents to convert
some consumption into h at a constant rate. This will cause I2∗ to increase, which
attenuates the effect of the µg damage. This attenuation comes at the cost of reduced
parental utility. Similarly, if µg is positive parents will “spend the bounty” (at least
in part), reduce I2∗ and increase consumption. Again, this will temper effects on h,
leading to an understatement of biological effects in analyses that ignore investments
(or parental utility). In either case, perfect substitutability hard-wires the response to
be compensatory.
      The polar opposite technology is perfect complementarity between childhood stages,
i.e., a Leontieff production function. Here, a compensatory strategy would be completely
ineffective in mitigating changes to h. As h is determined by the minimum of period 1 and
period 2 investments, optimal period 2 investments should reinforce µg . If µg is negative,
parents would seek to reduce I2 and consume more. Despite higher consumption, parents’
utility is reduced on net due to the shock (or this bundle of lower h and higher C would
have been selected absent µg ). Again, the full-cost of a negative µg shock is understated
when parental utility is ignored.
      The crossover between reinforcing and compensating responses of I2∗ will occur at
an intermediate parameter value of substitutability. (The fixed investments case of
Section 2.2 can be seen to reflect an optimized response at this point of balance between
  6
    Obviously, the marginal utilities themselves will not be the same but equal subject to discount
factor, preference parameters, and prices of C versus I which have been ignored.


                                                8
reinforcing and compensating responses). The value of φ at this point of balance will
depend on the functional form of parental preferences in (6), as shown for CES utility
in Appendix B.
    To take a familiar example, assume a Cobb-Douglas utility function of the form:

                               Up = (1 − α)logC + αlogh.                                (8)

If the production technology is also Cobb-Douglas (φ = 0), then no change to I2∗ is
warranted. If instead substitution between period 1 and period 2 is relatively easy
(φ > 0), compensating for the shock is optimal. If substitution is relatively difficult
(φ < 0), then parents should “go with the flow” and reinforce. For this reason, whether
conventional reduced form analyses under or over-state “biological” effects (effects with
I2 held fixed) depends on how easy it is to substitute the timing of investments across
childhood. If the elasticity of substitution across periods is low, then it may be optimal
for parents to reinforce the effect of a shock.
    Tension between preferences and the production technology may also be relevant
for within-family investment decisions. For example, Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman
[1982] considered parental preferences that parameterize varying degrees of “inequality
aversion” among (multiple) children. Depending on the strength of parents’ inequality
aversion relative to the production technology (as reflected by φ), parents may rein-
force or compensate exogenous within-family differences in early-life health and human
capital. If substitutability between periods of childhood is sufficiently difficult (low φ),
reinforcement of sibling differences will be optimal. This reinforcement may be optimal
even when the parents place a higher weight in their utility function on the accumulation
of human capital by the less able sibling (see Appendix C). Thus, empirical evidence that
some parents reinforce early-life shocks could reveal less about “human nature” than it
would reveal about the developmental nature of the childhood production technology.




3     Methods
As discussed above, we confine our discussion to methodological issues that seem par-
ticularly germane to the early influences literature.     One of these is the question of
when sibling fixed effects (or maternal fixed effects) estimation is appropriate. Fixed
effects can be a powerful way to eliminate confounding from shared family background
characteristics, even when these are not fully observed. This approach is particularly
effective when the direction of unobserved sibling-specific confounders can be signed.

                                             9
For example, Currie and Thomas [1995] find that in the cross-section, children who were
in Head Start do worse than children who were not. However, compared to their own
siblings, Head Start children do better. Since there is little evidence that Head Start
children are “favored” by parents or otherwise (on the contrary, in families where one
child attends and the other does not, children who attended were more likely to have
spent their preschool years in poverty), these contrasting results suggest that unob-
served family characteristics are correlated both with Head Start attendance and poor
child outcomes. When the effect of such characteristics is accounted for, the positive
effects of Head Start are apparent.
   However, fixed effects can not control for sibling-specific factors. The theory dis-
cussed above suggests that it may be optimal for parents to either reinforce or compen-
sate for the effects of early shocks by altering their own investment behaviors. Whether
parents do or do not reinforce/compensate obviously has implications for the interpre-
tation of models estimated using family fixed effects. If on average, families compen-
sate, then fixed effects estimates will understate the total effect of the shock (when the
compensation behavior is unobserved or otherwise not accounted for). In some circum-
stances, such a bias might be benign in the sense that any significant coefficient could
then be interpreted as a lower bound on the total effect. It is likely to be more problem-
atic if parents systematically reinforce shocks, because then any effect that is observed
results from a combination of underlying effects and parental reactions rather than the
shock itself. In the extreme, if parents seized on a characteristic that was unrelated to
ability and systematically favored children who had that characteristic, then researchers
might wrongly conclude that the characteristic was in fact linked to success even in the
absence of parental responses.
   The issue of how parents allocate resources between siblings has received a good deal
of attention in economics, starting with Becker and Tomes [1976] and Behrman, Pollak,
and Taubman [1982]. Some empirical studies from developing countries find evidence of
reinforcing behavior (see Rosenzweig and Schultz [1982], Rosenzweig and Wolpin [1988],
Pitt et al. [1990]). Empirical tests of these theories in developed countries such as the
United States and Britain generally use adult outcomes such as completed education
as a proxy for parental investments (see for example, Griliches [1979], Behrman et al.
[1994], Ashenfelter and Rouse [1998]).
   Several recent studies have used birth weight as a measure of the child’s endowment
and asked whether explicit measures of parental investments during early childhood are
related to birth weight. For example, Datar, Kilburn, and Loughran [2010] use data
from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-Child and show that low birth weight


                                           10
children are less likely to be breastfed, have fewer well-baby visits, are less likely to be
immunized, and are less likely to attend preschool than normal birth weight siblings.
However, all of these differences could be due to poorer health among the low birth
weight children. For example, if a child is receiving many visits for sick care, they may
receive fewer visits for well care and this will not say anything about parental investment
behaviors. Hence, Datar, Kilburn, and Loughran [2010] also look at how the presence
of low birth weight siblings in the household affects the investments received by normal
birth weight children.     They find no effect of having a low birth weight sibling on
breastfeeding, immunizations, or preschool. The only statistically significant interaction
is for well-baby care. This could however, be due to transactions costs. It may be the
case that if the low birth weight sibling is getting a lot of medical care, it is less costly
to bring the normal birth weight child in for care as well, for example.
   Del Bono, Ermisch, and Francesconi [2008] estimate a model that allows endowments
of other children to affect parental investments in the index child. They find, however,
that the results from this dynamic model are remarkably similar to those of mother fixed
effects models in most cases.    Moreover, although they find a positive effect of birth
weight on breastfeeding, the effect is very small in magnitude.
   We conducted our own investigation of this issue using data on twins from the Early
Childhood Longitudinal Study-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), using twin differences to control
for potential confounders. At the same time, twins routinely have large differences in
endowment in the form of birth weight. Table 2 presents estimates for all twins (with
and without controls for gender), same sex twins, and identical twins. Overall, there
are very few significant differences in the treatment of these twins: Parents seemed to
be more concerned about whether the low birth weight twin was ready for school, and
to delay introducing solid food (but this is only significant in the identical twin pairs).
We see no evidence that parents are more likely to praise, caress, spank or otherwise
treat children differently, and despite their worries about school readiness, parents have
similar expectations regarding college for both twins. This table largely replicates the
basic finding of Royer [2009], who also considered parental investments and birth weight
differences in the ECLS-B data. In particular, Royer [2009] focussed on investments soon
after birth, finding that breastfeeding, NICU admission, and other measures of neonatal
medical care did not vary with within twin pair birth weight differences.
   The parental investment response has also been explored in the context of natural
experiments. Kelly [2009] asked whether observed parental investments (e.g., time spent
reading to child) were related to flu-induced damages to test scores in the 1958 British
birth cohort study but did not detect an investment response.


                                             11
       In an interesting contribution to this literature, Hsin [2009] looks at the relationship
between children’s endowments, measured using birth weight, and maternal time use
using data from the Child Supplement of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. She
finds that overall, there is little relationship between low birth weight and maternal time
investments.      However, she argues that this masks important differences by maternal
socioeconomic status. In particular, she finds that in models with maternal fixed effects,
less educated women spend less time with their low birth weight children, while more
educated women spend more time. This finding is based on only 65 sibling pairs who
had differences in the incidence of low birth weight, and so requires some corroboration.
Still, one interpretation of this result in the context of the Section 2 framework is that the
elasticity of substitution between C and h varies by socioeconomic status. In particular,
if ϕpoor > ϕrich , low income parents tend to view their consumption and children’s h
as relatively good substitutes. This would lead low-income parents to be more likely to
reinforce a negative shock than high-income parents (assuming that the developmental
technology, captured by γ and φ, does not vary by socioeconomic status). A second
possible interpretation of the finding is that parents’ responses may reflect their budget
constraint more than their preferences. If parents would like to invest in both children,
but have only enough resources to invest adequately in one, then they may be forced
to choose the more well endowed child.7 Interventions that relaxed resource constraints
would have quite different effects in this case than in the case in which parents preferred
to maximize the welfare of a favored child. More empirical work on this question seems
warranted. For example, the PSID-CDS in 1997 and 2002 has time diary data for several
thousand sibling pairs which have not been analyzed for this purpose.
       Parent’s choices are determined in part by the technologies they face, and these
technologies may change over time, with implications for the potential biases in fixed
effects estimates.8 For example, Currie and Hyson [1999] asked whether the long term
effects of low birth weight differed by various measures of parental socioeconomic status
in the 1958 British birth cohort. They found little evidence that they did (except that
low birth weight women from higher SES backgrounds were less likely to suffer from
poor health as adults). But it is possible that this is because there were few effective
interventions for low birth weight infants in 1958. In contrast, Currie and Moretti [2007]
   7
     In the siblings model of Appendix C, this can be seen in the case of a Leontief production tech-
nology, where the second period investments generate increases in h only up to the level of first period
investments. If parental income Ȳ falls below the cost of maintaining the initial investment level 2I¯+ µg
                                                                          ∗
in the second period, it may be optimal to invest fully in child b (i.e. I2b    ¯ but not in child a (i.e.,
                                                                             = I),
I2a < I¯ + µg ), who experiences the negative first-period shock.
 ∗
   8
     For example, the effectiveness of remedial investments would change over time if γ varied with the
birth cohort. Remediation would be more effective for later cohorts if γ t > γ t+1 in equation (4).



                                                    12
looked at Californian mothers born in the late 1960s and 70s and find that women born
in low income zip codes were less educated and more likely to live in a low income zipcode
than sisters born in better circumstances. Moreover, women who were low birth weight
were more likely to transmit low birth weight to their own children if they were born in
low income zip codes, suggesting that early disadvantage compounded the initial effects
of low birth weight.
   To the extent that behavioral responses to early-life shocks are important empirically,
they will affect estimates of long-term effects whether family fixed effects are employed
or not. Our conclusion is that users of fixed effects designs should consider any evidence
that may be available about individual child-level characteristics and whether parents
are reinforcing or compensating for the particular early childhood event at issue. This
information will inform the appropriate interpretation of the estimates. There is lit-
tle evidence at present that parents in developed countries systematically reinforce or
compensate for early childhood events, but more research is needed on this question.



3.1    Power

Given that there are relatively few data sets with information about early childhood
influences and future outcomes, economists may be tempted to make use of relatively
small data sets that happen to have the requisite variables.      Power calculations can
be helpful in determining ex ante whether analysis of a particular data set is likely to
yield any interesting findings.   Table 3 provides two sample calculations.      The first
half of the table considers the relationship between birth weight and future educational
attainment as in Black et al. [2007]. Their key result was that a 1% increase in birth
weight increased high school completion by .09 percentage points. The example shows
that under reasonable assumptions about the distribution of birth weight and schooling
attainment, it requires a sample of about 4000 children to be able to detect this effect in
an OLS regression.     We can also turn the question around and ask, given a sample of a
certain size, how large would an effect have to be before we could be reasonably certain
of finding it in our data? The second half of the table shows that if we were looking
for an effect of birth weight on a particular outcome in a sample of 1,300 children, the
coefficient on (the log of ) birth weight would have to be at least .15 before we could
detect it with reasonable confidence.    If we have reason to believe that the effect is
smaller, then it is not likely to be useful to estimate the model without more data.




                                            13
3.2     Data Constraints

  The lack of large-scale longitudinal data (i.e. data that follows the same persons
over time) has been a frequent obstacle to evaluating the long-term impacts of early
life influences. Nevertheless, the answer may not always be to undertake collection of
new longitudinal data. Drawbacks include the high costs of data collection; the fact
that long term outcomes cannot be assessed for some time; and the fact that limiting
sample attrition is particularly costly.   Unchecked, attrition in longitudinal data can
pose challenges for inference.

3.2.1   Leveraging Existing Datasets

In many cases, existing cross-sectional microdata can serve as a platform for constructing
longitudinal datasets. First, it may be possible to add retrospective questions to ongoing
data collections. Second, it may be possible to merge new group-level information to
existing data sets. Third, it may be possible to merge administrative data sets by
individual in order to address previously unanswerable questions. The primary obstacle
to implementing each of these data strategies is frequently data security. Depending on
the approach adopted, there are different demands on data security, as described below.
   Smith [2009] and Garces et al. [2002] are examples of adding retrospective questions
to existing data collections. Smith had retrospective questions about health in childhood
added to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID began in the 1960s with
a representative national sample, and has followed the original respondents and their
family members every since. Using these data, Smith [2009] is able to show that adult
respondents who were in poor health during childhood have lower earnings than their
own siblings who were not in poor health. Such comparisons are possible because the
PSID has data on large numbers of sibling pairs. Garces et al. [2002] added retrospective
questions about Head Start participation to the PSID, and were able to show that young
adults who had attended Head Start had higher educational attainment, and were less
likely to have been booked or charged with a crime than siblings who had not attended.
   While these approaches may enable analyses of long-term impacts even in the ab-
sence of suitable “off the shelf” longitudinal data, they have their drawbacks. First,
retrospective data may be reported with error, although it may be possible to assess
the extent of reporting error using data from other sources. Second, only outcomes
that are already in the data can be assessed, so the need for serendipity remains. Still,
the method is promising enough to suggest that on-going, government funded data col-
lections should build-in mechanisms whereby researchers can propose the addition of


                                            14
questions to subsequent waves of the survey.
       A second way to address long-term questions is to merge new information at the
group level to existing data sets. The merge generally requires the use of geocoded
data. For some purposes, such as exploring variations in policies across states, only a
state identifier is required. For other purposes, such as examining the effects of traffic
patterns on asthma, ideally the researcher would have access to exact latitude and
longitude.      There are many examples in which this approach has been successfully
employed. For example, Ludwig and Miller [2007] study the long term effects of Head
Start which exploits the fact that the Office of Economic Opportunity initially offered the
300 poorest counties in the country assistance in applying for Head Start. They show,
using data from the National Educational Longitudinal Surveys, that children who were
in counties just poor enough to be eligible for assistance were much more likely to have
attended Head Start than children in counties that were just ineligible. They go on to
show that child mortality rates in the relevant age ranges were lower in counties whose
Head Start enrollments were higher due to the OEO assistance. Using Census data
they find that education is higher for people living in areas with higher former Head
Start enrollment rates. Unfortunately, however, neither the decennial Census nor the
American Community Survey collect county of birth, so they cannot identify people who
were born in these counties (substantial measurement error is obviously introduced by
using county of residence or county where someone went to school as a proxy for county
of birth). An exciting crop of new research would be enabled by the addition of Census
survey questions on county of birth, as well as county of residence at key developmental
ages (e.g., ages 5 and 14).9
       In addition to the observational approaches described above, an intriguing possibility
is that participants in a completed randomized trial could be followed up. For instance,
Rush, Stein, and Susser [1980] conducted a randomized intervention of a prenatal nu-
trition program in Harlem during the early 1970s. Following these children over time
would allow researchers to evaluate cognitive outcomes in secondary school, and it might
be possible to collect retrospective data on parental investments during childhood, and
to evaluate whether parental investments were affected by the randomization.
   9
    In another example, Currie and Gruber [1996b] were able to examine the effects of the Medicaid
expansions on the utilization of care among children by merging state-level information on Medicaid
policy to data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). At the time, this was only possible
because one of the authors had access to the NHIS state codes through his work at the Treasury De-
partment. It has since become easier to access geocoded health data either by travelling to Washington
to work with the data, or by using it in one of the secure data centers that Census and the National
Centers for Healh Statistics (NHCS) support. However, it remains a source of frustration to health
researchers that NCHS does not make state codes and/or codes for large counties available on its public
use data sets.



                                                  15
   A third approach to leveraging existing data merges administrative records from
multiple sources at the individual level, which obviously requires personal identifiers
such as names and birth dates or social security numbers. Access to such identifiers
is especially sensitive. Nevertheless, it constitutes a powerful way to address many
questions of interest. Several important studies have successfully exploited this approach
outside of the US. For example, Sandra E. Black and Salvanes [2005], Black et al. [2007]
use Norwegian data on all twins born over 30 years to look at long-term effects of
birth weight, birth order, and family size on educational attainment. Currie, Stabile,
Manivong, and Roos (forthcoming) use Canadian data on siblings to examine the effects
of health shocks in childhood on future educational attainment and welfare use. Almond,
Edlund, and Palme [2009] use Swedish data to look at the long term effects of low-level
radiation exposure from the Chernobyl disaster on children’s educational attainment.
   In the U.S., Doyle [2008] uses administrative data from child protective services and
the criminal justice system in Illinois to examine the effects of foster care. He shows first
that there is considerable variation between foster care case workers in whether or not
a child will be sent to foster care. Moreover, whether a child is assigned to a particular
worker is random, depending on who is on duty at the time a call is received. Using this
variation, Doyle shows that the marginal child assigned to foster care is significantly
more likely to be incarcerated in future.     These examples exploit large sample sizes,
objective indicators of outcomes, sibling or cohort comparisons, as well as a long follow
up period. Some limitations of using existing data include the fact that administrative
data sets often contain relatively little background information, and that outcomes are
limited to those that are collected in the data bases. Finally, the application process to
obtain individual-matched data is often protracted.
   Looking forward, the major challenge to research that involves either merging new
information to existing data sets, or merging administrative data sets to each other,
is that privacy concerns are making it increasingly difficult to obtain data just as it
is becoming more feasible to link them. In some cases, access to public use data has
deteriorated. For example, for many years, individual level Vital Statistics Natality data
from birth certificates included the state of birth, and the county (for counties with over
100,000 population). Since 2005, however, these data elements have been suppressed
and it is now necessary to get special permission to obtain U.S. Vital Statistics data
with geocodes.




                                             16
3.2.2     Improvements in the Production of Administrative Data

There are several “first best” potential solutions to these problems. First, creators of
large data sets need to be sensitive to the fact that their data may well be useful for
addressing questions that they have not envisaged. In order to preserve the ability to use
data to answer future questions, it is essential to retain information that can be used for
linkage. At a minimum, this should include geographic identifiers at the smallest level of
disaggregation that is feasible (for example a Census tract). Ideally, personal identifiers
would also be preserved.
   Second, more effort needs to be expended in order to make sensitive data available to
researchers. A range of mechanisms exist that protect privacy while enabling research:

  1. Suppress small cells or merge small cells in public use data files. For example,
        NCHS data sets such as NHIS could be released with state identifiers for large
        states, and with identifiers for groups of smaller states.

  2. Add small amounts of “noise” to public use data sets, or do data swapping in
        order to prevent identification of outliers. For example, Cornell University is coor-
        dinating the NSF-Census Bureau Synthetic Data Project which seeks to develop
        public-use “analytically valid synthetic data” from micro datasets customarily ac-
        cessed at secure Census Research Data Centers.

  3. Create model servers. In this approach, users login to estimate models using the
        true data, but get back output that does not allow individuals to be identified.

  4. Data use agreements. The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the National
        Educational Longitudinal Survey have successfully employed data use agreements
        with qualified users for many years, and without any documented instances of data
        disclosure.

  5. Creation of de-identified merged files. For example, Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder
        [2009a] asked the state of New Jersey to merge birth records with information about
        the location of pollution sources, and create a de-identified file. This allows them
        to study the effect of air pollution on infant health.

  6. Secure data facilities. The Census Research Data Centers have facilitated access
        to much confidential data, although researchers who are not located close to the
        facilities may still face large costs of accessing them.




                                               17
   These approaches to data dissemination have been explored in the statistics literature
for more than 20 years (see Dalenius and Reiss [1982], and have been much discussed at
Census (see for example, Reznek [2007]).

3.2.3   Additional Issues

We conclude with two new and relatively unexplored data issues.           First, how can
economists make effective use of the burgeoning literature on biomarkers? These mea-
sures have recently been added to existing health surveys, such as the National Longitu-
dinal Study of Adolescent Health data. Biomarkers include not only information about
genetic variations but also hormones such as cortisol (which is often interpreted as a
measure of stress). It is tempting to think of these markers as potential instrumental
variables [Fletcher and Lehrer, 2009]. For instance, if it was known that a particular gene
was linked to alcoholism, then one might think of using the gene as an instrument for
alcoholism. The potential pitfall in this approach is clear if we consider using something
like skin color as an instrument in a human capital earnings function–clearly, skin color
may predict educational attainment, but it may also have a direct effect on earnings.
Just because a variable is “biological” does not mean that it satisfies the criteria for a
valid instrument.
   A second issue is the evolving nature of what constitutes a “birth cohort”. Improve-
ments in neonatal medicine have meant that stillbirths and fetal deaths that would pre-
viously have been excluded from the census of live births may be increasingly important,
e.g. MacDorman, Martin, Mathews, Hoyert, and Ventura [2005]). Such a compositional
effect on live births may have first order-implications for program evaluation and the
long-term effects literature. Indeed, both the right and left tails of the birth weight
distribution have elongated over time – in 1970 there were many fewer live births with
birthweight either less than 1500 grams or over 4000 grams. To date there has been
little research exploring the implications of these compositional changes.
   In summary, there are many secrets currently locked in existing data that researchers
do not have access to. Economists have been skillful in navigating the many data chal-
lenges inherent in the analysis of long-term (and sometimes latent) effects. Nevertheless,
we need to explore ways to make more of these data available, and to more researchers.
In many cases, this will be a more cost effective and timely way to answer important
questions than carrying out new data collections.




                                            18
4     Empirical Literature: Evidence of Long Term Con-
      sequences

      What is of importance is the year of birth of the generation or group of in-
      dividuals under consideration. Each generation after the age of 5 years
      seems to carry along with it the same relative mortality throughout adult life,
      and even into extreme old age.

      Kermack et al. [1934] in The Lancet (emphasis added).

    In this section, we summarize recent empirical research findings that experiences
before five have persistent effects, shaping human capital in particular. A hallmark of this
work is the attention paid to identification strategies that seek to isolate causal effects
of the early childhood environment. An intriguing sub-current is the possibility that
some of these effects may remain latent during childhood (at least from the researcher’s
perspective) until manifested in either adolescence or adulthood. Recently, economists
have begun to ask how parents or other investors in human capital (e.g. school districts)
respond to early-life shocks, as suggested by the conceptual framework in Section 2.3.
    As the excerpt from Kermack et al. [1934] indicates, the idea that early childhood
experiences may have important, persistent effects did not originate recently, nor did
it first appear in economics. An extensive epidemiological literature has focussed on
the early childhood environment, nutrition in particular, and its relationship to health
outcomes in adulthood. For a recent survey, see Gluckman and Hanson [2006]. This
literature has been criticized within epidemiology for credulous empirical comparisons
(see, e.g. Rasmussen [2001] or editorial in The Lancet [2001]). Absent clearly-articulated
identification strategies, health determinants that are difficult to observe and are there-
fore omitted from the analysis (e.g., parental concern) are presumably correlated with
the treatment and can thereby generate the semblance of “fetal origins” linkages, even
when such effects do not exist.


4.1    Prenatal Environment
In the 1990s, David J Barker popularized and developed the argument that disruptions
to the prenatal environment presage chronic health conditions in adulthood, including
heart disease and diabetes [Barker, 1992]. Growth is most rapid prenatally and in early
childhood. When growth is rapid, disruptions to development caused by the adverse
environmental conditions may exert life-long health effects. Barker’s “fetal origins”



                                            19
perspective contrasted with the view that pregnant mothers functioned as an effective
buffer for the fetus against environmental insults.10
       In Table 4, we categorize prenatal environmental exposures into three groups. Specif-
ically, we differentiate among factors affecting maternal and thereby fetal health (e.g.
nutrition and infection), economic shocks (e.g. recessions), and pollution (e.g. ambient
lead).

4.1.1      Maternal Health

Currie and Hyson [1999] broke ground in economics by exploring whether “fetal origins”
(FO) effects were confined to chronic health conditions in adulthood, or might extend
to human capital measures. Using the British National Child Development Survey, low
birth weight children were more than 25% less likely to pass English and math O-level
tests, and were also less likely to be employed. The finding that test scores were substan-
tially affected was surprising as epidemiologists routinely posited fetal “brain sparing”
mechanisms, whereby adverse in utero conditions were parried through a placental triage
that prioritized neural development over the body, see, e.g., Scherjon et al. [1996]. Fur-
thermore, Stein et al. [1975]’s influential study found no effect of prenatal exposure to
the Dutch Hunger Winter on IQ.
       Currie and Hyson [1999] were followed by a series of papers that exploited differ-
ences in birthweight among siblings and explored their relationship to sibling differences
in completed schooling. In relatively small samples (approximately 800 families), Conley
and Bennett [2001] found negative but imprecise effects of low birth weight on educa-
tional attainment. Statistically significant effects of low birth weight on educational
attainment were found when birth weight was interacted with being poor, but in general
sample size prevented detection of all but the largest effects (see Section 3.1). Using a
comparable sample size, Behrman and Rosenzweig [2004] found the schooling of identical
female twins was nearly one-third of a year longer for a pound increase in birth weight
(454 grams), with relatively imprecise effects on adult BMI or wages.
       In light of the above power concerns, Currie and Moretti [2007] matched mothers to
their sisters in half a million birth records from California. Here, low birth weight was
found to have statistically significant negative impacts on educational attainment and
the likelihood of living in a wealthy neighborhood. However, the estimated magnitudes of
the main effects were more modest: low birth weight increased the likelihood of living in a
poor neighborhood by 3% and reduced educational attainment approximately one month
  10
     For example, it has been argued that nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy (morning sickness)
is an adaptive response to prevent maternal ingestion of foods that might be noxious to the fetus.



                                                20
on average. Like Conley and Bennett [2001], the relationship was substantially stronger
for the interaction between low birth weight and being born in poor neighborhoods.
       In a sample of Norwegian twins, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes [2007] also found
long-term effects of birth weight, but did not detect any heterogeneity in the strength
of this relationship by parental socioeconomic status.11 Oreopoulos et al. [2008] find
similar results for Canada and Lin and Liu [2009] find positive long term effects of birth
weight in Taiwan. Royer [2009] found long-term health and educational effects within
California twin pairs, with a weaker effect of birth weight than several other studies,
esp. Black, Devereux, and Salvanes [2007]. Responsive investments could account for
this discrepancy if they differed between California and elsewhere (within twin pairs).
Alternatively, there may be more homogeneity with respect to socioeconomic status in
Scandanavia than in California. As described in Section 3, Royer [2009] analyzed invest-
ment measures directly with the ECLS-B data, concluding that there was no evidence
of compensatory or reinforcing investments (see Section 2.2).
       Following a literature in demography on seasonal health effects, Doblhammer and
Vaupel [2001] and Costa and Lahey [2005] focused on the potential long-term health
effects of birth season. A common finding is that in the northern hemisphere, people
born in the last quarter of the year have longer life expectancies than those born in
the second quarter. Both the availability of nutrients can vary seasonally (particularly
historically), as does the likelihood of common infections (e.g., pneumonia). Therefore,
either nutrition or infection could drive this observed pattern. Almond [2006] focused
on prenatal exposure to the 1918 Influenza Pandemic, estimating that children of in-
fected mothers were 15% less likely to graduate high school and wages were between 5
and 9% lower. Kelly [2009] found negative effects of prenatal exposure to 1957 “Asian
flu” in Britain on test scores, though the estimated magnitudes were relatively modest.
Interestingly, while birth weight was reduced by flu exposure, this effect appears to be
independent of the test score effect. Finally, Field, Robles, and Torero [2009] found that
prenatal iodine supplementation raised educational attainment in Tanzania by half a
year of schooling, with larger impacts for girls.

4.1.2      Economic Shocks

A second set of papers considers economic shocks around the time of birth. Here, health
in adulthood tends to be the focus (not human capital), and findings are perhaps less
consistent than in the studies of nutrition and infection described above. Berg et al.
  11
    Royer [2009] notes that Black, Devereux, and Salvanes [2007] find a “negligible effect of birth weight
on high school completion for the 1967-1976 birth cohort, but for individuals born between 1977 and
1986, the estimate is nearly six times as large.”


                                                   21
[2006]’s basic result is that adult survival in the Netherlands is reduced for those born
during economic downturns. In contrast, Cutler et al. [2007] detected no long term
morbidity effects in the Health and Retirement Survey data for cohorts born during
the Dustbowl era of 1930s. Banerjee, Duflo, Postel-Vinay, and Watts [2009] found that
shocks to the productive capacity of French vineyards did not have detectable effects on
life expectancy or health outcomes, but did reduce height in adulthood. Baten, Crayen,
and Voth [2007] related variations in grain prices in the decade of birth to numeracy
using an ingenious measure based on “age heaping” in the British Censuses between
1851 and 1881.    Persons who are more numerate are less likely to round their ages to
multiples of 5 or 10.   They find that children born in decades with high grain prices
were less numerate by this index.

4.1.3   Air Pollution

The third strand of the literature examines the effect of pollution on fetal health. Epi-
demiological studies have demonstrated links between very severe pollution episodes and
mortality: one of the most famous focused on a “killer fog” in London, England and
found dramatic increases in cardiopulmonary mortality [Logan and Glasg, 1953]. Pre-
vious epidemiological research on the effects of moderate pollution levels on prenatal
health suggests negative effects but have produced inconsistent results. Cross-sectional
differences in ambient pollution are usually correlated with other determinants of fetal
health, perhaps more systematically than with nutritional or disease exposures consid-
ered above. Many of the pollution studies have minimal (if any) controls for these
potential confounders. Banzhaf and Walsh [2008] found that high-income families move
out of polluted areas, while poor people in-migrate. These two groups are also likely to
provide differing levels of (non-pollution) investments in their children, so that fetuses
and infants exposed to lower levels of pollution may tend to receive, e.g., better quality
prenatal care. If these factors are unaccounted for, this would lead to an upward bias in
estimates. Alternatively, certain pollution emissions tend to be concentrated in urban
areas, and individuals in urban areas may be more educated and have better access to
health care, factors that may improve health. Omitting these factors would lead to a
downward bias, suggesting the overall direction of bias from confounding is unclear.
   Two studies by Chay and Greenstone [2003b,a] address the problem of omitted con-
founders by focusing on “natural experiments” provided by the implementation of the
Clean Air Act of 1970 and the recession of the early 1980s. Both the Clean Air Act and
the recession induced sharper reductions in particulates in some counties than in others,
and they use this exogenous variation in levels of pollution at the county-year level to


                                           22
identify its effects. They estimate that a one unit decline in particulates caused by the
implementation of the Clean Air Act (recession) led to between five and eight (four and
seven) fewer infant deaths per 100,000 live births. They also find some evidence that
the decline in Total Suspended Particles (TSPs) led to reductions in the incidence of low
birth weight. However, only TSPs were measured at that time, so that they could not
study the effects of other pollutants. And the levels of particulates studied by Chay and
Greenstone are much higher than those prevalent today; for example, PM10 (particulate
matter of 10 microns or less) levels have fallen by nearly 50 percent from 1980 to 2000.
   Several recent studies consider natural experiments at more recently-encountered
pollution levels. For example, Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder [2009a] use data from birth
certificates in New Jersey in which they know the exact location of the mothers residence,
and births to the same mother can be linked.         They focus on a sample of mothers
who live near pollution monitors and show that variations in pollution from carbon
monoxide (which comes largely from vehicle exhaust) reduces birth weight and gestation.
Currie and Walker [2009] exploit a natural experiment having to do with introduction
of electronic toll collection devices (E-ZPass) in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Since
much of the pollution produced by automobiles occurs when idling or accelerating back
to highway speed, electronic toll collection greatly reduces auto emissions in the vicinity
of a toll plaza. Currie and Walker [2009] compare mothers near toll plazas to those who
live near busy roadways but further from toll plazas and find that E-ZPass increased birth
weight and gestation. They show that they obtain similar estimates following mothers
over time and estimating mother fixed effects models. These papers are notable in part
because it has proven more difficult to demonstrate effects of pollution on fetal health
than on infant health, as discussed further below. Hence, it appears that being in utero
may be protective against at some forms of toxic exposure (such as particulates) but not
others.
   This literature on the effects of air pollution is closely related to that on smoking.
Smoking is, afterall, the most important source of indoor air pollution. Medical research
has shown that nicotine constricts the oxygen supply to the fetus, so there is an obvious
mechanism for smoking to affect infant health. Indeed, there is near unanimity in the
medical literature that smoking is the most important preventable cause of low birth
weight. Economists have focussed on ways to address heterogeneity in other determi-
nants of birth outcomes that is likely associated with smoking. Tominey [2007] found
that relative to a conventional multivariate control specification, roughly one-third of the
harm from smoking to birth weight is explained by unobservable traits of the mother.
Moreover, the reduction in birth weight from smoking was substantially larger for low-


                                            23
SES mothers. In a much larger sample, Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder [2009a] showed
that smoking significantly reduced birth weight, even when comparisons are restricted to
within-sibling differences. Moreover, Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder [2009a] document a
significant interaction effect between exposure to carbon monoxide exposure and infant
health in the production of low birth weight, which may help explain the heterogeneity
in birth weight effects reported by Tominey [2007]. Aizer and Stroud [2009] note that
impacts of smoking on birth weight are generally much smaller in sibling comparisons
than in OLS and matching-based estimates. Positing that attenuation bias is accentu-
ated in the sibling comparisons, Aizer and Stroud [2009] use serum cotinine levels as an
instrument for measurement error in smoking and find that sibling comparisons yield
similar birth weight impacts (around 150 grams). Lien and Evans [2005] use increases in
state excise taxes as an instrument for smoking and find large effects of smoking on birth
weight (182 grams) as a result. Using propensity score matching, Almond, Chay, and
Lee [2005] document a large decrease in birth weight from prenatal smoking (203 grams),
but argue that this weight decrease is weakly associated with alternative measures of
infant health, such as prematurity, APGAR score, ventilator use, and infant mortality.
       Some recently-released data will enable new research on smoking’s short and long-
term effects. In 2005, twelve states began using the new U.S. Standard Certificate of
Live Birth (2003 revision). Along with other new data elements (e.g., on surfactant
replacement therapy), smoking behavior is reported by trimester. It will be useful to
consider whether smoking’s impact on birth weight varies by trimester, and also whether
smoking is more closely tied to other measures of newborn health if it occurs early versus
late in pregnancy. Second, there is relatively little research by economists on the long-
term effects of prenatal exposure to smoking. Between 1990 and 2003, there were 113
increases in state excise taxes on cigarettes [Lien and Evans, 2005].12 Since 2005, the
American Community Survey records both state and quarter of birth, permitting linkage
of these data to the changes in state excise taxes during pregnancy.
       Almond, Edlund, and Palme [2009] examine the effect of pollution from the Cher-
nobyl disaster on the Swedish cohort that was in utero at the time of the disaster. Since
the path of the radiation was very well measured, they can compare affected children
to those who were not affected as well as to those born in the affected areas just prior
to the disaster. They find that in the affected cohort those who suffered the greatest
radiation exposure were 3 percent less likely to qualify for high school, and had 6%
lower math grades (the measure closest to IQ). The estimated effects were much larger
  12
    Some states enacted earlier excise taxes: the “average state tax rate increased from 5.7 cents in 1964
to 15.5 cents in 1984” [Farrelly, Nimsch, and James, 2003]; high 1970s inflation can be an additional
potential source of identification as excise taxes were set nominally.


                                                   24
within families. A possible interpretation is that cognitive damage from Chernobyl was
reinforced by parents.
   To summarize, the recent “fetal origins” literature in economics finds substantial
effects of prenatal health on subsequent human capital and health. As we discuss in
Section 5, this suggests a positive role for policies that improve human capital by affect-
ing the birth endowment. That is, despite being congenital (i.e. present from birth),
this research indicates that the birth endowment is malleable in ways that shape hu-
man capital. This finding has potentially radical implications for public policy since it
suggests that one of the more effective ways to improve children’s long term outcomes
might be to target women of child bearing age in addition to focusing on children after
birth.


4.2      Early Childhood Environment
It would be surprising to find that a very severe shock in early childhood (e.g., a head
injury, or emotional trauma) had no effect on an individual. Therefore, a more interest-
ing question from the point of view of research is how developmental linkages operating
at the individual level affect human capital formation in the aggregate. To answer this
question, we need to know how many children are affected by negative early childhood
experiences that could plausibly exert persistent effects? How big and long-lasting are
the effects of less severe early childhood shocks relative to more severe shocks? Taken
together, how much of the differences in adult attainments might be accounted for by
things that happen to children between birth and age five? Furthermore, how are these
linkages between shocks and outcomes mediated or moderated by third factors? For
example, is the effect of childhood lead exposure on subsequent test scores stronger for
families of lower socioeconomic status (i.e. is the interaction with SES an important
one) and if so why? Alternatively, is the effect of injury mediated by health status, or
is the causal pathway a direct one to cognition?
   We might also wish to know how parents respond to early childhood shocks. To
date, there has been less focus on this question in the early childhood period than in
the prenatal period, perhaps because it seems less plausible to hope to uncover a “pure”
biological effect of a childhood shock given that children are embedded in families and in
society. However, this embeddedness opens the possibility that a richer set of behavioral
responses – of the kind considered by economists – might be at play. Furthermore, early
childhood admits a wider set of environmental influences than the prenatal period. For
example, abuse in early childhood can be distinguished from malnutrition, a distinction
more difficult for the in utero period, and these may have quite different effects.

                                            25
       We define early childhood as starting at birth and ending at age five. From an
empirical standpoint, early childhood so defined offers advantages and disadvantages
over analyses that focus on the prenatal period. Mortality is substantially lower during
early childhood than in utero, which reduces the scope for selective attrition caused by
environmental shocks to affect the composition of survivors. On the other hand, it is
unlikely that environmental sensitivity during early childhood tapers discontinuously at
any precise age (including age five). From a refutability perspective, we cannot make
sharp temporal comparisons of a cohort “just exposed” to a shock during early childhood
to a neighboring cohort “just unexposed” by virtue of its being too old to be sensitive.
Moreover, it will often be difficult to know a priori whether prenatal or postnatal expo-
sure is more influential.13 Thus, studies of early childhood exposures tend to emphasize
cross-sectional sources of variation, including that at the geographic and individual level.
The studies reviewed in this section focus on tracing out the relationships between events
in early childhood and future outcomes, and are summarized in Table 5.

4.2.1      Infections

Insofar a specific health shocks are considered, infections are the most commonly studied.
In epidemiology, long-term health effects of infections – and the inflammation response
they trigger – has been explored extensively, e.g. Crimmins and Finch [2006]. Out-
comes analyzed by economists include height, health status, educational attainment,
test scores, and labor market outcomes. The estimated impacts tend to be large. Using
geographic differences in hookworm infection rates across the US South, Bleakley [2007]
found that eradication after 1910 increased literacy rates but did not increase the amount
of completed schooling, except for Black children. The literacy improvement was much
larger among Blacks than Whites, and stronger among women then men. The return to
education increased substantially, and Bleakley [2007] estimated that hookworm infec-
tion throughout childhood reduced wages in adulthood by as much as 40%. Case and
Paxson [2009] focussed on reductions in U.S. childhood mortality from typhoid, malaria,
measles, influenza, and diarrhea during the first half of the 20th Century. They found
that improvements in the disease environment in one’s state of birth were mirrored by
improved cognitive performance at older ages, but like Bleakley [2007], this effect did not
seem to operate through increased years of schooling. However, the estimated cognitive
impacts in Case and Paxson [2009] were not robust to the inclusion of state-specific time
trends in their models.
  13
    For example, early postnatal exposure to Pandemic influenza apparently had a larger impact on
hearing than did prenatal flu exposure [Heider, 1934].



                                               26
       Chay, Guryan, and Mazumder [2009] found that reduced exposure to pneumonia
and diarrhea in early childhood among Blacks during the late 1960s raised subsequent
AFQT and NAEP scores towards those of Whites. Changes in postneonatal mortality
rates (dominated by infections) explained between 50 and 80 percent of the (large)
reduction in the Black-White AFQT gap. Finally, Bozzoli, Deaton, and Quintana-
Domeque [2009] highlight that in developing countries, high average mortality rates
cause the selection effect of early childhood mortality to overwhelm the “scarring” effect.
Thus, the positive relationship between early childhood health and subsequent human
capital may be absent in analyses that do not account for selective attrition in high
mortality settings.

4.2.2      Health Status

Many of the studies reviewed in Table 5 investigate the link between health in childhood
and future cognitive or labor market outcomes. These studies can be viewed as a subset
of a broader literature asking whether income affects health, and how health affects
income? For example, using cross-sectional U.S. data, Case et al. [2002] find a striking
relationship between family income and a child’s reported health status, which becomes
stronger as children age.       Their motivation for looking at children is that the child’s
health is unlikely to have a large direct effect on family income, so that the direction
of causality is relatively clear. Currie and Stabile [2003] investigate this relationship
using Canadian panel data and argue that one reason the relationship between income
and child health increases over time is that poorer children are subject to many more
negative health shocks. In fact, in Canada, this is the dominant mechanism driving the
relationship (which is not surprising given that all Canadian children have public health
insurance so that gaps in treatment rates are small).14
       The question we focus on here is how much poor health in childhood, in turn, affects
future outcomes.       One of the chief ambiguities in answering this question is what we
mean by health in childhood. While it has become conventional to measure fetal health
using birth weight (though there may be better measures, see Almond, Chay and Lee,
2005) there are a wide variety of different possible measures of child health, ranging
  14
    Condliffe and Link [2008] argue that in the U.S., differential access to care also plays a role in
the steepening of the relationship between income and child health with age. A number of studies
have investigated this relationship, dubbed “the gradient,” in other countries (c.f. Currie, Shields,
and Price [2007], Case, Lee, and Paxson [2008], Doyle, Walker, and Harmon [2005], Khanam, Nghiem,
and Connelly [2009]). Propper, Rigg, and Burgess [2007] and Khanam, Nghiem, and Connelly [2009]
are particularly interesting because they find that when maternal mental health is controlled, the
relationship between family income and child health disappears, suggesting that it is mediated largely
by factors that affect maternal mental health.



                                                 27
from maternal reports about the child’s general health status through questions about
diagnoses of specific chronic conditions, to the occurrence of “adverse events.”
   Case and Paxson [2008a,b, 2010a,b] do not have a direct measure of child health, but
argue that adult height is a good proxy for early child health. This is a useful observation
given that most surveys of adults have no direct information on child health. Height
at age 5 is affected by a range of early health shocks including fetal conditions, poor
nutrition, and illness.   In turn, height at age 5 is strongly predictive of adult height.
And like birthweight, it is predictive of many shorter and longer range outcomes.
   A second problem is that it is often unclear whether the ill health dates from a
particular period (e.g. an injury) or whether it might reflect a continuing, perhaps a
congenital, condition. For example, Smith [2009] uses data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics which asked young adults a retrospective question about their health
status before age 16.     In models with sibling fixed effects, he finds that the sib with
the worse health had significantly lower earnings, although educational attainment was
not significantly affected.   He also finds using data from the Health and Retirement
Survey that reports of general poor health in childhood do tend to be correlated in the
expected way with the presence of specific health conditions. However, it is not possible
to ascertain that the negative effects are due to poor health at any particular “critical”
window. Salm and Schunk [2008] attempt to deal with this problem using detailed health
information from a medical examination of young German children entering school. In
models with sibling fixed effects, they find a significant relationship between poor mental
health and asthma on the one hand, and measures of cognitive functioning on the other.
They control for the child’s birth weight in an effort to distinguish between the effects
of health at birth and health after birth (though to the extent that birth weight is an
imperfect measure of health at birth, it is possible that the other health measures partly
capture congenital conditions).
   Currie et al. [2009b] use administrative data from the Canadian province of Mani-
toba’s public health insurance system to follow children from birth through young adult-
hood.    Using information about all contacts with medical providers, they construct
measures of whether children suffered injuries, asthma, mental health problems or other
health problems at ages 0 to 3, 4 to 8, 9 to 13, and 14 to 18. It is interesting that even
in a large sample, there were relatively few children with specific health problems other
than injuries, asthma, or mental health problems, so that it was necessary to group the
remaining problems together.      They then look at the relationship between health at
various ages, educational attainment, and use of social assistance as a young adult in
sibling fixed effects models that also control flexibly for birth weight and for the presence


                                             28
of congenital anomalies.   The results are perhaps surprising in view of the conceptual
framework developed in Section 3. When entered by themselves, early childhood health
conditions (at age 0-3 and at age 4-8) are predictive of future outcomes, conditional on
health at birth. However, when early physical health conditions are entered along with
later ones, generally only the later ones matter.     This result suggests that physical
health in early childhood affects future outcomes largely because it affects future health
(i.e., subsequent health mediates the relationship), and not because there is a direct
link between early physical health status and cognition. In contrast, mental health con-
ditions at early ages seem to have significant negative effects on future outcomes even
if there are no intermediate report of a mental health condition. This result suggests
that common mental health problems such as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD, also called Attention Deficit Disorder or ADD) or Conduct Disorders (i.e. dis-
orders usually involving abnormal aggression and anti-social behavior) may impair the
process of human capital accumulation even if they do not lead to diagnoses of mental
health disorders in adulthood.
   Several recent papers focus specifically on measures of mental health conditions. Cur-
rie and Stabile [2006] use questions similar to those on mental health “screeners” which
were administered to large samples of children in the U.S. and Canada in two national
surveys. They find that children whose scores indicated mental health problems in 1994
had worse outcomes as of 2002-4 than siblings without such problems. They controlled
for birth weight (among other variables) and estimated models with and without in-
cluding children with diagnosed learning disabilities. In all specifications, they found
negative effects of high ADHD scores on test scores on schooling attainment. Smith
and Smith [2008] report similar results using data from the PSID which includes ret-
rospective questions about mental health problems before age 16.       Like Smith [2009]
and Currie et al. [2009b] they estimate models with sibling fixed effects, and find sig-
nificant long term effects of mental health conditions which are much larger than those
of physical health conditions.    Vujic et al. [2008] focus on conduct disorders using a
panel of Australian twins and find that conduct disorder before age 18 has strong neg-
ative effects on the probability of high school graduation as well as positive effects on
the probability of criminal activity.   None of these three papers focus specifically on
measures of mental health conditions before age 5 but ”externalizing” mental health
conditions such as ADHD and Conduct Disorder typically manifest themselves at early
ages. Finally, although they are conceptually distinct, many survey measures of mental
health resemble measures of “non-cognitive skills.” Hence, one might interpret evidence
that non-cognitive skills in childhood are important determinants of future outcomes


                                           29
as further evidence of the importance of early mental health conditions [Blanden et al.,
2006, Heckman and Rubinstein, 2001].



4.2.3   Home Environment


The home is one of the most important environments affecting a young child and there
is a vast literature in related disciplines investigating the relationship between different
aspects of the home environment and child outcomes.          We do not attempt to sum-
marize this literature here, but pick three aspects that may be most salient: Maternal
mental health and/or substance abuse, maternal employment, and child abuse/foster
care (which may be considered to be an extreme result of bad parenting). Given the
importance of child mental health and non-cognitive skills, it is interesting to ask how
maternal mental health affects child outcomes? Frank and Meara [2009] examine this
question using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. They include
a rich set of control variables (mother’s cognitive test score, grandparent’s substance
abuse, permanent income) and estimate models with mother fixed effects and models
with propensity scores.    Their estimates suggest large effects (relative to the effects
of income) of contemporaneous maternal depression on the quality of the home envi-
ronment and on children’s behavioral problems, but little effect on math and reading
scores. Estimates of the effects of maternal substance abuse are mixed, which echoes
the findings of Chatterji and Markowitz [2000] using the same data. Unfortunately, the
authors are not able to look at the long term effects of maternal depression experienced
by children aged 0 to 5 because the depression questions in the NLSY have been added
only recently. As these panel data are extended in time, further investigation of this
issue is warranted.
   There is also a large literature, including some papers by economists, examining the
effect of maternal employment at early ages on child outcomes. Much of this literature
suffers from the lack of an appropriate conceptual framework. If we think of child out-
comes being produced via some combination of inputs, then the important question is
how maternal employment affects the inputs chosen? This will evidently depend on how
much her employment income relaxes the household budget constraint, and the price and
quality of the child care alternatives and other inputs that are available. Some of the
literature on maternal employment seems to implicitly assume that the mother’s time
is such an important and unique input that no purchased input can adequately replace
it. This may possibly be the case but is a strong assumption. If the mother’s time is
replaceable at some price, then one might expect maternal employment to have quite

                                            30
different effects on women with different levels of household income (moreover, mother’s
time may not all be of equal quality, so that it is easier to replace some mother’s time
than others with the market). This argument suggests that it is extremely important to
consider explicitly the quality of the mother’s time inputs and the availability of poten-
tial substitute inputs in models of maternal employment, something that is difficult to
do in most available data sets. Studies that rely on regression methods and propensity
score matching (see Berger et al. [2005], Ruhm [2004] often find small negative effects of
maternal employment (especially in the first year) on children’s cognitive development.
However, two recent studies using variation in maternity leave provisions find that while
more generous maternity leave policies are associated with increased maternal employ-
ment, there is little effect on children’s outcomes [Baker and Milligan, 2009, Dustmann
and Schnberg, 2009]. Dustmann and Schnberg [2009] have data that permit cohorts
affected by expansions in German maternity leave laws to be followed for many years.
They see no effect of maternal employment on educational attainment or wages.
   Finally, there are a few papers examining the effects of child abuse/foster care on
child outcomes. This is a difficult area to investigate because it is hard to imagine that
abuse (or neglect) can be divorced from other characteristics of the household. Currie
and Widom [2009] use data from a prospective longitudinal study in which abused chil-
dren (the treatments) were matched to controls.      After following these children until
their mid 40s, they found that the abused children were less likely to be employed, had
lower earnings, and fewer assets, and that these patterns were particularly pronounced
among women.      It is possible that these results are driven by unobserved differences
between the treatments and controls although focusing on various subsets of the data
(e.g. children whose mothers were on welfare; children of single mothers) produced sim-
ilar results. Currie and Tekin [2006] use data from the National Longitudinal Study
of Adolescent Health to examine the effect of having been abused before age 7 on the
propensity to commit crime. They find strong effects which are quite similar in OLS,
sibling, and twin fixed effects models. It is possible that these results reflect a charac-
teristic of an individual child (such as difficult temperament) which makes it both more
likely that they will be abused and more likely that they will commit crime. However,
controlling directly for measures of temperament and genetic endowments does not alter
the results. The Doyle [2008] study of the effects of foster care on the marginal child is
also summarized in Table 5.




                                            31
4.2.4   Toxic Exposures

Epidemiological studies of postnatal pollution exposure and infant mortality have yielded
mixed results and many are likely to suffer from omitted variables bias. Currie and
Neidell [2005] examine the effect of more recent (lower) levels of pollution on infant
health, along with the role of specific pollutants in addition to particulates (only TSPs
were measured during the time periods analyzed by Chay and Greenstone [2003b,a]).
Using within-zip code variation in pollution levels, they find that a one unit reduction
in carbon monoxide over the 1990s in California saved 18 infant lives per 100,000 live
births. However, unlike Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder [2009a] they were unable to find
any consistent evidence of pollution effects on health at birth, probably because of the
crudeness of their measure of maternal location.
   Reyes [2007] found large effects of banning leaded gasoline on crime in the U.S., but
results were not robust to state-specific time trends despite a relatively long panel of
state-level lead measurements. Nilsson [2009] considered reductions in ambient lead lev-
els in Sweden following the banning of lead in gasoline and measures possible exposures
using the concentrations of lead in 1,000 moss (bryophyte) collection sites that have
been maintained by the Swedish environmental protection agency since the early 1970s.
Nilsson [2009] found that early childhood exposure reduced human capital, as reflected
by both grades and graduation rates. These effects persisted when comparisons were
restricted within siblings, and were substantially larger for low-income families.

4.2.5   Summary re: Long Term Effects of Fetal and Early Childhood Envi-
        ronment

The last 10 years have seen an upsurge of empirical work on the long-term effects of
early childhood. As a result, much has been learned. We can state fairly definitively
that at least some things that happen before age five have long-term consequences for
health and human capital. Moreover, these effects are sufficiently large and general to
shape outcomes at the population level. On balance, effects of fetal exposure tend to
be somewhat larger than postnatal effects, but there are important exceptions. Mental
health is a prime example. Mental health conditions and non-cognitive skills seem to
have large, persistent effects independent of those captured by measures of child health
at birth.




                                           32
5     Empirical Literature: Policy Responses
The evidence discussed above indicates that prenatal and early childhood often have a
critical influence on later life outcomes. However, by itself this evidence says little about
the effectiveness of remediation. Hence, this section discusses evidence about whether
remediation in the zero to five period can be effective in shaping future outcomes. In
so doing, we take a step away from explicit consideration of an early-childhood shock
ug as in Section 2. Instead, we focus on the specific public policies that may be able
to alter developmental trajectories, often in disadvantaged sub-populations. We begin
with programs that raise income, and then move on to programs that target specific
domains.


5.1    Income Enhancement
In the model sketched above, there are many ways for poverty to affect child outcomes.
Even with identical preferences, poorer parents will make different investment choices
than richer ones. In particular, poor families will optimize at lower investment (and con-
sumption) levels and thereby have children with lower health and human capital, other
things equal. Further, poor parents may face different input prices for certain goods, or
have access to different production technologies. Providing cash transfers addresses the
budgetary problems without necessarily changing the production technology. Hence, it
is of interest to see whether cash transfers, in and of themselves, can improve outcomes.
It is however, remarkably difficult to find examples of policies that increase incomes
without potentially having a direct effect on outcomes. For example, many studies of
cash welfare programs have demonstrated that children who are or have been on wel-
fare remain worse off on average than other children. This does not necessarily mean,
however, that welfare has failed them. Without welfare, their situation might have been
even worse. Berger, Paxson, and Waldfogel (in press) explore the relationship between
family income, home environments, child mental health outcomes, cognitive test scores
using data from the Fragile Families and Child Well-being Study which follows a co-
hort of five thousand children born in several large U.S. cities between 1998 and 2000.
They show that all of the measures of the home environment they examine (which in-
clude measures of parenting skills as well as physical aspects of the home) are highly
related to income and that controlling for these measures reduces the effects of income
on outcomes considerably.
    Levine and Zimmerman [2000] showed that children who spent time on welfare scored
lower than other children on a range of tests, but that this difference disappeared when


                                             33
the test scores of their mothers were controlled for, suggesting that welfare had little
effect either positive or negative. Similarly, Levine and Zimmerman [2000] argue that
children of welfare mothers were more likely to grow up to be welfare mothers, mainly
because of other characteristics of the household they grew up in.
   Currie and Cole [1993] compare siblings in families where the mother received welfare
while one child was in utero, but not while they other child was in utero, and find no
difference in the birth weight of the siblings. Given that research has shown little evi-
dence of positive effects of cash welfare on children, it is not surprising that the literature
evaluating welfare reform in the United States has produced similarly null findings. The
National Research Council [Smolensky and Gootman, 2003] concluded that “no strong
trends have emerged, either negative or positive, in indicators of parent well-being or
child development across the years just preceding and following the implementation of
[welfare reform].” However, U.S. welfare reform was a complex intervention that changed
many parameters of daily life by, for example, imposing work requirements on recipients.
   Conditional tax credits represent an alternative approach to providing income to
poor families, and hence to poor children. The early years of the Clinton administration
in the United States saw a huge expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC),
while in the U.K., the Working Families Tax Credit approximately doubled in 1999.
These are tax credits available to poor working families. Their essential feature is that
they are “refundable”—in other words, a family whose credit exceeds its taxes receives
the difference in cash. The tax credits are like welfare in that they give cash payments
to poor families. But like welfare reform, the tax credits are a complex intervention in
that recipients need to work and file tax returns in order to be eligible, and a great deal
of research has shown that such tax credits affect maternal labor supply and marriage
patterns [Eissa and Liebman, 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001, Blundell, 2006]. This
is because the size of the payment increases with earnings up to a maximum level before
being phased out, so that it creates an incentive to work among the poorest households
but a work disincentive for households in the phase-out range. In the U.S., the number
of recipients grew from 12.5 million families in 1990 to 19.8 million in 2003, and the
maximum credit grew from $953 to $4,204. The rapid expansion of this formerly obscure
program run through the tax system has resulted in cash transfers to low-income families
that were much larger than those that were available under welfare. Gundersen and
Ziliak [2004] estimate that the EITC accounted for half of the reduction in after-tax
poverty that occurred over the 1990s (the other half being mainly accounted for by
strong economic growth).
   Table 6 provides an overview of some of the research on the effects of income on


                                              34
children. Dahl and Lochner [2005] use variation in the amount of the EITC households
are eligible for over time and household type to identify the effects of household income
and find that each $1,000 of income improves childrens’ test scores by 2 to 4 percent of a
standard deviation. An attractive feature of the changes in the EITC is that households
may well have regarded them as permanent, so this experiment may approximate the
effects of changes in permanent rather than transitory income. Their result implies,
though, that it would take on the order of a $10,000 transfer to having an educationally
meaningful effect on test scores.

   Milligan and Stabile [2008] take advantage of a natural experiment resulting from
changes in Canadian child benefits.     These benefits vary across provinces and were
reformed at different times.    An advantage of their research is that the changes in
income were not tied to other changes in family behavior, in contrast to programs like
the EITC. They find that an extra $1,000 of child benefits leads to an increase of about
0.07 of a standard deviation in the math scores and in the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test, a standardized test of language ability for four to six year old children.    If we
think of a change of a third or a half a standard deviation in test scores as a meaningful
educational effect, then these results suggest that an increase of as little as $5000 in
family income has a meaningful effect. Milligan and Stabile [2008] go beyond Dahl and
Lochner by examining effects on other indicators. They find that higher child benefits
lower aggression in children and decrease depression scores for mothers. They do not
find much impact on physical health measures, though they do find a decrease in families
reporting that their children went hungry. There is some evidence of gender differences,
with girls showing greater responsiveness to income on the mental health and behavioral
scores while boys show greater responsiveness on test scores.
   These findings are extremely intriguing, but raise several questions. First, do the
effects of income vary depending on the child’s age?     Morris et al. [2004] argue that
income is more important at younger ages, though persistent poverty is worst of all.
Second, are there really gender effects in the impact of income, and if so why? Third,
the effects that Milligan and Stabile find are roughly twice those found by Dahl and
Lochner. Is this because the former study a pure income transfer while the later study
a tied transfer? Fourth, will the effects last, or will they be subject to “fade out” as
the children grow older?
   Table 6 also includes examples from a growing literature analyzing ”conditional cash
transfer programs” (CCTs). These are programs that tie transfers to specific behavior
on the part of the family.     For example, the parents may be required to make sure
that the children attend school or get medical care in return for the transfer.    These

                                           35
programs have become increasingly popular in developing countries, and have also been
implemented to a limited extent in rich countries (for example, there is a program in New
York City which is being evaluated by Manpower Development Research Corporation).
By their nature, CCTs are complex programs that cannot tell us about the pure impacts
of income. Still, these programs have attracted attention because randomized controlled
trials have shown at least short-term results. It is difficult however to compare across
programs, given that they all tend to focus on different outcomes.

   Given this positive evidence about the effects of income, it is a puzzle why so much
aid to poor families is transferred in kind. Currie and Gahvari [2008] survey the many
reasons for this phenomena that have been offered in the economics literature and con-
clude that the most likely reasons aid is offered in kind are agency problems, paternalism,
and politics. In a nutshell, policy makers and the voters they represent may be more
concerned with ensuring that children have medical care than with maximizing their
parent’s utility, even if the parent’s utility is assumed to be affected by the children’s
access to health care. Politics come in because coherent lobby groups (such as doctors,
teachers, or farmers) may have incentives to advocate for various types of in kind pro-
grams.    In any case, in kind programs are an important feature of aid policies in all
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development states, accounting for over
10% of GDP if health care and educational programs are included. In what follows, we
first discuss “near cash programs” and then programs whose benefits are less fungible
with cash.


5.2      Near-Cash Programs


   Programs such as the U.S. Food Stamp Program (FSP, now renamed the Supplemen-
tal Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP) and housing assistance are often referred
to as “near cash” programs because they typically offer households benefits that are
worth less than what the household would have spent on food or housing in any case.
Hence, canonical microeconomic theory suggests that households should think of them
as equivalent to cash and that they should have the same impact as the equivalent cash
transfer would have.    In the case of food stamps, it has proven difficult to test this
prediction because the program parameters are set largely at the national level, so that
there is only time series variation.
   Currie [2003] provides an overview of the program, and the research on its effects
that had been conducted up to that point. Schanzenbach [forthcoming] uses data from

                                            36
a food stamp cash out experiment to examine the effect on food spending. She finds
that a minority of households actually received more in food stamps than they would
otherwise spend on food. In these constrained households, families did spend more on
food than they would have otherwise, while in other households, food stamps had the
same effect as cash. Unfortunately, there is little evidence that constrained households
bought foods that were likely to have beneficial effects; they seem, for example, to have
spent some of the “extra” food money on products such as soda.
   Hoynes and Schanzenbach [2009] use variation from the introduction of the FSP
to identify its effects on food spending.      The FSP began as a small pilot program
in 1961, and gradually expanded over the next 13 years: In 1971, national eligibility
standards were established, and all states were required to inform eligible households
about the program. In 1974, states were required to extend the program statewide if
any areas of the state participated.      Using data from the PSID, the introduction of
the FSP was associated with an 18% increase in food expenditures in the full sample,
with somewhat larger effects in the most disadvantaged households. They find that the
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) food out of food stamp income was .16 compared
to .09 for cash income. Thus, it does seem that many households were constrained to
spend more on food than they otherwise would have (or alternatively, that the person
receiving the food stamps had a stronger preference for food than the person controlling
cash income in the household). From a policy makers point of view, this means that
the FSP has a bigger impact on food spending than an equivalent cash transfer. Still,
it is a leaky bucket if only 16 cents of every dollar transferred goes to food.
   Bingley and Walker [2007] conduct an investigation of the Welfare Milk Program in
the U.K.. They identify the effect of the program on household milk expenditures using
a large change in eligibility for the program that had differential effects by household
type. They find that about 80% of a transfer of free milk is crowded out by reductions
in milk purchases by the household. This estimate is quite similar to that of Hoynes
and Schanzenbach, though it still suggests that the in kind transfer is having some effect
on the composition of spending. Details of these two studies are shown in Table 7.
   Given that these programs appear to have some effect on food expenditures, it is
reasonable to ask what effect they have on child outcomes. There is a substantial older
literature examining this question (see Currie [2003] for a summary). The modal study
compares eligible participants to eligible non-participants using a multiple regression
model. The main problem with drawing inferences about the efficacy of the FSP from
this exercise is that participants are likely to differ from eligible non-participants in ways
that are not observed by the researcher. Thus, for example, Basiotis et al. [1998] and


                                             37
Butler and Raymond [1996] both find that participation in the FSP reduces consumption
of some important nutrients. Since it is hard to imagine how giving people food coupons
could do this, one suspects that these results are driven by negative selection into the
FSP program.

   Several recent papers examining the effects of the FSP on young children are sum-
marized in Table 7.    Currie and Moretti [2008] were the first to try to use variation
in the timing of the introduction of the food stamp program to look at effects on birth
outcomes. Using Vital Statistics Natality data from California, they find that the intro-
duction of the FSP increased the number of births, particularly in Los Angeles County.
They also find some evidence that the FSP increased the probability of fetal survival
among the lightest white infants, but the effect is very small, and only detectable in Los
Angeles. Notably, the FSP increased (rather than decreased) the probability of low birth
weight but the estimated effect is small, and concentrated among teenagers giving birth
for the first time. Thus, it appears that in California, the FSP increased fertility and
infant survival (in some groups) with overall zero or negative effects on the distribution
of birth weight.
   Almond et al. [2010] examine the same question using national data, and focus on
receipt of the FSP during the third trimester, when the fetus typically puts on most
of the weight the baby will have at birth.       In contrast to Currie and Moretti, they
find that the introduction of the FSP increased birth weights for whites and had even
larger effects on blacks. The percentage reductions in the incidence of low birth weight
were greater than the percentage increases in mean birth weight, suggesting that the
FSP had its largest effects at the bottom of the birth weight distribution. Almond et
al. find no effect of food stamp receipt in the first trimester of pregnancy and much
weaker evidence for effects of receipt in the second. This suggests that one reason for
the contrast between their results and those of Currie and Moretti is that the latter
did not focus narrowly enough on the relevant part of pregnancy. Moreover, Almond
et al. find larger effects in the South than in other regions, raising the possibility that
overall effects were smaller in California than in other regions.   Finally, it is possible
that the effects in California are obscured by the substantial in-migration that the state
experienced over this period.
   Baum [2008] examines the effects of the FSP on weight gain among pregnant women,
with particular attention to whether women gained either less than the recommended
amount or greater than the recommended amount given their pre-pregnancy body mass
index.   He estimates a simultaneous equations model in which weight gain and FSP
participation are jointly determined.   FSP participation is assumed to be affected by

                                            38
various state-level rules about eligibility, outreach and so on.    One difficulty is that
these rules may be affected by other characteristics of states (such as overall generosity
of social programs) which have direct effects on weight gain (e.g. through superior
access to health care during pregnancy). Baum finds that FSP participation reduces
the probability that women experienced inadequate weight gain during pregnancy, but
has no effect on the probability that they gained too much weight. Since inadequate
maternal weight gain is an important risk factor for low birth weight, it is likely that
FSP had a positive effect on birth weights among affected mothers.
     As discussed above, the other large category of “near cash” offer subsidized housing.
Many OECD countries have large housing assistance programs, but their effects on
families are understudied. In fact, we were able to find only one paper that examined
the effects of housing programs on the outcomes of children less than five, and only a
handful that examined effects on children at all. These studies are summarized in Table
8.
     Since by design, families receiving housing assistance are among the poorest of the
poor, it is clearly important to address the endogeneity of program receipt. Currie
and Yelowitz [2000] look at the effects of living in a public housing project in families
with two children.    They combine information from the Census and from the Survey
of Income and Program Participation in a two-sample instrumental variables framework
where the instrument for receipt of housing assistance is the sex composition of the
siblings (families with a boy and a girl are entitled to larger apartments, and so are
more likely to take up housing benefits). They find that families living in projects are
less likely to be subject to overcrowding and that the children are much less likely to
have been held back in school. The latter effect is three times bigger for boys (who are
more likely to be held back in any case) than for girls. Since most “holding back” occurs
at younger ages (Kindergarten and grade 1), this suggests that this type of assistance is
in fact beneficial for young children.
     Goux and Maurin [2005] focus on the effect of overcrowding in France using a similar
instrumental variables strategy:     They argue that children in families in which the
two eldest children are the same sex are more likely to live in crowded conditions in
childhood. They also propose an alternative strategy in which crowding is instrumented
with whether or not the parent was born in an urban area – parents who are from urban
areas are more likely to live in crowded conditions. They find evidence consistent with
Currie and Yelowitz in that crowding has a large and significant effect on the probability
that a child falls behind in school and eventually drops out.
     Fertig and Reingold [2007] examine the effect of receipt of public housing assistance


                                            39
using data from the Fragile Families Study and three instruments: The gender compo-
sition of children in the household, the supply of public housing in each location, and
the length of waiting lists in each location.    They find mixed estimates of effects on
maternal health and little evidence of an effect on child health, though their samples
are quite small. Newman and Harkness [2002] use data from the PSID to examine the
effect of living in public housing as a child on future earnings and employment. Living
in public housing is instrumented using the residual from a regression of local housing
supply on the demographic characteristics of the area. They find that public housing is
associated with increases in the probability of any employment (from 88 percent to about
95%) and increases in annual earnings (by $1,861 from a mean of $11,210). While all
of these instrumental variables strategies are subject to caveats (is gender composition
really uncorrelated with sibling’s outcomes? Are characteristics of local housing markets
associated with unobserved factors such as the quality of schools that might also affect
child outcomes?) they certainly all point in a similar direction.
   An important question is whether public housing assistance benefits children more
than the equivalent cash transfer. It is difficult to answer this question given the avail-
able data. However, it is possible to eliminate some possible channels through which
public housing programs might have different effects. One is that public housing pro-
grams may constrain the recipient’s choice of neighborhoods, with either positive or
negative effects. Jacob [2004] studies students displaced by demolitions of the most no-
torious Chicago high-rise projects. The U.S. Congress passed a law in 1996 that required
local housing authorities to destroy units if the cost of renovating and maintaining them
was greater than the cost of providing a voucher for 20 years. Jacobs argues that the or-
der in which doomed buildings were destroyed was approximately random. For example,
in January 1999, the pipes froze in some buildings in the Robert Taylor Homes, which
meant that those buildings were demolished before others in the same complex. By
comparing children who stayed in buildings scheduled to be demolished to others who
had already been displaced by demolitions, he obtains a measure of the effect of living
in high-rise public housing. Despite the fact that the high rises in Jacob’s study were
among the most notorious public housing projects in the country, he finds very little
effect of relocation on children’s educational outcomes. However, this may be because
for the most part, children stayed in the same neighborhoods and in the same schools.
   The most exhaustive examination of the effects of giving vouchers to project residents
is an ongoing experiment called “Moving to Opportunity” (MTO). MTO was inspired
by the Gautreaux program in Chicago, which resulted from a consent decree designed
to desegregate Chicago’s public housing by relocating some black inner-city residents


                                            40
to white suburbs. MTO is a large-scale social experiment that is being conducted in
Chicago, New York, Los Angeles, Boston and Baltimore (see Orr et al. [2003], Kling
et al. [2005], Sanbonmatsu et al. [2006] ). Between 1994 and 1998, volunteers from
public housing projects were assigned by lottery to one of three groups. The first group
received a voucher that could only be used to rent housing in a low-poverty area (a
Census tract with a poverty rate less than 10 percent). This group also received help
locating a suitable apartment (referred to here as the “MTO group”). The second group
received a voucher which they could use to rent an apartment in any neighborhood.
The third group was the control and received no vouchers or assistance although they
were eligible to remain in their project apartment. Families in the first group did move
to lower poverty neighborhoods and the new neighborhoods of the MTO group were
considerably safer. The move to new neighborhoods had positive effects on the mental
health and schooling attainment of girls, and negative effects on the probability that
they were ever arrested. But surprisingly, MTO either had no effect, or negative effects,
on boys. Boys in the experimental group were 13 percent more likely than controls to
have ever been arrested. This increase was due largely to increases in property crimes.
These boys also report more risky behaviors such as drug and alcohol use. And boys
in the MTO and voucher groups were more likely to suffer injuries. These differences
between boys and girls are apparent even within families [Orr et al., 2003].
   It remains to be seen how the long-term outcomes of the MTO children will differ
from controls. Oreopoulos [2003] uses data from Canadian income tax records to examine
the earnings of adults who lived in public housing projects in Toronto as children. There
are large differences between projects in Toronto, both in terms of the density of the
projects, and in terms of the poverty of the neighborhoods. Oreopoulos argues that the
type of project a family lives in is approximately randomly assigned because the family
is offered whatever happens to be available when they get to the top of the waiting
list. Oreopoulos finds that once the characteristics of the family are controlled, the
neighborhood has no effect on future earnings or on the likelihood that someone works.
   The findings on near cash programs can be summarized as follows. There is credible
evidence that the FSP may improve birth weight. More work remains to be done to
determine whether it has positive effects on the nutrition of children after birth, whether
similar programs in other countries have positive effects, and whether this particular type
of in kind program has effects that are different than cash subsidies to poor households.
The evidence regarding housing programs also suggests that they can be beneficial to
families, but offers little guidance about the important question of whether housing
programs matter primarily because they subsidize family incomes or operate through


                                            41
some other mechanism. It seems doubtful, given the available evidence, that housing
programs benefit child outcomes primarily by improving their neighborhoods (especially
since many housing projects are located in less desirable neighborhoods).


5.3       Early Intervention Programs
Many programs specifically seek to intervene in the lives of poor children in order to
improve their outcomes. Three interventions that have been shown to be effective are
nurse home visiting programs, nutritional supplementation for pregnant women, and
quality early childhood education programs. Table 9 summarizes some recent evidence
about home visiting programs.

5.3.1     Home Visiting

Unlike many social programs, home visiting has been subject to numerous evaluations
using randomized control trials.   A recent survey appears in Howard and Brooks-Gunn
[2009].    David Olds and collaborators have developed a particular model for home
visiting and conducted randomized controlled trials in a number of settings [Olds et al.,
1999, 2007] to evaluate it.   Olds’ programs focus on families that are at risk because
the mother is young, poor, uneducated and/or unmarried, and involve home visits by
trained public health nurses from the prenatal period up to two years post-partum.
The evaluations have shown many positive effects on maternal behavior, and on child
outcomes. As of two years of age, children in the Elmira New York were much less likely
to have been seen in a hospital emergency room for unintentional injuries or ingestion of
poisonous substances, although this finding was not replicated at other study sites. As
of age 15, children of visited mothers were less likely to have been arrested or to have run
away from home, had fewer sexual partners, and smoked and drank less. The children
were also less likely to have been involved in verified incidents of child maltreatment.
This finding is important given the high incidence of maltreatment among U.S. children
(and especially among poor children), and the negative outcomes of maltreated children
discussed above.    There was little evidence of effects on cognition at four years of
age (except among children of initially heavy smokers), though one might expect the
documented reduction in delinquent behavior among the teens to be associated with
improvements in eventual schooling attainment.
   In Olds’ model, using nurses as home visitors is viewed as key to getting good re-
sults. This may be because nurse home visitors are more acceptable to parents than
social workers or community workers because families may want medical services.           A
randomized trial of nurses versus trained paraprofessionals [Olds et al., 2002] suggests

                                            42
that the effects that can be obtained by paraprofessionals are smaller. Also, the Olds
programs are strongly targeted at families considered to be at risk and so they do not
shed light on the cost-effectiveness of the universal home visiting programs for pregnant
women and/or newborns that exist in many countries.
   Olds’ positive results do not imply that all home visiting programs are equally ef-
fective. In fact, Table 9 suggests that the average home visiting program has relatively
small effects.   They often improve parenting in subtle ways and may result in some
improvements in specific health outcomes.       However, these may not be sufficient to
justify the cost of a large scale program (Aos et al. [2004] offers a cost benefit analy-
sis of several programs). Home visiting programs can be viewed as a type of parenting
program—presumably the reason why Old’s home visitors improved outcomes is because
they taught mothers to be better parents. Since parents are so important to children,
programs that seek to improve parenting practices are perennially popular. Yet studies
of these programs suggest that it is remarkably difficult to change parent’s behavior and
that many attempted interventions are unsuccessful.       The most successful parenting
programs are those that combine parent education with some other intervention that
parents want, such as visits by nurses (as in Olds case) or child care [Brooks-Gunn and
Markham, 2005].

5.3.2   U.S. Supplemental Feeding Program for Women, Infants, and Chil-
        dren (WIC)

A second type of early intervention program that has been extensively studied is the
U.S. Supplemental Feeding Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). As its
name implies, WIC is a program targeted at pregnant and lactating women, infants,
and children up to age 5.      Participants receive vouchers that can be redeemed for
particular types of food at participating retailers. Participants must generally go to the
WIC office to receive the vouchers, and generally receive nutrition education services at
that time.   Many WIC offices are run out of clinics and may also facilitate access to
medical care. Dozens of studies, (many of them reviewed in Currie [2003]) have shown
that participation in WIC during pregnancy is associated with longer gestations, higher
birth weights, and generally healthier infants, and that the effects tend to be largest
for children born to the most disadvantaged mothers. Economists have critiqued these
studies, on the grounds that there may be unobservable variables that are correlated with
WIC participation among eligibles and also with better birth outcomes.       Moreover, it
may be implausible to expect WIC to have an effect on preterm birth. A recent Institute
of Medicine report on the subject reviewed the evidence and concluded that randomized


                                           43
trials of many different interventions with women at risk of preterm birth had failed
to find effects (Behrman, 2006). So it might be surprising to find an effect for WIC,
when more specific and intensive interventions aimed at preventing preterm birth have
generally failed.
   A number of new studies have attempted to deal with various aspects of this critique,
as shown in Table 10.     Bitler and Currie [2005] look at data from the Pregnancy
Risk Monitoring System, which contains very detailed data from new mothers obtained
by combining data from birth records and survey data taken from women before and
after pregnancy.    They directly address the question of selection bias by examining
the population of mothers eligible for Medicaid (all of whom are adjunctively eligible
for WIC) and asking how participants differ from non-participants along observable
dimensions.    They find that the WIC women are more disadvantaged than the non-
participants along all observables. This finding does not prove that WIC women are also
negatively selected in terms of unobservable variables, but it does mean that women who
were very negatively selected in terms of education, health, family relationships and so
on would have to have other attributes that were systematically correlated with positive
outcomes. Like previous studies, Bitler and Currie also find that WIC participation is
associated with higher maternal weight gain, longer gestation, and higher birth weight,
particularly among women on public assistance, high school dropouts, teen mothers, and
single mothers.
   Joyce et al. [2004] adopt a similar strategy with regard to selection, and focus on a
sample of first births to women who initiated prenatal care in the first four months of
pregnancy in order to ensure that participants and non-participants were more likely to
be similar in terms of unobservables.   In their sample of women giving birth in New
York City, they find positive effects of WIC among U.S. born black women, but not
in other groups. Joyce et al. [2007] use a national sample of women, compare women
who enrolled in WIC pre and post delivery, and focus on whether infants are small for
gestational age (SGA). If one does not believe that WIC can affect gestation, then
focusing on SGA is appropriate because it is not affected by gestational age. They find
that the incidence of SGA is lower for the prenatal enrollees than for the post-partum
enrollees. Gueorguieva et al. [2009] use a large sample of births from Florida and try
to deal with potential selection using propensity score matching.   They side step the
issue of whether WIC affects gestation by presenting separate analyses for pregnancies
of different length, and focusing on SGA. They find that longer participation in WIC is
associated with reductions in the incidence of SGA. Kowaleski-Jones and Duncan [2002]
examine sibling pairs from the NLSY and find that WIC participation is associated with


                                          44
an increase of seven ounces in birth weight. However, the number of pairs in which one
child participated and one did not is quite small, so that it would be useful to try to
replicate this finding in a larger sample of siblings.
   Figlio et al. [2009] present an innovative instrumental variables strategy using a
large sample of births from Florida that have been merged to school records of older
siblings.   While the characteristics of WIC programs vary across states, they do not
show a lot of variation over time, and previous analyses have demonstrated that these
characteristics are weak instruments [Bitler and Currie, 2005]. Figlio et al. [2009] first try
to select participant and non-participant groups who are very similar. They do this by
defining “marginally ineligible” families as those who participated in the National School
Lunch Program (NLSP) in the year before or after the birth, but did not participate
in the birth year. Thus, the study focuses on families whose incomes hover around the
eligibility threshold for NSLP, which is the same as the eligibility threshold for WIC.
The instrument is a change in income reporting requirements for WIC in Sept. 1999
which made it more difficult for eligible families to receive benefits. Figlio et al. [2009]
find that WIC participation reduces the probability of low birth weight, but find no
significant effect on gestational age or prematurity.
   There has been much less study of the effects of WIC on other outcomes, or other
groups of participants. A couple of studies that make some attempt to deal with the
selection issue are summarized in Table 10. One problem with WIC is that it subsidizes
baby formula, which is likely to discourage breast-feeding. Chatterji and Brooks-Gunn
[2004] use the NLSY Mother-Child file and estimate both sibling fixed effects models
and instrumental variables models using characteristics of state programs as instruments.
They find that WIC reduces breast feeding initiation and the length of breastfeeding.
However, these results are subject to the caveats above (i.e. small samples and possibly
weak instruments).       Turning to the effects of WIC on older children, Black et al.
[2004] compare WIC eligible participants and those who did not participate due to
“access problems.” These problems were assessed based on the families own reports
about why they were not participating.        They found that infants who received WIC
were less likely to be underweight, short, or perceived by their parents to be in fair or
poor health. Lee and Mackey-Bilaver [2007] use a large data base from Illinois that
integrates administrative data from several sources. Using sibling fixed effects models,
they find that siblings who received WIC were less likely to be anemic, to have exhibited
failure-to-thrive, or other nutritional deficiencies, and that the infants were less likely
to be abused or neglected. As discussed above, one issue in the interpretation of these
findings is why one infant would receive WIC while the other did not?


                                             45
    In one of the most interesting recent studies, Hoynes et al. [2009] use the initial
roll-out of the WIC program in the 1970s to identify its effects.       They find that the
implementation of WIC increased average birth weight by 10 percent and decreased
the fraction of low birth weight births. They did not find any evidence of changes in
fertility.
    In summary, the latest group of studies of WIC during pregnancy largely support
the findings of earlier studies which consistently found beneficial effects on infant health.
The finding is remarkable because WIC benefits are relatively modest (often amounting
to about $40 per month) and Americans are generally well fed (if not overfed at least
in terms of total calories). Research that attempted to peer into the “black box” and
shed light on why the program is effective would be extremely interesting.          Another
question that cries out for future research is whether WIC benefits infants and children
(i.e. children who participate after birth)?      While a few studies suggest that it does,
the effects of WIC in this population has been subject to much less scrutiny than the
effects on newborns.

5.3.3        Child Care

There have been many evaluations of early intervention programs delivered through
the provision of child care. One reason for focusing on early intervention through the
provision of quality child care is that the majority of young children are likely to be
placed in some form of care. In 2008, 64% of women with children under 3 worked
for pay (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2009). While the U.S. may be an outlier in
this respect, labor force participation among women with children is high and rising in
many other economies. Blau and Currie [2006] provide an overview of the literature on
early intervention through child care. Many studies concern experimental evaluations
of model programs that serve relatively small numbers of children and involve intensive
services delivered by well-trained and well-supervised staff.      These studies generally
find that early intervention has long-lasting effects on schooling attainment and other
outcomes such as teen pregnancy and crime, even if it does not result in any lasting
increase in cognitive test scores. These results point to the tremendous importance
of “non-cognitive skills” (c.f. Heckman and Rubinstein [2001]) or alternatively, to the
importance of mental as well as physical health in the production of good child outcomes
[Currie and Stabile, 2006].
    A few of the most notable model programs are summarized in Table 11. Two stud-
ies of “model” early intervention child care programs stand out because they randomly
assigned children to treatment and control group, had low dropout rates, and followed


                                             46
children over many years. They are the Carolina Abecedarian Project and the Perry
Preschool Project. Both found positive effects on schooling. A recent cost-benefit anal-
ysis of the Abcedarian data through age 21 found that each dollar spent on Abecedarian
saved tax payers four dollars. And by focusing only on cost savings, this calculation does
not even include the value of higher achievement to the individual children and society
[Masse and Barnett, 2002]. Each dollar spent on Perry Preschool has been estimated
to have saved up to seven dollars in social costs [Karoly et al., 1998], although this high
benefit-cost ratio is driven largely by the effect of the intervention on crime, which in
turn depends on a handful of individuals.
   Anderson [2008] conducts a re-analysis of the Perry Preschool and Abcedarian data
(and the Early Training Project) and finds that as in the MTO experiment, the effects
of intervention were largely concentrated among girls. In addition to analysing the data
by gender, Anderson focuses most of his attention on a summary index of effects, in
order to avoid understating the importance of null results. Anderson study highlights
an interesting question, which is why effects might be different for boys and girls?
   In a reanalysis of the Perry data, Heckman et al. [2010] argue that Anderson’s sum-
mary index is not meaningful, and that an important result of Perry is that there were
substantial negative effects on crime among males. Moreover, Heckman et al. note that
the randomization in Perry was imperfect, and that accounting for this imperfection
yields stronger results. They conclude that rates of return are 7 to 10% for males and
females, which are smaller than other estimates that have been reported, but economi-
cally significant.
   The fact that special interventions like Perry Preschool or Abcedarian had an effect
on at least some target children, does not prove that the types of programs typically
available to poor inner-city children will do so.     Head Start is a preschool program
for disadvantaged 3, 4, and 5 year olds which currently serves about 800,000 children
each year. It is funded as a federal-local matching grant program and over time, federal
funding has increased from $96 million when the program began in 1965 about $7 billion
in 2009 (plus additional “stimulus” funds). Head Start is not of the same quality as the
model interventions, and the quality varies from center to center. But Head Start centers
have historically been of higher average quality than other preschool programs available
to low income people. This is because, in contrast to the private child care market,
there are few very low-quality Head Start programs (see Blau and Currie [2006] for an
overview of preschool quality issues).
   An experimental evaluation of Head Start has recently been conducted [Puma et al.,
2010]. The evaluation compares Head Start children to peers who may or may not be


                                            47
in some other form of preschool (including state-funded preschools modelled in Head
Start).   In fact, the majority of children who did not attend Head Start did end up
attending some other preschool program. Even relative to this baseline, initial results
show that Head Start children make gains, particularly in terms of language ability. But
children are followed only into the first grade, and so this evaluation did not address the
important issue of whether Head Start has longer term effects. This example illustrates
one of the limitations of experiments for the study of longer-term effects, which is that
one may have to wait a long time for evidence to accumulate. There has also been a
federal evaluation of Early Head Start (EHS), a version of the program geared to infants
and toddlers under three years old. As Table 11 shows, EHS has small positive effects on
cognitive test scores and some measures of behavior though Aos et al. [2004] concludes
that it does not pass a cost-benefit test.

   Table 12 summarizes notable non-experimental evaluations of Head Start and other
public preschool programs.      In a series of studies Currie and Thomas use national
publicly-available survey data to try to measure the effect of Head Start. In most of
these studies, they compare the outcomes of children who attended Head Start to siblings
who did not attend. As discussed above, sibling fixed effects control for many shared
characteristics of children, but are not a panacea.     However, careful examination of
differences between participant and non-participant children within families suggested
that the Head Start sibling typically attends when the family is relatively disadvantaged.
For example, a young single mother might have her first child attend Head Start.         If
she then marries, her next child will enjoy higher income and be ineligible for Head
Start. Currie and Thomas found no within-family differences in birth weight or other
individual characteristics of the children. They also investigated spillover effects, which
as discussed above, can bias the estimated effect of Head Start.        They found some
evidence [Garces et al., 2002] that having an older sibling attend Head Start had positive
effects on younger siblings.    In all, it seems likely that sibling fixed effects models
understate the true effect of Head Start.
   Nevertheless, they found significant positive effects of Head Start on educational
attainments among white youths, and reductions in the probabilities of being booked
or charged with a crime among black youths [Garces et al., 2002]. Test score gains
for blacks and whites were initially the same, but these gains tended to fade out more
quickly for black than white students, perhaps because black former Head Start students
typically attend worse schools than other students [Currie and Thomas, 1995]. Effects
were especially large for Hispanic children [Garces et al., 2002].
   More recently, Deming [2009] replicates the results of Currie and Thomas [1995]

                                             48
using the same cohort of NLSY children observed at older ages.          Like Anderson, he
focuses on an index of outcomes (although he also reports results for separate outcomes)
and finds that Head Start results in an increase of .23 standard deviations, which is
equivalent to about 1/3 of the gap between Head Start and other children. He notes that
projected gains in earnings are enough to offset the cost of the program, so that there is a
positive cost/benefit ratio. Carneiro and Ginja [2008] use the same data but a different
identification strategy: they focus on families around the cutoff for income eligibility for
the program and compare families who are just below (and therefore eligible) to those
who are just above (and therefore ineligible). A potential problem with this strategy
is that it implicitly assumes that families cannot game the system by reducing their
incomes in order to become eligible for the program.       Consistent with other studies,
they find positive effects of Head Start attendance on adolescents including reductions
in behavior problems, grade repetition, depression, and obesity.
   Since its inception, Head Start has aimed to improve a broad range of child outcomes
(not only test scores). When the program was launched in 1965, the Office of Economic
Opportunity assisted the 300 poorest counties in applying for Head Start funds, and
these counties were significantly more likely than other counties to receive funds. Using
a regression discontinuity design, Ludwig and Miller [2007] show that mortality from
causes likely to be affected by Head Start fell among children 5 to 9 in the assisted
counties relative to the others. Mortality did not fall in slightly older cohorts who would
not have been affected by the introduction of the program.
   Frisvold [2006] and Frisvold and Lumeng [2009] also focus on health effects by exam-
ining the effect of Head Start on obesity. The former instruments Head Start attendance
using the number of Head Start places available in the community, while the later takes
advantage of a cut in a Michigan Head Start program which resulted in the conversion
of a number of full-day Head Start places to half day places. Both studies find large
and significant effects of Head Start on the incidence of obesity. In defense of their es-
timates, which some might find implausibly large, Frisvold and Lumeng point out that
a reduction of only 75 calories per day (i.e. less than a slice of bread or an apple) would
be sufficient to yield their results.   In small children, even small changes in diet may
have large cumulative effects. Anderson et al. [2009] follow Garces et al. and use sibling
fixed effects and data from the PSID to estimate the effect of Head Start on smoking as
an adult. Again, they find large effects.
   Head Start has served as a model for state preschools targeted to low-income children
in states such as California, and also for new (non-compulsory) universal preschool pro-
grams in Georgia, and Oklahoma. The best available evaluations of universal preschool


                                             49
programs highlight the importance of providing a high quality program that is utilized
by the neediest children. Baker, Gruber, and Milligan [2008] examine the introduction
of a universal, $5 per day (later $7), preschool program in the Canadian province of Que-
bec. The authors find a strong response to the subsidy in terms of maternal labor supply
and the likelihood of using care, but they find negative effects on children for a range of
outcomes. Lefebvre et al. [2006] focus on the same natural experiment and examine the
effects on children’s vocabulary scores, which have been shown to be a good predictor
of schooling attainment in early grades. They find strong evidence of negative effects.
In interpreting this study, it is important to consider who was affected by the program.
Because poor children were already eligible for child care subsidies, the marginal child
affected by this program was a child who probably would have stayed home with his or
her middle-class, married, mother, and instead was put into child care. Moreover, the
marginal child care slot made available by the program was of low quality—the sudden
influx of children into care caused the province to place more emphasis on making slots
available than on regulating their quality. Hence, the study should be viewed as the
consequence of moving middle class children from home care to relatively poor quality
care. It is not possible to draw any conclusion from this study about the effect of draw-
ing poor children into care of good quality, which is what model preschool programs and
Head Start aim to do.
   Gormley and Gayer [2006] examine the effects of Oklahoma’s universal pre-K pro-
gram which is run through the public schools and is thought to be of high quality. They
take advantage of strict age cutoffs for the program and compare children who had just
attended for a year to similar children who were ineligible to attend because they were
slightly younger. They find a 52 percent gain in pre-reading skills, a 27 percent gain
in pre-writing skills, and a 21 percent gain in pre-math skills. These results suggest
that a high quality universal pre-K program might well have positive effects, though one
would have to track children longer to determine whether these initial gains translate
into longer term gains in schooling attainment. Several other recent studies use a simi-
lar regression discontinuity design including Hustedt et al. [2008] and Wong et al. [2008]
who examine state pre-K programs in five states. These studies find uniformly positive
effects. It has been argued in fact, that the effects of quality state preschool programs
are larger than those of Head Start. However, it is difficult to control for pre-existing
differences between the Head Start children and children who attend other preschools.
For example in Magnuson et al. [2007], the preschool children had systematically higher
incomes than those who attended Head Start.
   A handful of studies examine the long-term effects of public pre-school or Kinder-


                                            50
garten programs. Cascio [2009] uses data from four decennial censuses to analyze the
impact of introducing Kindergarten into public schools in the U.S., where Kindergarten
was phased in on a state-by-state basis.      Using a cohort-based design, she finds that
white children born in adopting states after the reform were less likely to dropout of
highschool and less likely to be institutionalized as adults. However, she finds no signif-
icant effect for blacks, which may be due to significant crowd out of blacks from other
programs, such as Head Start.        Like Anderson, she finds that the effects were larger
for girls.   Havnes and Mogstad [2009] study a 1975 policy change in Norway which
increased the availability of regulated child care in some areas but not in others. They
find that children ”exposed” to more child care received more education and were more
likely to have earnings as adults.     Once again, much of the benefit was concentrated
among females, and children of less educated mothers were particularly likely to benefit.
In terms of mechanisms, they find that the increase in formal care largely displaced
informal care, without much net effect on the mother’s labor force participation.
   Finally, it is worth mentioning the “Sure Start” program in England and Wales. This
program aimed to provide early intervention services in disadvantaged neighborhoods but
allowed a wide variety of program models, which obviously complicates an assessment
of the program.    An evaluation was conducted by comparing communities that were
early adopters to those that adopted later. A second evaluation compared Sure Start
children to children from similar neighborhoods who were drawn from the Millenium
Cohort study. This second study used propensity scores to balance the samples. The
first evaluation found that the most disadvantaged households were actually doing more
poorly in intervention areas than in other areas (NESS, 2005), while the second found
some evidence of positive effects (NESS, 2008).       Following the first evaluation, there
has been a move to standardize the intervention and most communities are now offering
Sure Start Children’s Centers.     This latest incarnation of the program remains to be
evaluated.
   This discussion shows the value of using a framework for the production of child
quality as a lens for the interpretation of the program evaluation literature. As discussed
above, child human capital is produced using inputs that may come from either the
family or from other sources. A program that augments the resources available to the
child is likely to have positive effects (subject of course to diminishing returns), while a
program that reduces the resources available to the child is likely to have negative effects.
Hence, a program that causes poor quality group time to be substituted for relatively
high quality maternal time can have a negative effect and vice versa. The important
point is that it is possible to intervene effectively and to improve the trajectories of


                                             51
young children.

5.3.4   Health Insurance



Health insurance is not an intervention program in the sense of the programs described
above. Yet, there is a good deal of evidence that access to health insurance improves
children’s health at birth and afterwards.        Much of the evidence comes from studies
of the introduction, or expansion, of health insurance benefits. Some of this literature
is summarized in Table 13. For example, Hanratty [1996] examined the introduction
of public health insurance in Canada, which was phased in on a province-by-province
basis. Using county-level panel data, she finds that the introduction of health insurance
was associated with a decline of four percent in the infant mortality rate, and that the
incidence of low birth weight also decreased by 1.3% for all parents and by 8.9% for single
parents. Currie and Gruber [1996a] conduct a similar exercise for the U.S., focusing on
an expansion of public health insurance to pregnant women and infants.          They find
that the effects vary depending on whether the expansion covered the poorest women, or
women somewhat higher in the income distribution. Narrowly targeted expansions that
increased the fraction of the poorest women eligible by 30%, reduced low birth weight
by 7.8%, and reduced infant mortality by 11.5%. Expansions of eligibility of a similar
magnitude to women of higher incomes had very small effects on the incidence of low
birth weight, but reduced infant mortality. This result suggests that among women of
somewhat higher income levels, the expansions did not improve health at birth, but may
have increased access to life-saving technologies after birth. Currie and Grogger [2002]
focus on bureaucratic obstacles to obtaining health insurance by looking at contractions
of welfare (women cut from the rolls lost automatic eligibility for Medicaid) as well as
outreach measures undertaken by different states. They find that changes that reduced
barriers to enrollment increased use of prenatal care and had positive effects on infant
health outcomes.
   Baldwin et al. [1998] use individual-level data and compare expansions in Washing-
ton, which included enhanced prenatal care services, to expansions in Colorado which
did not in a difference-in-differences design. They find reductions in low birth weight
among medically high risk infants in Washington.            Dubay et al. [2001] conduct a
difference-in-difference investigation comparing the outcomes of high and low socioeco-
nomic status women in the 1980-1986 period and in the 1986 to 1993 period.           They
find overall improvements in the use of prenatal care for low SES women, but find im-
provements in birth weight only for some groups of white women. However, this design

                                             52
does not really focus on health insurance per se, since the estimates will be affected by
any other changes in health care markets between the two periods that had differential
effects by SES.
   Studies of the effects of health insurance expansions on children often examine pre-
ventable hospitalizations (also called ambulatory care sensitive hospitalizations). The
idea is that certain conditions, such as childhood asthma, should not result in hospital-
izations if they are properly treated on an outpatient basis. Hence, hospitalizations for
these conditions are inefficient and indicate that children are receiving inadequate pre-
ventive care. Kaestner et al. [2001] use a difference-in-differences design comparing low
income and other children before and after Medicaid expansions. They find reductions
in preventable hospitalizations of 10 to 20 percent.
   Aizer [2003] examines a California outreach program that increased child enrollments
into Medicaid. She finds that an increase in enrollments of 1,000 reduces hospitaliza-
tions by 3.26. Dafny and Gruber [2005] use a design similar to Currie and Gruber in
which actual individual eligibility is instrumented using a “simulated eligibility measure”
which is an index of the generosity of the Medicaid program in the state. The reason for
adopting instrumental variables estimation is that eligibility for Medicaid is determined
by endogenous variables such as parental labor supply. They find that Medicaid eligi-
bility increased hospitalizations overall. However, there was no statistically significant
increase in avoidable hospitalizations, suggesting that the increase was mainly due to
children with unavoidable conditions gaining greater access to care. They also found
increases in the probability of receiving a procedure and reductions in length of stay,
suggesting that children who were hospitalized were receiving more aggressive care and
that it may have improved their outcomes.
   One difficulty with studying child health is that health today is affected by past
investments, including health insurance at younger ages. Janet Currie [2008] therefore
compare the health effects of contemporaneous eligibility for health insurance among
older children to the effect of having been eligible since birth. They find that contem-
poraneous health insurance coverage has little effect on health status but that eligibility
from birth is protective.   Levine and Schanzenbach [2009] link health insurance eligi-
bility at birth to 4th and 8th grade scores on the National Assessment of Educational
Progress. They find that a 50 percentage point increase in eligibility at birth is associ-
ated with a small but significant gain on reading scores at both grades, though there is
no effect on math scores. A difficulty with both studies is that neither income at birth
nor state of birth are directly observed in the cross sectional data sets that they use, so
they must be imputed using current income and state of birth.


                                            53
    Another area of research focuses on the quality of care provided by public health
insurance programs.    Analysis of this issue is complicated by the possibility that ex-
pansions of public insurance cause people to lose private health insurance coverage, a
phenomena dubbed “crowdout” (Cutler and Gruber, 1996; Dubay and Kenney, 1997;
Card and Shore-Shepard, 2004; Gruber and Simon, 2008). If the private insurance that
is lost (or dropped) in response to expansions of public insurance is of superior quality
to the private insurance, than people’s health may suffer. Koch [2009] concludes that
recent expansions of public health insurance to children at higher income levels have
reduced access to doctor’s office visits and increased reliance on emergency rooms. He
also shows some evidence consistent with the idea that this is because children are being
crowded out of superior (but obviously more expensive) coverage from private heath
insurance plans. In fact, it is quite possible that crowding out has increased over time
as the public has become familiar with public health insurance plans for children and
private health insurance costs have continued to escalate.
    Medicaid managed care has also been shown (in at least some cases) to reduce the
quality of care. Christopher J. Conover [2001] conduct a difference-in-difference analy-
sis of Tennessee and North Carolina before and after Tennessee switched its Medicaid
patients to managed care. They find that use of prenatal care and birth outcomes dete-
riorated in Tennessee after the switch. Aizer et al. [2007] examine data from California,
where Medicaid managed care was adopted on a county-by-county basis. They also find
that compulsory managed care had a negative impact on use of prenatal care and birth
outcomes. This may be because the California Medicaid managed care program “carved
out” care for sick newborns–that is, they were covered by a state fund rather than by
the managed care companies so that companies had little incentive to take actions to
improve newborn health.
    In summary, health insurance matters for children’s outcomes. But quality of care
also matters. And it is important to remember that for most children threats to health
and well being come from sources such as injuries, poor nutrition, and toxins rather than
only from lack of access to medical care.



6     Discussion and Conclusions
There has been an explosion of research into the early determinants of human capital
development over the past 10 years.     The work surveyed in this chapter conclusively
shows that events before five years old can have large long term impacts on adult out-
comes. It is striking that child and family characteristics measured at school entry do

                                            54
as much to explain future outcomes as factors that labor economists have more tradi-
tionally focused on, such as years of education. Yet evidence for long term effects of
early insults should not be a cause of pessimism. While children can be permanently
damaged at this age, the damage can be remediated. The picture that emerges is one
of vulnerability but also of resilience.
       Since early childhood is a new area of research for economists, there remain many
unanswered questions. One major question implicit in the structure of this chapter is
whether it will ever be possible to estimate human capital production functions. The
opening sections of this chapter showed that the production function paradigm pro-
vides an extremely useful way of thinking about the problem, and in particular, that
it highlights the importance of actions taken by parents and others in exacerbating or
mitigating the effects of random shocks.           However, to actually estimate the implied
production functions would place huge demands on the data, demands that are unlikely
to be met in practice.15 Hence, the evidence we have surveyed is largely reduced form.
       A second major question is whether shocks at certain key ages matter more than
others?       Much has been written about “critical periods.” The idea is that certain
functionalities must be acquired at a particular point in life, and if they are not acquired
at that point, they will either not be acquired at all, or will not be acquired properly
There is to date little hard evidence of critical periods in humans. However, the evidence
discussed above certainly suggests that the period while children are in utero is one of
the most important to their later development. This has important implications for the
timing of social interventions designed to mitigate harms – it may be that interventions
should be targeted at pregnant women and/or women of child bearing age in addition
to young children. But there is insufficient evidence at present to be able to say that
insults or interventions at for example zero to one are likely to be more effective than
interventions at age three or four. Moreover, the cohort designs used to establish the
importance of the fetal period can tell us more about the comparison between the fetal
period and the early post natal period than they do about the comparison between the
fetal period and say exposures at age five.
       A related question is whether some types of shocks matter more than others? This
chapter surveyed many different types of shocks including exposure to disease, inade-
quate nutrition, exposure to pollution, injuries, maternal mental health problems, ma-
ternal smoking, and maltreatment. However, given that studies of the effects of these
shocks rely on different populations, time periods, and methods, it is difficult to get any
sense of whether one type of shock is more of a threat to human capital development
  15
       See however Appendix D for one thought about how a production function might be estimated.



                                                 55
than any other. Similarly, while it is clear that shocks to health have longterm effects
on domains such as education and earnings, it is not clear whether health shocks have
direct effects on cognition or learning, or whether they act mainly by affecting future
health.
       Several studies we reviewed suggested that both shocks and interventions can have
different long-term effects on males and females. But these findings are too new for us
to be able to predict when this difference will occur, and we have virtually no evidence
about why it occurs          One possibility is that gender differences are biological.         For
example, boys may be less robust than girls so that the same health shock can “cull”
boys while girls survive (e.g., see Kraemer [2000], Almond and Mazumder [2008]). In
this case, average health of male survivors might be better than that of female survivors.
Alternatively, gender differences could reflect differential parental or societal responses
to shocks inspired by son preferences or by beliefs about biological gender differences.16
       Finally, given all of this evidence of long term effects of early life outcomes, what is the
least cost way to intervene to improve outcomes? This is still an open question and our
knowledge of the types of programs that are effective (and why) is evolving rapidly. For
example, until recently, there was little evidence that income transfers had much effect,
so it was easy to surmize that in-kind programs were a more effective way to improve
child outcomes. Recent evidence that cash transfers are indeed effective should cause
a re-evaluation of the received wisdom on this point, given the inefficiencies involved
in providing transfers in-kind. Similarly, the large literature about negative effects of
maternal employment in the early years is thrown into question by recent studies showing
that large changes in maternity leave policies affected maternal employment without
having any detectable impact on long-term child outcomes. This rapid development in
our knowledge makes the study of human capital development before five an exciting
frontier for research in labor economics.




  16
    For example, advances in ultrasound technology could have changed the average human capital
endowments of boys and girls by allowing parents who prefer sons to invest differentially prenatally
(and not only by allowing them to abort female fetuses). See Lhila and Simon [2008] for recent work
on this topic.


                                                 56
Appendix
Appendix A
The following acronyms are used in this chapter:

AFDC = Aid to Families with Dependent Children

BCS = British Birth Cohort Study of 1970.

BPI = Behavioral Problems Index

BW = birth weight

CESD = Center for Epidemiological Depression scale

CCT = Conditional Cash Transfer

COHS = County Organized Health System

CPS = Current Population Survey

DDST = Denver Developmental Screening Test

ECLS-B = Early Childhood Longitudinal Study - Birth Cohort

ECLS-K = Early Childhood Longitudinal Study - Kindergarten Class of 1998-1999

EITC = Earned Income Tax Credit

EPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

FSP = Food Stamp Program

HAZ = Height for age z-score

HOME = Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment Score

IHDP = Infant Health and Development Project

IPUMS = Integrated Public-Use Microdata Samples of the U.S. Census

IV = instrumental variables

LBW = Low Birth Weight (birth weight less than 2500 grams)

MMC = Medicaid Managed Care

NBER = National Bureau of Economic Research

NCDS = National Child Development Survey (1958 British Birth Cohort)

NELS = National Education Longitudinal Study

NHANES = National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey


                                         57
NHDS = National Hospital Discharge Survey

NLSY = National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979 cohort

NLSY-Child = Children of the NLSY 1979 cohort

NLSCY = National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (Canadian)

PIAT = Peabody Individual Achievement Test

pp = percentage points

PPVT = Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test

NSLP = National School Lunch Program

OLS = Ordinary Least Squares

PNM = Post Neonatal Mortality (death after 28 days and before 1 year)

PSID = Panel Study of Income Dynamics

RDA = Recommended Dietary Allowance

REIS = Regional Economic Information System

SCHIP = State Child Health Insurance Program

SD = Standard Deviation

SES = Socio-economics Status

SGA = Small for Gestational Age

SIPP = Survey of Income and Program Participation

SNAP = Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (formerly, Food Stamps)

TSIV = Two Sample Instrumental Variables

TVIP = Spanish-speaking version of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test

TSP = Total Suspended Particles

USDA = U.S. Department of Agriculture

VSDN = Vital Statistics Detailed Natality files (birth certificate data for U.S.)

WIC = Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children

WPPSI = Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence




                                          58
Appendix B
Human capital of a child is produced with a CES technology:
                                   h                           i1/φ
                              h = A γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2φ      ,                                     (9)

where µg is an exogenous shock to (predetermined) period 1 investments. Parents value
their consumption and the human capital of their child:

                           Up = U (C, h) = B [θ(C)ϕ + (1 − θ)hϕ ]1/ϕ ,                                   (10)

and have the budget constraint:

                                          I¯1 + I2 + C = ȳ.

   Absent discounting, the marginal utility from consuming equals the marginal utility
from investing:
                                   δU      δU δh
                                        =           .
                                   δC ∗     δh δI2∗
                                                              1
                           θC ϕ−1 = (1 − θ)hϕ−1 A[...] φ −1 (1 − γ)I2∗φ−1                                (11)

                                                               ϕ−1         1
                θ(ȳ − I¯1 − I2∗ )ϕ−1 = (1 − θ)Aϕ−1 [...]       φ    A[...] φ −1 (1 − γ)I2∗φ−1           (12)

                                                                               ϕ−φ
                      θ(ȳ − I¯1 − I2∗ )ϕ−1 = (1 − θ)(1 − γ)Aϕ [...]            φ    I2∗φ−1              (13)

                                                                                     ϕ−φ
            G(ug , I2∗ ) ≡ θ(ȳ − I¯1 − I2∗ )ϕ−1 − (1 − θ)(1 − γ)Aϕ [...]             φ    I2∗φ−1 = 0.   (14)

                                                          δG
                                          δI2∗      δµ
                                               = − δGg
                                          δµg       δI2∗
                                          ϕ−2φ
                                                    
                                 ∗ φ−1
                             a(I2 ) [...]   φ    ϕ−φ
                                                  φ
                                                        γφ(I¯1 + µg )φ−1
=                                    h ϕ−φ                                ϕ−2φ
                                                                                                 i,
   −(ϕ − 1)θ(ȳ − I¯1 − I2∗ )ϕ−2 − a [...] φ (φ − 1)I2∗φ−2 + ϕ−φ φ
                                                                    [...]  φ φ(1 − γ)I
                                                                                       ∗φ−1 ∗φ−1
                                                                                       2   I2
                                                                                              (15)
                                                                                  ϕ
using the implicit function theorem and defining a to be (1 − θ)(1 − γ)A ≥ 0.
                                                       ϕ−2φ
                             (ϕ − φ)a(I2∗ )φ−1 [...]   γ(I¯1 + µg )φ−1
                                                        φ
  =                                          ϕ−φ
                                                      h                                  i (16)
                                                 ∗φ−2                           ∗φ
      (1 − ϕ)θ(ȳ − I¯1 − I2∗ )ϕ−2   + a[...] I2
                                              φ        (1 − φ) + (ϕ − φ)(1 − γ)I2 /[...]

For ϕ > φ, (16) is positive, so negative shocks in the first period should be reinforced.
Accommodation through preferences (i.e., more consumption and less investment, which
lowers h in addition to that caused by µg ) is optimal.




                                                  59
Appendix C
Sibling a has human capital ha , which is affected by a period 1 investment shock of µg :
                                  h                               i1/φ
                         ha = A γ(I¯1a + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a
                                                         φ
                                                                         ,             (17)

   Sibling b does not experience a shock to first period investments:
                                    h                    i1/φ
                              hb = B γ I¯1b
                                         φ            φ
                                            + (1 − γ)I2b      .                        (18)

    Assume further that first period investments do not distinguish between the two
siblings (absent the shock experienced by sibling a):

                                         I¯1a = I¯1b = I¯1

   Parents have Cobb-Douglas utility that cares only about the human capital of their
two children:

                       Up = U (ha , hb ) = (1 − α)logha + αloghb .                     (19)
   The parents exhaust their budget on investments in their children:

                                      ȳ = 2I¯1 + I2a + I2b .

Denoting Ȳ = ȳ − 2I¯1 as the budget for second period investments, I2b = Ȳ − I2a .
   To maximize utility, the marginal utilities from investing in siblings a and b should
be equal:
                                    δUp δha      δUp δhb
                                               =
                                     δha δI2a    δhb δI2b
                     
                1−α Ah ¯                               φ
                                                          i(1/φ)−1
                                                                                 φ−1
                              γ(I1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a              φ(1 − γ)I2a
                 ha      φ
                     h
                      α B                             i(1/φ)−1
                 =              γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)I2b
                                                   φ
                                                                 φ(1 − γ)I2b φ−1
                                                                                       (20)
                     hb φ
                                 h                              i−1
                                     ¯        φ
                       (1 − α) γ(I1 + µg ) + (1 − γ)I2a      φ        φ−1
                                                                     I2a
                                  h                      i−1
                             = α γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)I2b φ         φ−1
                                                               I2b                     (21)
                                         h                               i−1
                G(µg , I2a ) ≡ (1 − α) γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a     φ       φ−1
                                                                             I2a
                                                    −1
                 − α γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ     (Ȳ − I2a )φ−1 = 0
                    
                                                                                       (22)
using budget the constraint: I2b = Ȳ − I2a . By the implicit function theorem:
                                                   δG
                                            ∗
                                          δI2a  − δµ
                                               = δG g                                  (23)
                                          δµg    δI ∗ 2a




                                                60
            δG                    h                            i−2
                              φ−1      ¯       φ
                 = −(1 − α)I2a γ(I1 + µg ) + (1 − γ)I2a      φ
                                                                   φγ(I¯1 + µg )φ−1                   (24)
            δµg
                                                
                                             δG
                            ⇒ signum −             = signum[φ].
                                             δµg
                 δG             h                            i−1
                      = (1 − α)   γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a
                                                           φ               φ−2
                                                                  (φ − 1)I2a
                   ∗
                 δI2a
                             h                            i−2
                                 ¯         φ
             + (−1)(1 − α) γ(I1 + µg ) + (1 − γ)I2a     φ                φ−1 φ−1
                                                               φ(1 − γ)I2a   I2a
                h                               −1                             i
             − α γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ      (φ − 1)(Ȳ − I2a )φ−2 (−1)
  h                                     −2                                          i
 − (−1)α γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ     φ(1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ−1 (−1)(Ȳ − I2a )φ−1 (25)
        

                            h                           i−1
                 = (1 − α) γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a φ              φ−2
                                                            (φ − 1)I2a
                          h                           i−2
                              ¯        φ
                −(1 − α) γ(I1 + µg ) + (1 − γ)I2a   φ
                                                          φ(1 − γ)I2a2φ−2

                h                               −1                       i
            + α γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ       (φ − 1)(Ȳ − I2a )φ−2
              h                                −2                         i
          − α γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ        φ(1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )2φ−2            (26)

                                                           "                                         #
                                                                                       φ
               h                            i−1                               φ(1 − γ)I2a
   = (1 − α) γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 −      φ
                                    γ)I2a          φ−2
                                                  I2a       (φ − 1) −
                                                                        γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a
                                                                                                φ



                                                                             φ(1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ
                                                                                                      
                                  −1
+α γ(I¯1 ) + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )
          φ                     φ                φ−2
  
                                      (Ȳ − I2a )     (φ − 1) −
                                                                        γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ
                                                                                                   (27)

                                                       "                                         !       #
                                                                                   φ
           h                              i−1                              (1 − γ)I2a
 = (1 − α) γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 −      φ
                                  γ)I2a          φ−2
                                                I2a        (φ 1 −                                    −1
                                                                    γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a
                                                                                            φ



                                                                          (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ
                                                                                                        
                                 −1
+α γ(I¯1 ) + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )
          φ                    φ               φ−2
  
                                     (Ȳ −I2a )     φ 1−                                                 −1
                                                                    γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ
                                                                                                      (28)
   Because φ ≤ 1 and:
                           φ
                   (1 − γ)I2a                                (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ
                                       < 1 and                                        < 1,
          γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I2a
                                  φ
                                                       γ(I¯1 )φ + (1 − γ)(Ȳ − I2a )φ

   Equation (28) is always negative. Therefore:
                                    ∗ 
                                     δI2a
                           signum         = − signum[φ].
                                     δµg


                                                  61
    We consider three cases for the substitutability of period 1 and period 2 investments
(as captured by φ):

   1. Good Substitutability Between Periods 1 and 2 When φ > 0, the optimal I2a
      moves in the opposite direction from µg and parents should compensate a negative
      shock to child a by reducing second period investments in child b. Intuitively, it
      is easier to substitute though the production function for human capital than it is
      through the Cobb-Douglas utility function.

   2. Cobb-Douglas Substitutability Between Periods 1 and 2 For φ = 0, the
      elasticity of substitution between periods is the same as the elasticity of substitu-
      tion in preferences between the children (both Cobb-Douglas). Here, there is no
                                                                    δI ∗
      winning investment response to the shock to child a, i.e. δµ2a = 0, so period 2
                                                                        g
      investments should be left unchanged.

   3. Poor Substitutability Between Periods 1 and 2 For φ < 0, it is difficult to
      repair damage from a negative µg shock in the second period, so the return to
      period 2 investments in sibling a is below that for sibling b. Therefore, parents
      should reinforce the first peirod shock by allocating second period investments
      away from sibling a.

    Importantly, the direction of these investment responses did not depend on α, the
relative weight parents place in their utility function on the human capital of child a
versus child b. Favoring the human capital formation of a particular child – even the
child that experiences the negative endowment shock – does not affect the direction of
the optimal investment response. Nor do differences in the “overall” productivity of the
child, i.e. efficiency parameter A 6= B in equations (17) and (18), alter the direction
of the optimal investment response to µg . Thus, empirical evidence suggesting either
reinforcing or compensating investments within the family does not reveal information
on parental preferences absent additional information on the production function for
human capital.


Appendix D
In general, we need to observe the baseline investments I¯1 and I¯2 to estimate parameters
of the production function φ and γ. However, nearly all datasets with measures of
human capital h and an observable investment shock µg lack measures of human capital
investments I¯1 and I¯2 . We can still make progress in estimating parameters of the
production function despite not observing I¯1 and I¯2 , so long as we expect baseline
investment levels to be similar: I¯1 ∼
                                     = I¯2 . For µg = µg 0 ,17 equation (4) reduces to:

                                                  1−γ
                                                      .                                                (29)
                                                   γ
  17
     The assumption that µg = µg 0 simplifies the algebra, but φ and γ can still be estimated for µg 6= µg 0
so long as µg and µg 0 are observed. We thank Christine Pal for pointing this out.




                                                    62
                                                                      0
That is, we can observe damage to h from the shock µg in second period investments
relative to the damage from the first period shock µg , which isolates γ (while remaining
silent on the magnitude of φ).
    With an estimate of γ in hand, we can then estimate φ by using the total derivative
in investment shocks, i.e. how human capital changes as we change both first and second
period investments (by an equal amount). In an overlapping generations framework,
this would require a shock lasting two childhood periods (or longer), and “half-exposed”
cohorts on either end of the shock. Damage to the fully exposed cohort relative to the
cohort exposed in period 1 alone is:
                            "                                                 # 1−φ
                         1 γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)(I¯1 + µg )φ
                                                                                 φ

                       =                                                              ,   (30)
                         γ      γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I¯1φ
using the assumption that I¯1 = I¯2 and µg = µg 0 .
                               "                           # 1−φ
                             1         (I¯1 + µg )φ           φ

                           =                                     ,                        (31)
                             γ γ(I¯1 + µg )φ + (1 − γ)I¯1φ
                                                                  1−φ
                                                                     φ
                                    1        1
                                =                             φ
                                                                         ,               (32)
                                    γ γ + (1 − γ) I¯1
                                                 I¯1 +µ   g

                                 "                           −φ # φ−1
                                                                     φ
                                1                 µg
                           =      γ + (1 − γ) 1 + ¯                            ,          (33)
                                γ                 I1
   Similarly, damage to the “doubly exposed” cohort relative to that experiencing a
shock in just the second childhood period is:
                               "                     # φ−1
                                                 µg −φ φ
                                            
                            1
                         =       (1 − γ) + γ 1 + ¯          ,                             (34)
                           1−γ                   I1
   Equations (33) and (34) constitute two equations in the two unknowns I¯1 and φ,
with γ known from equation (29).




                                               63
References
An overstretched hypothesis? The Lancet, 357(9254):405, 2001.

Jorge M. Agüero, Michael R. Carter, and Ingrd Woolard. The impact of unconditional
  cash transfers on nutrition: The south african child support grant. manuscript, Febru-
  ary 2009.

Anna Aizer. Low take-up in medicaid: Does outreach matter and for whom? American
 Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93(2):238–241, May 2003.

Anna Aizer. Public health insurance, program take-up and child health. The Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 89(3):400–415, 2007.

Anna Aizer and Laura Stroud. Education, medical knowledge and the evolution of
 disparities in health. manuscript, Brown University, September 2009.

Anna Aizer, Janet Currie, and Enrico Moretti. Does managed care hurt health? evidence
 from medicaid mothers. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3):385–399, 2007.

Anna Aizer, Laura Stroud, and Stephen Buka. Maternal stress and child well-being:
 Evidence from siblings. manuscript, Brown University, February 2009.

Mevlude Akbulut-Yuksel. Children of war: The long-run effects of large-scale physical
 destruction and warfare on children. Discussion Paper 4407, The Institute for the
 Study of Labor (IZA), September 2009.

Douglas Almond. Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic over? Long-term effects of in utero
 influenza exposure in the post-1940 U.S. population. Journal of Political Economy,
 114(4):672–712, August 2006.

Douglas Almond and Bhashkar Mazumder. The 1918 influenza pandemic and subsequent
 health outcomes: An analysis of sipp data. American Ecnomic Review, Papers and
 Proceedings, 95(2), May 2005.

Douglas Almond and Bhashkar Mazumder. Health capital and the prenatal en-
 vironment: The effect of maternal fasting during pregnancy. Working Pa-
 per 14428, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2008.     URL
 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14428.

Douglas Almond, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee. The costs of low birth weight.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):1031–1084, August 2005.

Douglas Almond, Lena Edlund, and Mårten Palme. Chernobyl’s subclinical legacy: Pre-
 natal exposure to radioactive fallout and school outcomes in sweden. Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 124(4):1729–1772, 2009. doi: 10.1162/qjec.2009.124.4.1729. URL
 http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/qjec.2009.124.4.1729.

Douglas Almond, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. Inside the war
 on poverty: The impact of food stamps on birth outcomes. The Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 2010. forthcoming.


                                          64
Kathryn H. Anderson, James E. Foster, and David E. Frisvold. Investing in health:
 The long-term impact of head start on smoking. Working Paper 1465-7295, Western
 Economic Association International, 2009.

Michael Anderson. Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early
 intervention: A reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training
 projects. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484):1481–1495, 2008.

Joshua D. Angrist and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Em-
  piricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2009.

Steve Aos, Roxanne Lieb, Jim Mayfield, Marna Miller, and Annie Pennucci. Benefits and
  costs of prevention and early intervention programs for youth. Technical appendix,
  Washington State Institute for Public Policy, September 2004.

Orley Ashenfelter and Cecilia Rouse.    Income, schooling, and ability: Evi-
  dence from a new sample of identical twins.      Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 113(1):253–284, 1998.      doi:   10.1162/003355398555577.    URL
  http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/003355398555577.

Alison Aughinbaugh and Maury Gittleman. Does money matter? a comparison of the
  effect of income on child development in the united states and britain. Journal of
  Human Resources, 38(3):416–440, 2003.

Kevin Baker. Do cash transfer programs improve infant health: Evidence from the 1993
  expansion of the earned income tax credit. manuscript: University of Notre Dame,
  2008.

Michael Baker and Kevin Milligan. Evidence from maternity leave expansions of the
 impact of maternal care on early child development. Journal of Human Resources,
 2009. forthcoming.

Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan.        Universal child
 care, maternal labor supply, and family well-being.      Journal of Po-
 litical Economy, 116(4):709–745, 2008.    doi:  10.1086/591908.     URL
 http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/591908.

Laura-Mae Baldwin, Eric H. Larson, Frederick A. Connell, Daniel Nordlund, Kevin C.
  Cain, Mary L. Cawthon, Patricia Byrns, and Roger A. Rosenblatt. The effect of
  expanding medicaid prenatal services on birth outcomes. American Journal of Public
  Health, 88(11):1623–1629, 1998.

Abhijit V. Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Timothy Watts. Long run
 health impacts of income shocks: Wine and phylloxera in 19th century france. Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2009. forthcoming.

Spencer Banzhaf and Randall P. Walsh. Do people vote with their feet? an empirical
  test of tiebout. American Economic Review, 98(3):84363, June 2008.

D.J.P. Barker, editor. Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease. British Medical Journal,
  London, 1992.

                                           65
Beth Barnet, Margo DeVoe Jiexin Liu, Kari Alperovitz-Bichell, and Anne K. Duggan.
  Home visiting for adolescent mothers: Effects on parenting, maternal life course, and
  primary care linkage. Annals of Family Medicine, 5(3):224–232, 2007.

Steven Barnett, Clive R. Belfield, Milagros Nores, and Lawrence Schweinhart. The
  high/scope perry preschool program: Cost-benefit analysis using data from the age-
  40 follow-up. The Journal of Human Resources, 41(1):162–190, 2006.

Alan Barreca. The long-term economic impact of in utero and postnatal exposure to
  malaria. Journal of Human Resources, 2009. Forthcoming.

Peter Basiotis, Carol S. Kramer-LeBlanc, and Eileen T. Kennedy. Maintaining nutrition
  security and diet quality: The role of the food stamp program and wic. Family
  Economics, 11(1-2):4–16, 1998.

Jörg Baten, Dorothee Crayen, and Joachim Voth. Poor, hungry and stupid: Numeracy
   and the impact of high food prices in industrializing britain, 1780-1850. Economics
   Working Papers 1120, Department of Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu
   Fabra, October 2007. URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/upf/upfgen/1120.html.

Charles L. Baum. The effects of food stamp benefits on weight gained by expectant
 mothers. Discussion Paper 1343-08, Institute for Research on Poverty, September
 2008.

Gary S. Becker and Nigel Tomes. Child endowments and the quantity and quality of
 children. The Journal of Political Economy, 84(4):S143–S162, August 1976.

Jere R. Behrman and Mark R. Rosenzweig. Returns to birthweight. The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 86(2):586–601, May 2004.

Jere R. Behrman, Robert A. Pollak, and Paul Taubman. Parental preferences and
  provision for progeny. Journal of Political Economy, 90(1):52–73, 1982.

Jere R. Behrman, Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman. Endowments and the allo-
  cation of schooling in the family and in the marriage market: The twins experiment.
  Journal of Political Economy, 102(6):1131–1174, 1994.

Gerard J. Van Den Berg, Maarten Lindeboom, and France Portrait. Economic conditions
 early in life and individual mortality. American Economic Review, 96(1):290–302,
 March 2006.

Gerard J. Van Den Berg, Maarten Lindeboom, and France Portrait. Long-run longevity
 effects of a nutritional shock early in life: The dutch potato famine of 1846-1847.
 Journal of Health Economics, 2009. Forthcoming.

Lawrence M. Berger, Jennifer Hill, and Jane Waldfogel. Maternity leave, early maternal
  employment, and child health and development in the us. The Economic Journal,
  115:F29–F47, 2005.




                                          66
Oleg Bilukha, Robert A. Hahn, Alex Crosby, Mindy T. Fullilove, Akiva Liberman, Eve
  Moscicki, Susan Snyder, Farris Tuma, Phaedra Corso, Amanda Schofield, and Peter A.
  Briss. The effectiveness of early childhood home visitation in preventing violence: A
  systematic review. American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 28(2):11–39, 2005.

Paul Bingley and Ian Walker. There’s no such thing as a free lunch: Altruistic par-
  ents and the response of household food expenditures to nutrition program reforms.
  Discussion Paper 2007-19, University College Dublin Geary Institute, June 2007.

Marianne Bitler and Janet Currie. Does wic work? the effect of wic on pregnancy and
 birth outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 24(1):73–91, November
 2005.

Maureen M. Black, Diana B. Cutts, Deborah A. Frank, Joni Geppert, Anne Skalicky,
 Suzette Levenson, Patrick H. Casey, Carol Berkowitz, Nievves Zaldivar, John T. Cook,
 Alan F. Meyers, and Tim Herren. Special supplemental nutrition program for women,
 infants, and children participation and infants’ growth and health: A multi-site surveil-
 lance study. Pediatrics, 114(1):169–176, 2004.

Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. From the cradle to the
  labor market? the effect of birth weight on adult outcomes. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122(1):409–439, February 2007.

Jo Blanden, Paul Gregg, and Lindsey MacMillan. Explaining intergenerational income
  persistence: Non-cognitive skills, ability and education. CMPO Working Paper Series
  06/146, University of Bristol, The Centre for Market and Public Organisation, April
  2006. URL www.bris.ac.uk/Depts/CMPO/.

David Blau and Janet Currie. Pre-school, day care, and after-school care: Who’s minding
  the kids? 2:1163–1278, 2006.

Hoyt Bleakley. Disease amd development: Evidence from hookworm eradication in the
  south. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):73–, 2007.

Laura Blow, Ian Walker, and Yu Zhu. Who benefits from child benefit. manuscript,
  February 2005.

Richard Blundell. Earned income tax credit policies: Impact and optimality: The adam
  smith lecture, 2005. Labour Economics, 13(4):423 – 443, 2006. ISSN 0927-5371. doi:
  DOI: 10.1016/j.labeco.2006.04.001. European Association of Labour Economists, 2nd
  World Conference SOLE/EALE, Fairmont Hotel San Francisco, USA, 2-5 June 2005.

Carlos Bozzoli, Angus S. Deaton, and Climent Quintana-Domeque. Child mortality,
  income and adult height. NBER Working Paper No. 12966, March 2009. forthcoming,
  “Demography”.

Jeanne Brooks-Gunn and Greg Duncan. Consequences of Growing Up Poor. Russell
  Sage Foundation, New York, 1997. editors.

Jeanne Brooks-Gunn and Lisa B. Markham. The contribution of parenting to ethnic
  and racial gaps in school readiness. The Future of Children, 15(1):139–168, 2005.

                                           67
J.S. Butler and Jennie E. Raymond. The effect of the food stamp program on nutrient
  intake. Economic Inquiry, 34:781–198, 1996.

Frances A. Campbell and Craig T. Ramey. Effects of early intervention on intellectual
  and academic achievement: A follow-up study of children from low-income families.
  Child Development, 65(2):684–698, 1994.

David Card and Laura Shore-Sheppard. Using discontinuous eligibility rules to identify
  the effects of the federal medicaid expansions on low-income children. Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 86(3):752–766, 2004.

Pedro Carneiro and Rita Ginja. Preventing behavior problems in childhood and adoles-
  cence: Evidence from head start. manuscript, March 2008.

Pedro Carneiro and James Heckman.   Human capital policy.   Working Pa-
  per 9495, National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2003.   URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9495.

Elizabeth U. Cascio. Do investments in universal early education pay off? long-term ef-
  fects of introducing kindergartens into public schools. Working Paper 14951, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, May 2009.

Anne Case and Christina Paxson. Height, health, and cognitive function in old age.
 American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 98(2):463–467, 2008a.

Anne Case and Christina Paxson. Stature and status: Height, ability, and labor market
 outcomes. Journal of Political Economy, 116(3):499–532, 2008b. doi: 10.1086/589524.

Anne Case and Christina Paxson. Early Life Health and Cognitive Function in Old Age.
 American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):104–109, May 2009.

Anne Case and Christina Paxson. Causes and consequences of early life health. Work-
 ing Paper 15637, National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2010a. URL
 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15637.

Anne Case and Christina Paxson. The long reach of childhood health and circumstance:
 Evidence from the whitehall ii study. Working Paper 15640, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, January 2010b. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w15640.

Anne Case, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. Economic status and health in
 childhood: The origins of the gradient. American Economic Review, 92(5):1308–1334,
 December 2002.

Anne Case, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. The lasting impact of childhood health
 and circumstance. Journal of Health Economics, 24:365–389, March 2005.

Anne Case, Diana Lee, and Christina Paxson. The income gradient in children’s health:
 A comment on currie, shields, and wheatley price. Journal of Health Economics, 27
 (3):801–807, 2008.




                                          68
Pinka Chatterji and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. Wic participation, breastfeeding practices,
  and well-child care among unmarried, low-income mothers. American Journal of
  Public Health, 94(8):1324–1327, 2004.

Pinka Chatterji and Sarah Markowitz. The impact of maternal alcohol and illicit drug
  use on children’s behavior problems: Evidence from the children of the national longi-
  tudinal survey of youth. Working Paper 7692, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  May 2000.

Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael Greenstone. The impact of air pollution on infant mortal-
  ity: Evidence from the geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):1121–1167, August 2003a.

Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael Greenstone. Air quality, infant mortality, and the clean
  air act of 1970. Working Paper 10053, National Bureau of Economic Research, October
  2003b. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w10053.

Kenneth Y. Chay, Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder. Birth cohort and
  the black-white achievement gap: The roles of access and health soon after birth.
  Working Paper 15078, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2009. URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15078.

Alpha C. Chiang. Fundamental Methods of Mathematical Economics. McGraw-Hill,
  New York, third edition, 1984.

Frank A. Sloan Christopher J. Conover, Peter J. Rankin. Effects of tennessee medicaid
  managed care on obstetrical care and birth outcomes. Journal of Health Politics,
  Policy, and Law, 26(6):1291–1324, 2001.

Simon Condliffe and Charles R. Link. The relationship between economic status and
  child health: Evidence from the united states. American Economic Review, 98(4):
  1605–1618, September 2008.

Dalton Conley and Neil G. Bennett. Birth weight and income: Interactions across gen-
 erations. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 42(4):450–465, 2001. ISSN 00221465.
 URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/3090189.

Dalton Conley, Kate W. Strully, and Neil G. Bennett. Twin differences in birth weight:
 The effects of genotype and prenatal environment on neonatal and post-natal mortal-
 ity. Economics and Human Biology, 4(2):151–183, 2006.

Dalton Conley, Katherine M. Pfeiffer, and Melissa Velez. Explaining sibling differences in
 achievement and behavioral outcomes: The importance of within- and between-family
 factors. Social Science Research, 36(3):1087–1104, 2007.

Dora L. Costa and Joanna N. Lahey. Predicting older age mortality trends. Journal of
 the European Economic Association, 3(2-3):487–493, April-May 2005.

James C. Cramer. Racial and ethnic differences in birthweight: The role of income and
  financial assistance. Demography, 32(2):231–247, 1995.



                                           69
Eileen M. Crimmins and Caleb E. Finch. Infection, inflammation, height, and longevity.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(2):498–503, January 2006.

Flavio Cunha and James Heckman. The technolgy of skill formation. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 97(2):31–47, May 2007.

Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman.       Formulating, Identifying and Esti-
  mating the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.   J.
  Human Resources, 43(4):738–782, 2008.   doi: 10.3368/jhr.43.4.738.   URL
  http://jhr.uwpress.org/cgi/content/abstract/43/4/738.

Flavio Cunha, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach. Estimating the technology
  of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica, forthcoming. URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15664. NBER Working Paper No. 15664.

Alison Currie, Michael Shields, and Stephen W. Price. Is the child health/family income
  gradient universal? evidence from england. Journal of Health Economics, 26(2):213–
  232, 2007.

Janet Currie. Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, chapter U.S. Food
  and Nutrition Programs, pages 199–290. University of Chicago Press for NBER,
  Chicago, IL, 2003. Robert Moffitt, editor.

Janet Currie and Nancy Cole. Welfare and child health: The link between afdc partici-
  pation and birth weight. The American Economic Review, 83(4):971–985, 1993.

Janet Currie and Firouz Gahvari. Transfers in cash and in-kind; theory meets the data.
  Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2):333–383, 2008.

Janet Currie and Jeffrey Grogger. Medicaid expansions and welfare contractions: Off-
  setting effects on prenatal care and infant health. Journal of Health Economics, 21
  (2):313–335, 2002.

Janet Currie and Jonathan Gruber.       Saving babies: The efficacy and cost
  of recent changes in the medicaid eligibility of pregnant women.     Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 104(6):1263, 1996a.   doi: 10.1086/262059.  URL
  http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/262059.

Janet Currie and Jonathan Gruber. Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical
  care, and child health. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):431–466, May
  1996b.

Janet Currie and Rosemary Hyson. Is the impact of shocks cusioned by socioeconomic
  status? the case of low birth weight. American Economic Review, 89(2):245–250, May
  1999.

Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti.      Biology as destiny?     short- and long-
  run determinants of intergenerational transmission of birth weight.    Jour-
  nal of Labor Economics, 25(2):231–264, 2007.     doi: 10.1086/511377.  URL
  http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/511377.



                                          70
Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti. Making Americans Healthier: Social and Economic
  Policy as Health Policy, chapter Short and Long-Run Effects of the Introduction of
  Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes in California. Russell Sage, New York, 2008. R.F.
  Schoeni, J House, G Kaplan, and H Pollack, editors.

Janet Currie and Matthew Neidell.       Air pollution and infant health: What
  can we learn from california’s recent experience?    Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 120(3):1003–1030, 2005.      doi: 10.1162/003355305774268219.     URL
  http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/003355305774268219.

Janet Currie and Mark Stabile. Socioeconomic status and child health: Why is the
  relationship stronger for older children? American Economic Review, 93(5):1813–
  1823, December 2003.

Janet Currie and Mark Stabile. Child mental health and human capital accumulation:
  the case of adhd. Journal of Health Economics, 25(6):1094–1118, November 2006.

Janet Currie and Mark Stabile. An Economic Perspective on the Problems of
  Disadvantaged Youth, chapter Mental Health in Childhood and Human Capital,
  pages 115–148. University of Chicago Press for NBER, Chicago, 2009. URL
  http://www.nber.org/chapters/c0590. Jonathan Gruber, editor.

Janet Currie and Erdal Tekin.     Does child abuse cause crime?      Work-
  ing Paper 12171, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2006. URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w12171.

Janet Currie and Duncan Thomas. Does head start make a difference?           American
  Economic Review, 85(3):341–364, 1995.

Janet Currie and Duncan Thomas. Early test scores, socioeconomic status and future
  outcomes. Working Paper 6943, National Bureau of Economic Research, February
  1999a. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w6943.

Janet Currie and Duncan Thomas. Does head start help hispanic children? Journal of
  Public Economics, 74(2):235 – 262, 1999b. ISSN 0047-2727. doi: DOI: 10.1016/S0047-
  2727(99)00027-4.

Janet Currie and Reed Walker. Traffic congestion and infant health: Evidence from e-
  zpass. Working Paper 15413, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2009.
  URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w15413.

Janet Currie and Cathy S. Widom. Long-term consequences of child abuse and neglect
  on adult economic well-being. manuscript, September 2009.

Janet Currie and Aaron Yelowitz. Are public housing projects good for kids? Journal of
  Public Economics, 75(1):99 – 124, 2000. ISSN 0047-2727. doi: DOI: 10.1016/S0047-
  2727(99)00065-1.

Janet Currie, Matthew Neidell, and Johannes F. Schmieder. Air pollution and infant
  health: Lessons from new jersey. Journal of Health Economics, 28(3):688 – 703, 2009a.
  ISSN 0167-6296. doi: DOI: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.02.001.

                                          71
Janet Currie, Mark Stabile, Phongsack Manivong, and Leslie L. Roos. Child health and
  young adult outcomes. Journal of Health Economics, 2009b. forthcoming.

David M. Cutler, Grant Miller, and Douglas M. Norton. Evidence on early-life in-
  come and late-life health from America’s Dust Bowl era. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 104(33):13244–13249, 2007. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700035104.
  URL http://www.pnas.org/content/104/33/13244.abstract.

Leemore Dafny and Jonathan Gruber. Public insurance and child hospitalizations: access
  and efficiency effects. Journal of Public Economics, 89(1):109–129, January 2005. URL
  http://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/pubeco/v89y2005i1p109-129.html.

Gordon Dahl and Lance Lochner. The impact of family income on child achievement:
 Evidence from the earned income tax credit. Working Paper 14599, National Bureau
 of Economic Research, December 2008. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w14599.

Gordon B. Dahl and Lance Lochner. The impact of family income on child achievement.
 Working Paper 11279, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2005. URL
 http://www.nber.org/papers/w11279.

Tore Dalenius and Steven P. Reiss. Data swapping: A technique for disclosure control.
  Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 6(1):73–85, 1982.

Ashlesha Datar, Rebecca Kilburn, and David Loughran. Endowments and parental
  investments in infancy and early childhood. Demography, february 2010. forthcoming.

Lorraine Dearden. Ability, family, education, and earnings in britain. Working Paper
  98/114, Institute for Fiscal Studies, July 1998.

Emilia Del Bono, John Ermisch, and Marco Francesconi.       Intrafamily re-
 source allocations: A dynamic model of birth weight.   IZA Discussion Pa-
 pers 3704, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), September 2008.    URL
 http://ideas.repec.org/p/iza/izadps/dp3704.html.

David Deming. Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3):111–134, 2009.

Olivier Deschnes and Michael Greenstone. Climate change, mortality, and adaptation:
  Evidence from annual fluctuations in weather in the us. NBER Working Paper No.
  13178, June 2007.

Martin Deutsch, Cynthia P. Deutsch, Theresa J. Jordan, and Richard Grallo. As the
 Twig is Bent...Lasting Effects of Preschool Programs, chapter The IDS Program: An
 Experiment in Early and Sustained Enrichment, pages 377–410. Consortium for Lon-
 gitudinal Studies, Hillsdale N.J.: Erlbaum, 1983.

Gabriele Doblhammer and James W. Vaupel. Lifespan depends on month of birth.
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(5):2934–2939, February 2001.




                                          72
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.     Child protection and adult crime:    Using investi-
  gator assignment to estimate causal effects of foster care.    Journal of
  Political Economy, 116(4):746–770, 2008.    doi:  10.1086/590216.    URL
  http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/590216.
Orla Doyle, Ian Walker, and Colm P. Harmon. The impact of parental income and
  education on the health of their children. Discussion Paper 5359, Centre for Economic
  Policy Research, December 2005.
Lisa Dubay, Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, and Genevieve M. Kenney. Changes in prenatal
  care timing and low birth weight by race and socioeconomic status: Implications for
  the medicaid expansions for pregnant women. Health Services Research, 36(2):373–
  398, 2001.
Anne K. Duggan, Elizabeth McFarlane, Loretta Fuddy, Lori Burrell, Susan M. Higman,
 Amy Windham, and Calvin Sia. Randomized trial of a statewide home visiting pro-
 gram: Impact on preventing child abuse and neglect. Child Abuse and Neglect, 28(6):
 597–622, 2004.
Anne K. Duggan, Debra Caldera, Kira Rodriguez, Lori Burrell, Charles Rohde, and
 SarahS. Crowne. Impact of a statewide home visiting program to prevent child abuse.
 Child Abuse and Neglect, 31(8):801–827, 2007.
Anne K. Duggan, Lisa J. Berlin, Jude Cassidy, Lori Burrell, and S. Darius Tandon. Ex-
 amining maternal depression and attachment insecurity as moderators of the impacts
 of home visiting for at-risk mothers and infants. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
 Psychology, 77(4):788–799, 2009.
Kimberly DuMont, Susan Mitchell-Herzfeld, Rose Greene, Eunju Lee, Ann Lowenfels,
  and Monica Rodriguez. Healthy families new york (hfny) randomized trial: Impacts
  on parenting after the first two years. Working Paper Series: Evaluating Healthy
  Families New York 1, New York State Office of Children & Family Services, June
  2006.
Christian Dustmann and Uta Schnberg. The Effect of Expansions in Maternity
 Leave Coverage on Children’s Long-Term Outcomes. SSRN eLibrary, 2009. doi:
 10.1111/j.0042-7092.2007.00700.x.
Nada Eissa and Jeffrey B. Liebman. Labor supply response to the earned income tax
  credit. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(3):653–691, 1996.
Matthew C. Farrelly, Christian T. Nimsch, and Joshua James. State cigarette excise
 taxes: Implications for revenue and tax evasion. Report 08742.000, RTI International,
 Research Triangle Park, NC, May 2003.
David M. Fergusson, Hildegard Grant, L. John Horwood, and Elizabeth M. Ridder.
  Randomized trial of early start program of home visitation. Pediatrics, 117(3):803–
  809, 2006.
Angela R. Fertig and David A. Reingold. Public housing, health, and health behaviors:
 Is there a connection? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 26(4):831–859,
 2007.

                                          73
Erica Field, Omar Robles, and Maximo Torero. Iodine deficiency and schooling attain-
  ment in tanzania. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4):140–169,
  October 2009.

David Figlio, Sarah Hamersma, and Jeffrey Roth. Does prenatal wic participation im-
  prove birth outcomes? new evidence from florida. Journal of Public Economics, 93
  (1-2):235–245, 2009.

Jason M. Fletcher and Steven F. Lehrer. Using genetic lotteries within families
  to examine the causal impact of poor health on academic achievement. Work-
  ing Paper 15148, National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2009.      URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15148.

Richard G. Frank and Ellen Meara. The effect of maternal depression and substance
  abuse on child human capital development. Working Paper 15314, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, September 2009.

David E. Frisvold. Head start participation and childhood obesity. Working Paper
  06-WG01, Vanderbilt University, February 2006.

David E. Frisvold and Julie C. Lumeng. Expanding exposure: Can increasing the daily
  duration of head start reduce childhood obesity? manuscript, April 2009.

Howard L. Garber. The Milwaukee Project: Prevention of Mental Retardation in Chil-
  dren at Risk. American Association on Mental Retardation, Washington, D.C., 1988.

Eliana Garces, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. Longer-term effects of head start.
  American Economic Review, 92(4):999–1012, September 2002.

Paul J. Gertler. Do conditional cash transfers improve child health? evidence from
  progresa’s control randomized experiment. Health, Health Care, and Economic De-
  velopment, 94(2):336–341, 2004.

Peter D. Gluckman and Mark A. Hanson. Adult disease: Echoes of the past. European
  Journal of Endocrinology, 155(Supl. 1):S47–S50, November 2006.

Bridget J. Goosby and Jacob E. Cheadle. Birth weight, math and reading achievement
  growth: A multilevel between-sibling between-families approach. Social Forces, 87(3):
  1291–1320, 2009.

William Gormley, Jr. The effects of oklahoma’s pre-k program on hispanic children.
 Social Science Quarterly, 89(4):916–936, 2008.

William Gormley, Jr. and Ted Gayer. Promoting school readiness in oklahoma: An
 evaluation of tulsa’s pre-k program. The Journal of Human Resources, 40(3):533–558,
 2006.

William Gormley, Jr., Ted Gayer, Deborah Phillips, and Brittany Dawson. The effects of
 universal pre-k on cognitive development. Developmental Psychology, 41(6):872–884,
 2005.



                                          74
Dominique Goux and Eric Maurin. The effects of overcrowded housing on children’s
 performance at school. Journal of Public Economics, 89(5-6):797–819, June 2005.

Susan W. Gray, Barbara K. Ramsey, and Rupert A. Klaus. As the Twig is Bent...Lasting
  Effects of Preschool Programs, chapter From 3 to 20: The Early Training Project,
  pages 171–200. Consortium for Longitudinal Studies, Hillsdale N.J.: Erlbaum, 1983.

Zvi Griliches. Sibling models and data in economics: Beginnings of a survey.
  Journal of Political Economy, 87(s5):S37, 1979. doi: 10.1086/260822. URL
  http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/260822.

Michael Grossman. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal
 of Political Economy, pages 223–255, 1972.

Ralitza Gueorguieva, Steven B. Morse, , and Jeffrey Roth. Length of prenatal par-
  ticipation in wic and risk of delivering a small for gestational age infant: Flordida,
  1996-2004. Journal of Maternal and Child Health, 13(4):479–488, 2009.

Craig Gundersen and James Ziliak. Poverty and macroeconomic performance across
  space, race, and family structure. Demography, 41(1):61–86, 2004.

Maria J. Hanratty.   Canadian national health insurance and infant health.
 American Economic Review, 86(1):276–284, 1996.     ISSN 00028282.   URL
 http://www.jstor.org/stable/2118267.

Kathryn Harding, Joseph Galano, Joanne Martin, Lee Huntington, and Cynthia J. Schel-
 lenbach. Healthy families america effectiveness: A comprehensive review of outcomes.
 Journal of Prevention and Intervention in the Community, 34(1-2):149–179, 2007.

Tarjei Havnes and Magne Mogstad. No child left behind: Universal child care and
  children’s long-run outcomes. Discussion Paper 582, Statistics Norway, Research De-
  partment, May 2009.

James Heckman. The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability
  formation. PNAS, 104(33):13250–13255, August 14 2007.

James Heckman, Seong H. Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz.
  The rate of return to the high/scope perry preschool program. Working Paper 15471,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, November 2009.

James Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam
  Yavitz. The rate of return to the Highscope Perry Preschool program. Jour-
  nal of Public Economics, 94(1-2):114 – 128, 2010. ISSN 0047-2727. doi: DOI:
  10.1016/j.jpubeco.2009.11.001.

James J. Heckman and Yona Rubinstein. The importance of noncognitive skills: Lessons
  from the ged testing program. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 91
  (2):145–149, 2001.

Fritz Heider. The influence of the epidemic of 1918 on deafness: A study of birth dates
  of pupils registered in schools for the deaf. American Journal of Epidemiology, 19:
  756–765, 1934.

                                          75
Chris M. Herbst and Erdal Tekin. Child care subsidies and child development. Discussion
 Paper 3836, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), November 2008.

Jennifer Hill, Jane Waldfogel, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. Differential effects of high
  quality child care. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21(4):601–627, 2002.

Kimberly S. Howard and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. The role of home visiting programs in
  preventing child abuse and neglect. The Future of Children, 19(2):119–146, 2009.

Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Schanzenbach. Consumption responses to in-kind transfers:
  Evidence from the introduction of the food stamp program. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4):109–139, 2009.

Hilary W. Hoynes, Marianne Page, and Ann H. Stevens. Is a wic start a better start?
  evaluating wic’s impact on infant health using program introduction. Working Paper
  15589, National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2009.

Amy Hsin. Is biology destiny? birth weight and differential parental treatment.
 Manuscript, Population Studies Center, University of Michigan, 2009.

Jason T. Hustedt, W. Steven Barnett, Kwanghee Jung, and Alexandra Figueras. Impacts
  of new mexico pre-k on children’s school readiness at kindergarten entry: Results from
  the second year of a growing initiative. Research report, National Institute for Early
  Education, Rutgers University, June 2008.

Alison Jacknowitz, Daniel Novillo, and Laura Tiehen. Special supplemental nutrition
  program for women, infants, and children and infant feeding practices. Pediatrics, 119
  (2):281–289, 2007.

Brian Jacob. Public housing, housing vouchers, and student achievement: Evidence
  from public housing demolitions in chicago. American Economic Review, 94(1):233–
  258, March 2004.

Wanchuan Lin Janet Currie, Sandra Decker. Has public health insurance for older
 children reduced disparities in access to care and health outcomes? Journal of Health
 Economics, 27(6):1567–1581, 2008.

Dale L. Johnson and Todd Walker. A follow-up evaluation of the houston parent child
 development center: School performance. Journal of Early Intervention, 15(3):226–
 236, 1991.

Rucker C. Johnson and Robert F. Schoeni. The influence of early-life events on human
 capital, health status, and labor market outcomes over the life course. Working Paper
 07-05, National Poverty Center, February 2007.

Theodore Joyce, Diane Gibson, and Sylvie Colman. The changing association between
 prenatal participation in wic and birth outcomes in new york city. Working Paper
 10796, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2004.

Theodore Joyce, Andrew D. Racine, and Cristina Yunzal-Butler. Reassessing the wic
 effect: Evidence from the pregnancy nutrition surveillance system. Journal of Policy
 Analysis and Management, 87(2):277–303, 2007.

                                          76
Theodore Joyce, Andrew D. Racine, and Cristina Yunzal-Butler. Maternal smoking and
 the timing of wic enrollment. Working Paper 14728, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, February 2009.

Robert Kaestner, Ted Joyce, and Andrew Racine. Medicaid eligibility and the incidence
  of ambulatory care sensitive hospitalizations for children. Social Science and Medicine,
  52(2):305–313, 2001.

Lynn A. Karoly, Peter W. Greenwood, Susan S. Everingham, Jill Hoube, M. Rebecca
  Kilburn, C. Peter Rydell, Matthew Sanders, and James Chiesa. Investing in our chil-
  dren: What we know and don’t know about the costs and benefits of early childhood
  interventions. Consensus report, Rand, July 1998.

Barbara H. Kehrer and Charles M. Wolin. Impact of income maintenance on low birth
  weight: Evidence from the gary experiment. The Journal of Human Resources, 434-
  462(14):4, autumn 1979.

Elaine Kelly. The scourge of asian flu: in utero exposure to pandemic influenza and
  the development of a cohort of british children. Institute for Fiscal Studies, Working
  Paper 09/17, September 2009. University College London.

W.O. Kermack, A.G McKendrick, and P.L. McKinlay. Death-Rates in Great Britain
 and Sweden. The Lancet, pages 698–703, March 31 1934.

Rasheda Khanam, Hong S. Nghiem, and Luke B. Connelly. Child health and the income
  gradient: Evidence from australia. Journal of Health Economics, 28(4):805–817, 2009.

Jeffrey R. Kling, Jeffrey Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz. Neighborhood effects on crime
  for female and male youth: Evidence from a randomized housing voucher experiment.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1):87–130, 2005.

Jeffrey R Kling, Jeffrey B Liebman, and Lawrence F Katz. Experimental analysis of
  neighborhood effects. Econometrica, 75(1):83–119, January 2007.

Christopher R. Knittel and Douglas L. Miller (and Nicholas J. Sanders. Caution drivers!
 children present: Traffic, pollution and infant health. manuscript, UC Davis, 2009.

Thomas G. Koch. Public insurance, crowd-out, and health care utilization. manuscript,
 August 2009.

Lori Kowaleski-Jones and Greg J. Duncan. Effects of Participation in the WIC Pro-
  gram on Birthweight: Evidence From the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.
  Am J Public Health, 92(5):799–804, 2002. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.92.5.799. URL
  http://ajph.aphapublications.org/cgi/content/abstract/92/5/799.

Sebastian Kraemer. The fragile male. BMJ, 321(7276):1609–1612, 2000.                  doi:
  10.1136/bmj.321.7276.1609. URL http://www.bmj.com.

Bong J. Lee and Lee Mackey-Bilaver. Effects of wic and food stamp program participa-
  tion on child outcomes. Children and Youth Services Review, 29(4):501–517, 2007.



                                           77
Pierre Lefebvre, Philip Merrigan, and Matthieu Verstraete. Impact of early childhood
  care and education on children’s preschool cognitive development: Canadian results
  from a large quasi-experiment. Working Paper 06-36, Centre interuniversitaire sur le
  risque, les politiques conomiques et lemploi (CIRPEE), October 2006.

Philip B. Levine and Diane W. Schanzenbach. The impact of children’s public health
  insurance expansions on educational outcomes. Forum for Health Economics and
  Policy, 12(1):Article 1, 2009.

Phillip B. Levine and David J. Zimmerman. Children’s welfare exposure and subsequent
  development. Working Paper 7522, National Bureau of Economic Research, February
  2000. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w7522.

Aparna Lhila and Kosali I. Simon. Prenatal health investment decisions: Does the childs
 sex matter? Demography, 45(4):885–905, November 2008.

Diana S. Lien and William N. Evans. Estimating the Impact of Large Cigarette
  Tax Hikes: The Case of Maternal Smoking and Infant Birth Weight.        J.
  Human Resources, XL(2):373–392, 2005.   doi: 10.3368/jhr.XL.2.373.   URL
  http://jhr.uwpress.org/cgi/content/abstract/XL/2/373.

Ming-Jen Lin and Jin-Tan Liu. Do lower birth weight babies have lower grades?
 twin fixed effect and instrumental variable evidence from taiwan. Social Science &
 Medicine, 68(10):1780–1787, 2009.

W.P.D. Logan and M.D. Glasg. Mortality in london fog incident, 1952. Lancet, 1(1):
 336–338, 1953.

John M Love, Ellen Eliason Kisker, Christine M. Ross, Peter Z. Schochet, Jeanne Brooks-
  Gunn, Diane Paulsell, Kimberly Boller, Jill Constantine, Cheri Vogel, Alison Sidle
  Fuligni, and Christy Brady-Smith. Making a difference in the lives of infants and
  toddlers and their families: The impacts of early head start. volume i: Final technical
  report. Technical report, Administration for Children and Families. U.S. Department
  of Health and Human Services, June 2002.

John M. Love, Ellen E. Kisker, Christine Ross, Jill Constantine, Kimberly Boller, Rachel
  Chazan-Cohen, Christy Brady-Smith, Allison S. Fuligni, Helen Raikes, Jeanne Brooks-
  Gunn, Louisa B. Tarullo, Peter Z. Schochet, Diane Paulsell, and Cheri Vogel. The
  effectiveness of early head start for 3-year-old children and their parents: Lessons for
  policy and programs. Developmental Psychology, 41(6):885–901, 2005.

Jens Ludwig and Douglas L. Miller. Does head start improve children’s life chances?
  evidence from a regression discontinuity design. Discussion Paper 1311-05, Institute
  for Research on Poverty, November 2005.

Jens Ludwig and Douglas L. Miller. Does head start improve children’s life chances?
  evidence from a regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 488
  (1):159–208, February 2007.




                                           78
Marian F. MacDorman, Joyce A. Martin, T.J. Mathews, Donna L. Hoyert, and
 Stephanie J. Ventura. Explaining the 2001-2002 infant mortality increase in the united
 states: data from the linked birth/infant death data set. International Journal of
 Health Services, 35(3):415–442, 2005.

Harriet L. MacMillan, B. Helen Thomas, Ellen Jamieson, Christine A. Walsh, Michael H.
  Boyle, Harry S. Shannon, and Amiram Gafni. Effectiveness of home visitation by pub-
  lic health nurses in prevention of the recurrence of child physical abuse: A randomized
  controlled trial. Lancet, 365(9473):1786–1793, 2005.

Karen Macours, Norbert Schady, and Renos Vakis. Cash transfers, behavioral changes,
 and cognitive development in early childhood: Evidence from a randomized experi-
 ment. Working Paper 4759, The World Bank: Development Research Group, Human
 Development and Public Services Team, October 2008.

Katherine A. Magnuson, Christopher Ruhm, , and Jane Waldfogel. Does pre-
 kindergarten improve school preparation and performance? Economics of Education
 Review, 26(1):33–51, 2007.

Leonard Masse and W. Steven Barnett. A Benefit-Cost Analysis of the Abecedarian Early
  Childhood Intervention. National Institute for Early Education Research, Rutgers, NJ,
  2002.

Cecelia M. McCarton, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Ina F. Wallace, Charles R. Bauer, For-
  rest C. Bennett, Judy C. Bernbaum, R. Sue Broyles, Patrick H. Casey, Marie C. Mc-
  Cormick, David T. Scott, Jon Tyson, James Tonasela, and Curtis L. Meinen. Results
  at age 8 years of early intervention for low-birth-weight premature infants. Journal of
  the American Medical Association, 277(2):126–132, 1997.

Marie C. McCormick, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Stephen L. Buka, Julie Goldman, Jennifer
 Yu, Mikhail Salganik, David T. Scott, Forrest C. Bennett, Libby L. Kay, Judy C.
 Bernbaum, Charles R. Bauer, Camilia Martin, Elizabeth R. Woods, Anne Martin, and
 Patrick H. Casey. Early intervention in low birth weight premature infants: Results
 at 18 years of age for the infant health and development. Pediatrics, 117(3):771–780,
 2006.

Emma McIntosh, Jane Barlow, Hilton Davis, and Sarah Stewart-Brown. Economic
 evaluation of an intensive home visiting programme for vulnerable families: A cost-
 effectiveness analysis of public health intervention. Journal of Public Health, 31(3):
 423–433, 2009.

Jane McLeod and Karen Kaiser. Childhood emotional and behavioral problems and
  educational attainment. American Sociological Review, 69(5):636–658, 2004.

Bruce D. Meyer and Dan T. Rosenbaum.          Welfare, the earned income tax
  credit, and the labor supply of single mothers*. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 116(3):1063–1114, 2001.     doi: 10.1162/00335530152466313.   URL
  http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/00335530152466313.




                                           79
Kevin Milligan and Mark Stabile.   Do child tax benefits affect the wellbeing
  of children? evidence from canadian child benefit expansions. Working Pa-
  per 14624, National Bureau of Economic Research, December 2008.       URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14624.

Pamela Morris, Greg J. Duncan, and Christopher Rodrigues. Does money really matter?
  estimating impacts of family income on children’s achievement with data from random-
  assignment experiments. manuscript, 2004.

Sandra J. Newman and Joseph M. Harkness. The long-term effects of public housing on
  self-sufficiency. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21(1):21–43, 2002.

Peter Nilsson. Does a pint a day affect your child’s pay? the effect of prenatal alcohol
  exposure on adult outcomes. Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice Working
  Paper CWP22/08, The Institute for Fiscal Studies, August 2008.

Peter Nilsson. The long-term effects of early childhood lead expsoure: Evidence from
  sharp changes in local air lead levels induced by the phase-out of leaded gasoline.
  manuscript, Uppsala University, September 2009.

David L. Olds, Charles R. Henderson, Harriet J. Kitzman, John J. Eckenrode, Robert E.
  Cole, and Robert C. Tatelbaum. Prenatal and infancy home visitation by nurses:
  recent findings. The Future of Children, 9(1):44–65, Spring-Summer 1999.

David L. Olds, JoAnn Robinson, Ruth O’Brien, Dennis W. Luckey, Lisa M.
  Pettitt, Charles R. Henderson, Jr., Rosanna K. Ng, Karen L. Sheff,
  Jon Korfmacher, Susan Hiatt, and Ayelet Talmi.          Home visiting by
  paraprofessionals and by nurses:  A randomized controlled trial.      Pe-
  diatrics, 110(3):486–496, 2002.    doi:   10.1542/peds.110.3.486.    URL
  http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/cgi/content/abstract/110/3/486.

David L. Olds, Harriet Kitzman, Carole Hanks, Robert Cole, Elizabeth Anson, Kim-
  berly Sidora-Arcoleo, Dennis W. Luckey, Charles R. Henderson, Jr., John Holmberg,
  Robin A. Tutt, Amanda J. Stevenson, and Jessica Bondy. Effects of nurse home
  visiting on maternal and child functioning: Age-9 follow-up of a randomized trial.
  Pediatrics, 120(4):832–845, 2007.

Phil Oreopoulos, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld, and Leslie Roos. Short, medium, and
  long-term consequences of poor infant health: An anlysis using siblings and twins.
  Journal of Human Resources, 43(1), Winter 2008.

Philip Oreopoulos.       The long-run consequences of living in a
  poor   neighborhood.       Quarterly   Journal   of  Economics,  118(4):
  1533–1575,   2003.       doi:     10.1162/003355303322552865.       URL
  http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/003355303322552865.

Larry Orr, Judith D. Feins, Robin Jacob, Erik Beecroft, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lawrence F.
  Katz, Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Jeffrey R. Kling. Moving to opportunity: Interim im-
  pacts evaluation. Final report, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,
  Office of Policy Development and Research, June 2003.


                                          80
Emily J. Ozer, Lia C.H. Fernald, James G. Manley, and Paul J. Gertler. Effects of a
 conditional cash transfer program on children’s behavior problems. Pediatrics, 123
 (4):630–637, 2009.

Mark Pitt, Mark Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan. Productivity, health, and inequality
 in the intrahousehold distribution of food in low-income countries. American Economic
 Review, 80(5):1139–1156, December 1990.

Carol Propper, John Rigg, and Simon Burgess. Child health: Evidence on the roles of
  family income and maternal mental health from a uk birth cohort. Health Economics,
  16(11):1245–1269, 2007.

Michael Puma, Stephen Bell, Ronna Cook, Camilla Heid, Gary Shapiro, Pam Broene,
 Frank Jenkins, Philip Fletcher, Liz Quinn, Janet Friedman, Janet Ciarico, Monica
 Rohacek, Gina Adams, and Elizabeth Spier. Head start impact study: Final report;
 executive summary. Technical report, Administration for Children and Families. U.S.
 Department of Health and Human Services, January 2010.

Kathleen Maher Rasmussen. The “fetal origins” hypothesis: Challenges and opportu-
 nities for maternal and child nutrition. Annual Review of Nutrition, 21:73–95, July
 2001.

Jessica Wolpaw Reyes. Environmental policy as social policy? the impact of childhood
  lead exposure on crime. Working Paper 13097, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  May 2007. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w13097.

Arnold Reznek.      Methods of confidential data protection.                  Virtual-
  RDC powerpoint presentation, Cornell University, April 2007.                   URL
  http://www.vrdc.cornell.edu/news/.

Ian Roberts, Michael S. Kramer, , and Samy Suissa. Does home visiting prevent child-
  hood injury? a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. British Medical
  Journal, 312(7022):29–34, 1996.

Mark R. Rosenzweig and T. Paul Schultz. Market opportunities, genetic endowments,
 and intrafamily resource distribution: Child survival in rural india. American Eco-
 nomic Review, 72(4):803–815, 1982.

Mark R. Rosenzweig and Kenneth I. Wolpin. Heterogeneity, intrafamily distribution,
 and child health. Journal of Human Resources, 23(4):437–461, Fall 1988.

Heather Royer. Separated at girth: Us twin estimates of the effects of birth weight.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1):49–85, January 2009.

Christopher J. Ruhm. Parental employment and child cognitive development. The
 Journal of Human Resources, 39(1):155–192, 2004.

David Rush, Zena Stein, and Mervyn Susser. Diet in Pregnancy: A Randomized Con-
  trolled Trial of Nutritional Supplements. Alan R. Liss, Inc., New York, 1980.




                                         81
Alan S. Ryan and Wenjun Zhou. Lower breastfeeing rates persist among the special sup-
  plemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children participants. Pediatrics,
  117(4):1136–1146, 2006.

Martin Salm and Daniel Schunk. The role of childhood health for the intergenerational
 transmission of human capital: Evidence from administrative data. Discussion Paper
 3646, The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), August 2008.

Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Jeffrey R. Kling, Greg J. Duncan, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. Neigh-
  borhoods and academic achievement. Journal of Human Resources, 41(4):649–690,
  2006.

Paul J. Devereux Sandra E. Black and Kjell G. Salvanes. The more the merrier? the
  effect of family size and birth order on children’s education. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 120(2):669–700, 2005. doi: 10.1162/0033553053970179.

Diane W. Schanzenbach. What are food stamps worth. American Economic Journal -
  Economic Policy, forthcoming.

Sicco A. Scherjon, Hans Oosting, Bram W.Ongerboer de Visser, Ton deWilded, Hans A.
  Zondervan, and Joke H. Kok. Fetal brain sparing is associated with accelerated short-
  ening of visual evoked potential latencies during early infancy. American Journal of
  Obstetrics and Gynecology, 175(6):1569–1575, December 1996.

L.J. Schweinhart, H. Barnes, and D. Weikart. Significant benefits: The high/scope perry
  preschool study through age 27. monograph, 1993.

James P. Smith. The impact of childhood health on adult labor market outcomes. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(3):478–489, 2009.

James P. Smith and Gillian C. Smith. Long-term economic costs of psychological prob-
  lems during childhood. manuscript, October 2008.

E. Smolensky and J. Appleton Gootman. Working Families and Growing Kids: Caring
  for Children and Adolescents. The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003.

Gary Solon. Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3, chapter Intergenerational Mobility
 and the Labor Market, pages 1761–1800. Elsevier, 1999. edited by Orley Ashenfelter
 and David Card.

Zena Stein, Mervyn Susser, Gerhart Saenger, and Francis Marolla. Famine and Human
  Development: The Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944-1945. Oxford University Press, New
  York, 1975.

Monica A. Sweet and Mark I. Appelbaum. Is home visitng an effective strategy? a
 meta-analytic review of home visiting programs for families with young children. Child
 Development, 75(5):1435–1456, 2004.

Beck A. Taylor, Eric Dearing, and Kathleen McCartney. Incomes and outcomes in early
  childhood. The Journal of Human Resources, 39(4):630–637, 2004.



                                          82
Emma Tominey. Maternal smoking during pregnancy and early child outcomes. CEP
 Discussion Papers dp0828, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE, October 2007.
 URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/cep/cepdps/dp0828.html.

Suncica Vujic, Pierre Konig, Dinand Webbinnk, and Nick Martin. The effect of childhood
  conduct disorder on human capital. Discussion Paper 3646, CPB Netherlands Bureau
  for Economic Policy Analysis, November 2008.

Vivian C. Wong, Thomas D. Cook, W.Steven Barnett, and Kwanghee Jung. An
  effectiveness-based evaluation of five state pre-kindergarten programs. Journal of
  Policy Analysis and Management, 27(1):122–154, 2008.

Peter Zweifel, Friedrich H. J. Breyer, and Mathias Kifmann. Health Economics. Oxford
  University Press, second edition, 2009. forthcoming.




                                         83
Table 1: How much of the differences in later outcomes (test scores, educational attainment, earnings)
can be explained by early childhood factors?

Study and Data                     Inputs/Intermediate Variables     Outcomes                                          Results
STUDIES USING NATIONAL LONGITUDINAL SURVEY OF YOUTH-CHILD SAMPLE DATA
Childhood Emotional and            Emotional and behavioral          Dummy for graduating high                         R-squared for predicting HS graduation:
Behavioral Problems and            problems at age 6-8 measured by   school by 2000, dummy for                         Only child emotional and behavioral problems: 0.046
Educational Attainment             BPI, mother emotional problems    enrolling in college by 2000                      Add child and mother demographics: 0.111
(McLeod and Kaiser (2004))         and delinquency, poverty status,                                                    Add mother's emotional problems and delinquency:
NLSY-Child Sample data on          mother's AFQT score, mother's                                                       0.124
children 6-8 in 1986. Five waves   education, mother's marital                                                         R-squared for predicting college enrollment:
through 2000 (when children 20-22) status and age, child's age, sex,                                                   Only child emotional and behavioral problems: 0.017
n=424.                             and race, dummy for LBW                                                             add child and mother demographics: 0.093
                                                                                                                       Add mother's emotional problems and delinquency:
                                                                                                                       0.112.
Formulating, Identifying, and      Home environment measured by HOME           Log earnings and likelihood of          A 10% increase in parental investments at ages 6-7
Estimating the Technology of       score. Measures of parental investments:   graduation from high school.             increases earnings by 24.9% (12.5% through cognitive
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill   number of child's books, whether the       Estimated a dynamic factor model         skills, 12.4% through non-cognitive skills), and increases
Formation (Cunha and Heckman       child has a musical instrument, whether    that exploites cross-equation            likelihood of graduating high school by 64.4% (54.8%
(2008))                            the family receives a daily newspaper,     restrictions for identification.         through cognitive skills, 9.6% through non-cognitive
NLSY-Child Sample data on white    whether the child receives special         Estimated effects of cognitive and       skills).
males. n=1,053.                    lessons, how often the child goes to       non-cognitive skills as well as
                                   museums, and how often the child goes      parental investments at different
                                   to the theater. Measures of child          stages of the child's lifecycle on log
                                   cognitive skills: PIAT test scores at      earnings and likelihood of
                                   various ages. Measures of child's non-     graduation from high school.
                                   cognitive skills: BPI at various ages.
Estimating the Technology of        Examples of measures of child cognitive    Main outcome variable: completed 34% of variation in educational attainment is explained
Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skill   skills: Motor-Social Development at        years of education by age 19. Multi- by measures of cognitive and non-cognitive capabilities.
Formation (Cunha, Heckman, and      birth; PIAT Reading-Comprehension at       stage production functions           16% is due to adolescent cognitive capabilities; 12% is
Schennach (2010)). NLSY-Child       ages 5-6; PIAT Math at ages 13-14.         estimated in which the productivity due to adolescent non-cognitive capabilities. Parental
sample first-born white children.   Examples of measures of child non-         of later investments depends on      endowments/investments account for 15% of variation in
N=2,207.                            cognitive skills: BPI at various ages;     early investments and on the stock educational attainment.
                                    "friendliness at birth". Examples of       of cognitive and non-cognitive
                                    measures of parental investments: "How     skills and investments are
                                    often child goes on outings during year    endogenous. Identification based
                                    of birth"; "How often mom reads to child   on nonlinear factor models with
                                    during year of birth"; "Child has a CD     endogenous inputs. In preferred
                                    player, ages 3-4"; How often child is      specification, used maximum-
                                    praised, ages 13-14".                      likelihood methods to estimate the
                                                                               production technology.

STUDIES USING NATIONAL CHILD DEVELOPMENT STUDY (1958 BRITISH BIRTH COHORT) DATA
Ability, family, education, and  Math and verbal ability (age 7),   Years of full-time education;                  R-squared for education as outcome:
earnings in Britain              type of school, family             Earnings at age 33                             Including all explanatory variables: 0.33-0.34
(Dearden (1998))                 characteristics -- teacher's                                                      R-squared for earnings as outcome:
Focus on individuals who         assessment of interest shown by                                                   Baseline earnings equation including only years
participated in waves 4 and 5    parents in child's education at 7;                                                education: 0.15 (males), 0.25 (females).
of the survey in 1981 and 1991,  type of school attended at 16                                                     Add reading and math scores at age 7, school type
who were employees in 1991.      family's financial status at 11                                                   and regional dummies: 0.26 (males), 0.31 (females).
n = 2597 males, 2362 females     and 16; region dummies; father's                                                  Including all explanatory variables: .029 (males),
                                 SES; parents' education levels                                                    0.41 for females.
Early test scores, socioeconomic Reading and math test scores at    Number of O-level passes of                    R-squared for predicting age 16 exam passes:
status, and future outcomes      age 7, mother and father's SES and exams by age 16; employed                      Reading and math scores only: 0.21-0.22
(Currie and Thomas (1999))       education, birth weight, other     at age 23, 33; log wage at age                 Add other background variables: 0.31-0.32.
                                 child background variables at age  23, 33                                         R-squared for predicting employment at 33:
Full sample size (based on       7                                                                                 Reading and math test scores only: 0.01
responses at 7): n = 14,022                                                                                        Add other background variables: 0.04-0.05.
                                                                                                                   R-squared for predicting log wage at 33:
                                                                                                                   Reading and math test scores only: 0.08-0.09
                                                                                                                   Add other background variables: 0.18-0.20.
The lasting impact of               Mother's and father's education            Number of O-level passes of         R-squared for predicting age 16 exam passes/adult
childhood health and                and SES, LBW, indicators                   exams by age 16; adult health       health/employment at 42.
circumstance                        for moderate, heavy, and varied            status at age 42; part-time or      Mother's education and SES: 0.062/0.082/0.076
(Case, Fertig, and Paxson (2005))   maternal smoking during                    full employment at age 42.          Father's education and SES: 0.241/0.189/0.173
                                    pregnancy, number of chronic                                                   LBW and maternal smoking: 0.024/0.086/0.052
n = 14,325 (7016 men, 7039          conditions at age 7 and 16.
women)
Explaining intergenerational        A. Family income at age 16,          A. Earnings at age 33   R-squared Model A. Birth weight, childhood health,
income persistence: non-cognitive   reading and math test scores at      B. Earnings at age 30   and age 11 test scores only: 0.116
skills, ability, and education      age 11, scores for "behavioral                               Including "behavioral syndromes"
(Blanden, Gregg, and Macmillan      syndromes" at age 11, O-level                                at age 11: 0.151
(2006))                             exam scores at age 16                                        All variables: 0.263
A. NCDS: 1958 cohort                B. Years of preschool education,
Focus on 2163 males.                birth weight, height at 5 and 10,                            R-squared Model B. Birth weight, childhood health,
B. British Cohort Study: 1970       emotional/behavioral scores                                  and age 10 test scores only: 0. 075
cohort. Focus on 3340 males.        at ages 5, 10, & 16, family income                           Including emotional/behavioral
                                    at ages 10 and 16, reading and                               characteristics at age 10: 0.087
                                    math test scores at age 10, IQ at                            All variables: 0.222
                                    age 10, dummy for HS degree,
                                    exam scores at age 16.
Table 2: Estimated Effect of Birth Weight on Parental Investments Within Twin Pairs,
Estimates from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study.

9 month survey
Outcome:                                                   All Twins   Same Sex Twins   Identical Twins
1 if child was ever breastfed                              0.0183      0.0187           0.0031
                                                           [0.0238]    [0.0277]         [0.0355]
                                                           1550        1000             350
1 if child is now being breastfed                          0.0038      -0.0039          -0.0007
                                                           [0.0126]    [0.0152]         [0.001]
                                                           1550        1000             350
How long child was breastfed in months                     -0.0753     -0.2165          -0.343
 given breastfed                                           [0.1752]    [0.204]          [0.3182]
                                                           800         500              150
Age solid food was introduced in months,                   -0.1802     -0.2478          -0.6660*
 given introduced                                          [0.1523]    [0.1906]         [0.2914]
                                                           1550        1000             350
Number of well-baby visits                                 0.283       0.3803           0.5797
                                                           [0.1883]    [0.2414]         [0.5253]
                                                           1550        1000             350
Number of well-baby visits                                 0.1956      0.2329           0.2668
 only children in excellent of very good health            [0.1624]    [0.1944]         [0.3799]
                                                           1500        950              300
1 if caregiver praises child                               -0.0015     -0.051           0.096
                                                           [0.0941]    [0.1189]         [0.2089]
                                                           1250        800              250
1 if caregiver avoids negative comments                    -0.0051     -0.0077          0
                                                           [0.0055]    [0.0084]         [.]
                                                           1250        800              250
1 if somewhat difficult or difficult to raise              -0.0181     -0.0772          -0.0946
 (caregiver report)                                        [0.0583]    [0.0712]         [0.1395]
                                                           1550        1000             350
1 if not at all difficult or not very difficult to raise   0.1065      0.153            0.2237
 (caregiver report)                                        [0.0707]    [0.0812]         [0.1195]
                                                           1550        1000             350
2-year survey
1 if Caress/kiss/hug child                                 0.0228      0.0055           0.0021
                                                           [0.0266]    [0.0254]         [0.0049]
                                                           1350        850              300
1 if Spank/slap child                                      -0.0195     -0.0095          -0.0048
                                                           [0.0249]    [0.0192]         [0.0316]
                                                           1350        850              300
1 if tme spent calming child >1 hr usually                 0.0317      -0.024           0.0719
                                                           [0.0646]    [0.0759]         [0.093]
                                                           1450        950              300
1 if somewhat difficult or difficult to raise              -0.0432     -0.0901          -0.1412
 (caregiver report)                                        [0.0555]    [0.0621]         [0.086]
                                                           1450        950              300
1 if not at all difficult or not very difficult to raise   -0.0031         0.068                   0.0527
 (caregiver report)                                        [0.0757]        [0.0869]                [0.1258]
                                                           1450            950                     300
Age when stopped feeding formula in months                 -0.1903         -0.4504                 -0.5903
                                                           [0.255]         [0.3204]                [0.7844]
                                                           1150            750                     250
Age when stopped breastfeeding in months                   -0.1492         -0.0267                 -0.0422
                                                           [0.5981]        [0.044]                 [0.069]
                                                           100             50                      50
Preschool Survey

1 if parent expects child to enter kindergarten early -0.0082              -0.0071                 0
                                                      [0.012]              [0.0102]                [0]
                                                      1300                 800                     250
1 if parents concerned about                          -0.1435**            -0.1299*                -0.1099
 child's kindergarten readiness                       [0.0554]             [0.0636]                [0.1253]
                                                      1300                 850                     250
1 ifexpect child to get >= 4 yrs of college           -0.0073              0.0069                  0.0228
                                                      [0.0272]             [0.0327]                [0.0264]
                                                      1350                 850                     300
Number of servings of milk in the past 7 days         -0.0598              -0.0577                 0.0819
                                                      [0.2074]             [0.2278]                [0.2489]
                                                      1350                 850                     300
Number of servings of vegetables past 7 days          0.0632               0.2131                  0.0871
                                                      [0.2634]             [0.3027]                [0.4091]
                                                      1350                 850                     300

Notes: Standard errors clustered on the mother are shown in in brackets with sample sizes below. Twin pairs in
which a child had a congenital anomaly are omitted. Birth weight measured in kilograms. Each entry is from a
separate regression of the dependent variable on birth weight and a mother fixed effect. Models in column 1 also
control for child gender. Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest multiple of 50.
Table 3: Sample Power Calculations

Given a true population effect size, what is the power of a size alpha = .05 test
against the null hypothesis that there is no effect for different sample sizes?
Basis Study                 Assumptions                                                  Sample Size        Power
Black, Devereux, and        True model:                                                           100          0.097
Salvanes (2007)             Prob(HSGRAD) = 0.7 + 0.1*ln(birthweight) + error                      300          0.167
                                                                                                  500          0.263
Key result: a 1% increase   Calculation of error variance and SD:                                 600          0.298
in birth weight increases   Let y = Prob(HSGRAD), x = ln(birthweight), e = error                  700          0.351
the probabililty of high    Var(y) = 0.44^2 = 0.19                                                800          0.376
school completion by        Var(x) = 0.26^2 = 0.07 (where SD(x)=0.26, according                   900          0.409
0.09 percentage points.     to the distribution of ln(birthweight))                             1000           0.446
                            If y = 0.7 + 0.1x + e, and x and e are independent,                 1250           0.531
Birth weight sample         Var(e) = Var(y) - (0.1^2)*Var(x)                                    1500           0.617
summary stats (twins):              = 0.19-(0.1^2)*(0.07) = 0.19                                1620           0.660
mean = 2598g, SD = 612g                                                                         2000           0.744
                            So, SD(e) = sqrt(Var(e)) = 0.44                                     2200           0.750
Probability of HS grad                                                                          2500           0.825
sample summary stats:       Therefore, assume: birthweight ~ N(2598, 612), and                  3000           0.892
mean = 0.73, SD = 0.44      take the natural log of birthweight.                                3500           0.928
                                                    error ~ N(0, 0.44)                          4000           0.962
                                                                                                4500           0.975
                                                                                                5000           0.982
                                                                                                5500           0.993
                                                                                                6000           0.994
                                                                                                6500           0.996
                                                                                                7000           0.999

Given a sample size, how large would the true effect size have to be in order to be able to
detect it with reliable power using a test of size alpha = .05?
Basis Study                 Assumptions                                              True B1             Power
Conley, Pfeiffer and        Model: y = B0 + B1*x + error                                        0.005            0.046
Velez (2006)                                                                                     0.01            0.047
                            Assume: z ~ N(2598, 612), x = ln(z)                                  0.02            0.077
Sibling sample from                  error ~ N(0, 0.44)                                          0.03            0.092
PSID (n=1,360)                       sample size = 1500                                          0.04            0.146
                                                                                                 0.05            0.198
                                                                                                 0.06            0.274
                                                                                                 0.07            0.354
                                                                                                 0.08            0.461
                                                                                                 0.09            0.525
                                                                                                   0.1           0.631
                                                                                                 0.12            0.769
                                                                                                 0.15            0.926
                                                                                                 0.17            0.975
                                                                                                   0.2            0.99

Notes: Power calculations are based on Monte Carlo simulations with 1000 replications.
Table 4: Prenatal Effects on Later Child and Adult Outcomes
Study and Data                     Study Design                                                    Results
EFFECTS OF MATERNAL HEALTH
Is the Impact of Health Shocks     Multivariate regression with numerous background and            LBW children are 38-44% less likely to pass Math O-level.
Cushioned by Economic Status?      demographic controls (including maternal grandfather's          LBW females are 25% less likely to pass English O-level tests.
The Case of Low Birth Weight.      SES, birth order, and maternal smoking during                   LBW females are 16% less likely to be employed full-time at age 23, LBW
(Currie and Hyson (1999))          pregnancy). Key explanatory variables are indicators for        males are 9% less likely to be employed full-time at age 33.
NCDS 1958 cohort. N=11,609 at LBW, SES, and the interactions. Outcomes measured are                LBW females are 54% more likely to have fair/poor health at age 23, LBW
age 20, 10,267 at age 23, 9,402 at the number of O-level passes at age 16 (transcripts             males are 43% more likely to have fair/poor health at age 33.
age 33.                            collected at age 20), employment, wages and health              Few significant differences by SES.
                                   status at ages 23 and 33. SES assigned using father's
                                   social class in 1958 (or mother's SES if father is missing).

Returns to Birthweight (Behrman        Twin fixed effects estimates compared to OLS. To explore    Results from twins sample:
and Rosenzweig (2004)).                generalizability of findings from twins sample, weighted    1 oz. per week of pregnancy increase in fetal growth leads to increases of 5%,
Monozygotic female twins born          the sample using the U.S. singleton distribution of fetal   in schooling attainment; 2% in height; 8% hourly wages.
1936-1955 from the Minnesota           growth rates.                                               Results from twins sample weighted using singleton distribution:
Twins Registry for 1994 and the                                                                    1 oz. per week of pregnancy increase in fetal growth leads to increase of 5% in
birth weights of their children.                                                                   schooling attainment; 1.7% in height; no significant effect on wages.
N=804 twins, and 608 twin-mother                                                                   OLS underestimates effects of birth weight by 50%.
pairs.

The Costs of Low Birth Weight          Twin fixed effects to estimate effect of low birth weight   Results using twin fixed effects:
(Almond, Chay, and Lee (2005)).        (LBW) on hospital costs, health at birth, and infant        1 SD increase in birth weight leads to:
Linked birth and infant death files    mortality. Also estimated impact of maternal smoking        0.08 SD decrease in hospital costs for delivery and initial care
for U.S. for 1983-85, 1989-91 and      during pregnancy on health among singleton births,          0.03 SD decrease in infant mortality rates
1995-97. Hospital costs from           controlling for numerous background and demographic         0.03 SD increase in Apgar scores
Healthcare Cost and Utilization        characteristics using OLS and propensity score matching.    0.01 SD decrease in use of assisted ventilator after birth
Project State Inpatient Database for                                                               (OLS estimates w/out twin fixed effects are 0.51 SD, 0.41 SD, 0.51 SD, 0.25
1995-2000 in New York and New                                                                      SD). Results from OLS on effects of maternal smoking:
Jersey. NCHS N=189,036 twins,                                                                      Maternal smoking reduces birth weight by 200g (6%); increases likelihood that
497,139 singletons. HCUP                                                                           infant is LBW (<2500g) by more than 100% (mean=.061)
N=44,410.                                                                                          No statistically significant effects on Apgar score, infant mortality rates, or use
                                                                                                   of assisted ventilator at birth.
The 1918 influenza pandemic and        Compare cohorts in utero before, during and after Oct.      Individuals born in 1919 are 10% more likely to be in fair or poor health, also
subsequent health outcomes             1918 flu pandemic. Regressions estimate cohort effects      increases of 19%, 35%, 13%, 17% in trouble hearing, speaking, lifting and
(Almond and Mazumder (2005)).          including survey year dummies and quadratic in age          walking.
Data from SIPP for 1984-1996.          interacted with survey year.
N=25,169.
Estimating the Impact of Large    IV using tax hikes in four states as instruments for    Maternal smoking during pregnancy reduces birth weight by 5.4% and
Cigarette Tax Hikes: The Case of maternal smoking during pregnancy. Controlled for state increases likelihood of low birth weight by ~100%.
Maternal Smoking and Infant Birth and month of conception and background characteristics.
Weight
(Lien and Evans (2005)). 1990-
1997 U.S. Natality files. Data on
cigarette taxes from the Tax
Burden on Tobacco, various years.


Long term effects of in utero         Estimated effects of in utero influenza exposure by          Estimation results comparing birth cohorts:
exposure to the 1918 influenza       comparing cohorts born immeditely before, during, and         The 1919 birth cohort, compared with the cohort trend:
pandemic in the post-1940 US         after the 1918 pandemic and by employing the                  was 4-5% (13-15% among treated) less likely to complete high school
population                           idiosyncratic geographic variation in intensity of            received 0.6-1.6% fewer years of education
(Almond (2006)) . 1960-1980 U.S.     exposure to conduct within- cohort analysis. Exposed          had 1-3% less total income (for males only, 2005 dollars)
Census data. 1917-1919 Vital         cohort = those born in 1919. Surrounding cohorts = those      had 1-2% lower socioeconomic status index (Duncan index)
Statistics data on mortality. For    born in 1918 and 1920. Used multivarate regression with       was 1-2% more likely to have a disability that limits work (for males only)
1960 n=114,031, for 1970             dummy for birth cohort = 1919, and a quadratic cohort         had 12% higher average welfare payment (for women)
n=308,785, for 1980 n=471,803.       trend to measure departures in the 1919 birth cohort          Estimates are slightly larger for nonwhite subgroup.
                                     outcomes from the trend. For geographic comparison,           Estimation results using geographic variation and state fixed effects: (For
                                     used data on virus strength by week as well as data on        the 1919 birth cohort, used average maternal infection rate = 1/3)
                                     epidemic timing by census division to yield a measure of      Maternal infection:
                                     average pandemic virulence by division. Then estimated        reduces schooling by 2.2%
                                     multivariate regression including the virulence measure,      reduces probability of high school graduation by 0.05%
                                     state and year of birth fixed effects, the infant mortality   decreases annual income by 6%
                                     rate in state and year of birth, and the attrition of birth   reduces socioeconomic status index by 2-3%
                                     cohort in the census data.
Explaining sibling differences in    Sibling fixed effects to examine effects of birth weight, No statistically significant effects of birth weight on BPI or on cognitive
achievement and behavioral          birth order, and gender on later outcomes. Cognitive       assessments for whole sample.
outcomes: the importance of within- outcomes measured by the Woodcock- Johnson Revised For blacks, positive effect of birth weight on cognitive assessments.
and between-family factors          Tests of Achievement. Behavioral outcomes measured by
(Conley, Pfeiffer, and Velez        the Behavioral Problems Index (BPI). Control for family-
(2007)). Data from Child            and child-specific characteristics.
Development Supplement of PSID.
N=1,360.
Twin differences in birth weight:    Twin fixed effects models of effects of birth weight on    1 lb increase in birth weight leads to:
the effects of genotype and prenatal mortality for same-sex and mixed-sex pairs.                9% (10%) reduction in infant mortality for mixed-sex (same-sex)
environment on neonatal and                                                                     7% (8%) reduction in neonatal mortality for mixed-sex (same-sex)
postnatal mortality                                                                             2% reduction in post-neonatal mortality for mixed-sex and same-sex
(Conley, Strully, and Bennett                                                                   For full-term twins, mixed-sex effects much larger than same-sex effects.
(2006)). Data on twin births from
the 1995-97 Matched Multiple
Birth Database. N=258,823.

Biology as destiny? Short- and long- Examine effect of mother's birth weight on child's birth   Mother's low birth weight increases likelihood that child is low birth weight by
run determinants of                 weight in models with grandmother fixed effects.            about 50%. The incidence of child low birth weight is 7% higher if mother was
intergenerational transmission of   Examine interactions of mother's birth weight and           born into high poverty zip code than into low poverty zip code.
birth weight (Currie and Moretti    grandmother's SES at time of mother's birth as proxied by   Children born into poor households are 0.7% more likely to be low birth
(2007)). California natality data   income in zip code of mother's birth. Examine effect of     weight if their mothers were low birth weight; children born into nonpoor
for children born between 1989 and maternal low birth weight on mother's SES at time she        households are .0.4% more likely to be low birth weight if their mothers were
2001 and their mothers (if born in gives birth.                                                 low birth weight (so, poverty raises the probability of transmission of low birth
CA) born between 1970 and 1974.                                                                 weight by 88%).
Mothers who are sisters are                                                                     Being low birth weight is associated with a loss of $110 in future income, on
matched using grandmother's                                                                     average, on a baseline income of $10,096 (in 1970 dollars). Being low birth
name. n=638,497 births.                                                                         weight increases the probability of living in a high-poverty neighborhood by
                                                                                                3% relative to the baseline.
                                                                                                Being low birth weight reduces future educational attainment by 0.1 years.
From the cradle to the labor         Twin fixed effects, controlling for mother and birth-      10% increase in birth weight:
market: the effect of birth weight   specific variables. Log(birth weight) is primary           reduces 1-year mortality by 13%
on adult outcomes (Black,            independent variable.                                      increases 5 min APGAR score by 0.3%
Devereux, and Salvanes (2007)).                                                                 increases probability of high school completion by 1.2%
Birth records from Norway for                                                                   increases full-time earnings by 1%
1967-1997. Dropped congenital                                                                   Male outcomes at age 18-20:
defects. Matched to registry data                                                               10% increase in birth weight:
on education and labor market                                                                   increases height by 0.3%
outcomes and to military records.                                                               increases BMI by 0.5%
n=33,366 twin pairs.                                                                            increases IQ by 1.1% (scale of 1-9)
                                                                                                 Effects of mother's birth weight on child's birth weight:
                                                                                                10% increase in mother's birth weight:
                                                                                                increases child's birth weight by 1.5%
The influence of early-life events    Sibling fixed effects to estimate impact of maternal         Note: means are not reported, so relative effects cannot be calculated.
events on human capital, health       smoking during pregnancy on birth outcomes. Also             Effects of income and mother's birth weight on child's birth weight:
status and labor market outcomes      estimated model using OLS, controlling for grandparent       An increase in income of $10,000 raises child's birth weight by 0.12 lbs if
over the life course (Johnson and     smoking in adolescence, maternal birth weight, and           mother was low birth weight (by 0.02 lbs if mother was not low birth weight)
Schoeni (2007)) . PSID. Adult         paternal smoking, among other background                     for a family with income of $7,500 (1997 dollars).
sample born between 1951 and          characteristics.                                             Having no health insurance increases the probability of low birth weight by 10
1975. N=5,160 people and 1,655                                                                     pp.
families. Child sample 0-12 years                                                                  Effects on child health outcomes:
old in 1997. N=1,127 mothers                                                                       (health index 1-100)
and 2,239 children.                                                                                Low birth weight siblings have a 1.67 point lower health index
                                                                                                   Private health insurance increases health index by 1.02 points
                                                                                                   A $10,000 increase in income for families with $15,000-50,000 income
                                                                                                   increases health index by 0.53 pp.
                                                                                                   Effects on adult outcomes:
                                                                                                   Low birth weight siblings:
                                                                                                   4.7 pp more likely to be high school dropouts,
                                                                                                   have a 3.7 point lower health index (1-100 scale)
                                                                                                   Low birth weight brothers (sample of males only):
                                                                                                   are 4.3 pp more likely to have no positive earnings (sig at 10% level)
                                                                                                   have $2,966 less annual earnings (sig at 10% level).
Maternal Smoking During               Sibling fixed effects to estimate impact of maternal         Note: only reporting results from sibling fixed effects regression here.
Pregnancy and Early Child             smoking during pregnancy on birth outcomes. Also             Maternal smoking during pregnancy reduces birth weight by 1.7%.
Outcomes                              estimated model using OLS, controlling for grandparent       No statistically significant effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy on
(Tominey (2007)). Children of         smoking in adolescence, maternal birth weight, and           probability of having a low birth weight child, pre-term gestation, or weeks of
NCDS mothers born between 1973        paternal smoking, among other background                     gestation. No statistically significant effects of maternal smoking among
and 2000. n=2,799 mothers and         characteristics.                                             mothers who quit by month 5 of pregnancy. Larger effects of maternal
6,291 sibling children.                                                                            smoking on birth weight among low educated women.

Can a pint per day affect your        Swedish natural experiment in which alcohol availability     DDD results:
child's pay? The effect of prenatal   in 2 treatment regions increased sharply as regular          Years of schooling: decreased by 0.27 (2.1%) years for whole sample; by 0.47
alcohol exposure on adult outcomes    grocery stores were allowed to market strong beer for 6      years for males; no statistically significant effect for females
(Nilsson (2008)). Data from           months during 1967 with the minimum age for purchase         HS graduation: decreased by 0.4% for whole sample; by 10% for males; no
Swedish LOUISE database on first-     being 16 (instead of 21). Difference-in-difference-in-       stat. significant effect for females
born individuals born between         difference comparing under-21 mothers with older             Graduation from higher education: decreased by 16% for whole sample; by
1964 and 1972. n=353,742.             mothers in treatment and control regions pre-, during,       35% for males; no stat. significant effect for females
                                      and post- experiment. Baseline estimations focused on        Earnings at age 32: decreased by 24.1% for whole sample; by 22.8% for males;
                                      children conceived prior to the experiment, but exposed in   by 17.7% for females
                                      utero to the experiment. Controlled for quarter and          Probability no income at age 32: increased by 74% whole sample
                                      county of birth fixed effects.                               Proportion on welfare: increased by 90% for whole sample; by 5.1pp for males
Short-, medium- and long-term         Sibling and twin fixed effects. Used three measures of       Note: only reporting results from regressions that included family fixed effects
consequences of poor infant health    infant health : birth weight, 5-min Apgar score, and         here. BW = birth weight.
(Oreopoulos et al. (2008)). Data      gestational length in weeks; used dummies for different      Relative to Apgar score=10, BW>3500g, gestation 40-41 weeks lower values
from the Manitoba Center for          categories of the variables to estimate nonlinear effects.   Effects on infant mortality: increase infant morality.
Health Policy matching provincial     Also estimated models using OLS for the whole sample,        E.g. in Sibling Sample (infant mortality = 0.011)
health insurance claims with birth    for the siblings sample, and for the twins sample without    Apgar score <6 increases probability of infant mortality by 31.9 pp
records, educational records, and     family fixed effects.                                        BW<1000g increases probability of infant mortality by 87.2 pp
social assistance records. Includes                                                                gestation<36 weeks increases probability of infant mortality by 11.9 pp
all children born in Manitoba from                                                                 Effect on Language Arts score (taken in grade 12):
1979 to 1985. n=54,123 siblings                                                                    Apgar score <6 decreases test score by 0.1 of SD (sig. at 10% level)
and 1,742 twins.                                                                                   BW 2501-3000g decreases test score by 0.04 of SD
                                                                                                   Effect on probability of reaching grade 12 by age 17:
                                                                                                   Apgar score <6 decreases grade 12 probability by 4.1 pp (sig. at 10%)
                                                                                                   BW 1001-1500g decreases grade 12 probability by 14.1 pp
                                                                                                   gestation<36 weeks decreases grade 12 probability by 4.0 pp
                                                                                                   Effect on social assistance take-up during ages 18-21.25:
                                                                                                   BW<1000 decreases probability of take-up by 21.5 pp.
Birth Cohort and the Black-White      Regression of test scores on year, age, and subject fixed    NAEP-LTT data:
Achievement Gap: The Role of          effects (separately for blacks and whites) using NAEP-       The black-white test score gap declined from 1 SD to 0.6 of SD between 1971
Health Soon After Birth               LTT and AFQT test score data. In AFQT test score data,       and 2004. The convergence was primarily due to large increases in black test
(Chay, Guruyan and Mazumder           correct for selection bias using inverse probability         scores in the 1980s. Regression results indicate that the convergence was due
(2009)). Data from the National       weighting from Natality and Census data. Estimated           to cohort effects, rather than time effects.
Assessment of Educational             regressions separately for blacks and whites and for the     AFQT data:
Progress Long-term Trends for         North, the South, the Rustbelt, the deep South, and          The black-white gap in AFQT test scores declined by about 19% between the
1971-2004. AFQT data from U.S.        individual states within the South and North. Also           1962-63 and 1972 birth cohorts.
military for 1976-2001 for male       estimated difference-in-difference-in-difference (DDD)       The decline in the gap is about 0.3SDs greater in the South relative to the
applicants 17-20. n=2,649,573         models, comparing black and white test scores between        Rustbelt between 1960-62 and 1970-72 cohorts.
white males and n=1,103,748 black     cohorts born in 1960-62 and 1970-72 in the South relative    Convergence in PNMR explains 52% of the variation across states in AFQT
males. Hospital discharge rates       to the Rustbelt, controlling for region-specific, race-      convergence.
from National Health Interview        specific age-by-time effects and race-by-region-by-time      Effects of access to hospitals:
Survey.                               effects. Used post neonatal mortality rate (PNMR) as a       A 30pp increase in black hospital birth rates from 1962-64 to 1968-70
                                      proxy for infant health environment to assess impact of      increases cohort AFQT scores by 7.5 percentile points.
                                      infant health on the test score gap.                         A black child who gained admission to a hospital before age 4 had a 0.7-1 SD
                                                                                                   gain in AFQT score at age 17-18 relative to a black child who did not.
Separated at girth: US twin       Twin fixed effects, allowing non-linear effects of birth      Twin fixed-effect results:
estimates of the effects of birth weight.                                                       250g increase in birth weight leads to:
weight                                                                                          8.3% decrease in probability of infant mortality
(Royer (2009)). California birth                                                                0.82 day decrease in stay in hospital post-birth
records. n=3,028 same-sex female                                                                0.02-0.04 of SD increase in mental/motor test score
twin births 1960-1982. Data from                                                                0.2% increase in educ. attainment of mother at childbirth
Early Childhood Longitudinal                                                                    0.5% increase in child's birth weight
Study-Birth Cohort. n=1,496 twin                                                                11% decrease in pregnancy complications
births.                                                                                         No statistically significant effects of birth weight on adult health outcomes
                                                                                                such as hypertension, anemia, and diabetes. No statistically significant effects
                                                                                                of birth weight on income-related measures.
                                                                                                200g increase in birth weight leads to a 0.5 pp increase in probability of being
                                                                                                observed in adulthood -- small selection bias. Found no statistically significant
                                                                                                evidence of compensating or reinforcing parental investments when
                                                                                                considering early medical care and breastfeeding.
The long-term economic impact of IV using fraction of days in "malaria- ideal" temperature      Note: Only results from the IV regression are reported here.
in utero and postnatal exposure to range as IV for malaria deaths in state and year.            Exposure to 10 additional malaria deaths per 100,000 inhabitants causes:
malaria (Barreca (2009)). Malaria                                                               3.4% less years of schooling
mortality from U.S. mortality                                                                   Exposure to malaria can account for approximately 25% of the difference in
statistics 1900-1936. n=1,147 state-                                                            years of schooling between cohorts born in high and low malaria states.
year observations. Climate data
n=1,813 obs. Adult outcomes from
1960 Census. All data merged at
state/year of birth level.


 Long-run longevity effects of a     Key independent variable is exposure to famine at birth.   Results from nonparametric regression:
nutrition shock in early life: The   Instrument access to food with variations in yearly        Residual life expectancy at age 50 is 3.1 years shorter for exposed men than for
Dutch Famine of 1846-47.             average real market prices of rye and potatoes for three   men born after the famine; 1.4 years shorter than for men born before famine.
 (Berg, Lindeboom, Portrait          different regions. Controlled for macroeconomic            Kolmogorov-Smirnov test suggests that the survival curves after age 50 differ
(2009)). Historical Sample of the    conditions, infant mortality rates, and individual         significantly for exposed and control men. Max difference in distribution =
Netherlands. Exposed cohort born     demographic and socio-economic characteristics.            0.15 at age 56.
9/1/1846-6/1/1848. Non-exposed                                                                  Results from parametric survival models:
born 9/1/1848-9/1/1855 and                                                                      Exposure to famine at birth for men reduces residual life expectancy at age 50
9/1/1837-9/1/1944.                                                                              by 4.2 years. No statistically significant results for women.
Maternal stress and child well-   Sibling fixed effects. Estimated effect of deviations from      No significant effects on birth weight or maternal postnatal investments.
being: evidence from siblings     mean cortisol levels (cortisol measures maternal stress)        Exposure to top quartile of cortisol level distribution (relative to the middle)
(Aizer, Stroud, and Buka (2009)). during pregnancy on outcomes.                                   leads to 47% of SD decrease in verbal IQ at age 7 (sign. at 10% level).
National Collaborative Perinatal                                                                  1 SD deviation in cortisol levels leads to 26% of SD decrease in educational
Project. Births 1959-65 in                                                                        attainment.
Providence and Boston. N=1,103                                                                    Exposure to top quartile of cortisol level distribution (relative to the middle)
births to 915 women. 163 siblings                                                                 leads to 51% of SD decrease in educational attainment.
in sample.

The scourge of Asian flu: the        Effect of flu on each cohort member identified using         No statistically significant evidence of reinforcing or compensating parental
physical and cognitive               variation in incidence of epidemic by local authority of     investments.
development of a cohort of British   birth. Epidemic peaked when cohort members were 17-          1 SD increase in epidemic intensity decreases birth weight by .03-.363 SD;
children in utero during the Asian   23 weeks gestation. 1/3 of women of chlid-bearing age        decreases test scores by 0.067 of SD at age 7, by 0.043 of SD at age 11;
Influenza Pandemic of 1957, from     were infected, hence true treatment effect can be             increases detrimental effect of mother preeclampsia from -0.075 to -0.11 SD
birth until age 11                   estimated by multiplying results by 3.                       on birth weight;
(Kelly (2009)). NCDS 1958 cohort.                                                                 increases detrimental effect of mother smoking by 0.03 of SD on birth weight;
N=16,765 at birth, 14,358 at 7,                                                                   increases detrimental effect of mother under 8 stone weight from -0.54 to -0.61
14,069 at 11.                                                                                     of SD on birth weight.


 Do lower birth weight babies have Twin fixed effects and IV using the public health budget       Increase in birth weight: 100g/100g (IV for <9 yrs ed and <25 years)
lower grades? Twin fixed effect     and number of doctors in county where child was born as       Increase Chinese score: 0.5%/8.2%
and instrumental variables          instruments for child's birth weight.                         Increase English score: 0.3%/
evidence from Taiwan (Lin and                                                                     Increase Math score: 0.7%/12.6%
Liu (2009)). Birth Certificate data                                                               Increase Natural Science score: 0.8%/11.8%
for Taiwan. High school entrance                                                                  Increase Social Science score: 0.4%/
exam results from Committee of
Basic Competence Test.
N=118,658. Twin sample
n=7,772.

Poor, Hungry and Stupid:             Age heaping is rounding age to nearest 5 or 10. Whipple      During the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, the price of wheat almost
Numeracy and the Impact of High      index (WI) = number of ages that are multiples relative to   doubled -- and the number of erroneously reported ages at multiples of 5
Food Prices in Industrializing       expected number given uniform age distribution.              doubled from 4% to 8%. Men and women born in decades with higher WI
Britain, 1750-1850                   Regressions use WI as dependent variable. Wheat prices       sorted into jobs that had lower intelligence requirements. 1 SD increase in the
(Baten, Crayen and Voth (2007)).     and poor relief measures are independent variables.          Whipple Index associated with a 2.8% (relative to median earnings) decrease
Data on age heaping from 1951 to                                                                  in earnings.
1881 British Census. Information
on poor relief from Boyer (1990).
IMPACTS OF ECONOMIC SHOCKS
Birth weight and income:          Sibling fixed effects.                                           Low birth weight child who spent 6 years at poverty line is less likely to
interactions across generations                                                                    graduate high school than normal birth weight child who spent 6 years at
(Conley and Bennett (2001)). Data                                                                  poverty line. Low birth weight child who spent 6 years with income 5 times the
from PSID. Two samples: 1)                                                                         poverty line is as likely to graduate high school as normal birth weight child of
children born 1986-1992, n=1,654;                                                                  same income (significant at 10% level).
2) reached 19 by 1992, n=1,388
individuals in 766 families.

Economic conditions early in life     Compared individuals born in booms with those born in        Comparing those born in boom of 1872-1876 with those born in recession of
and individual mortality              the subsequent recessions. Controlled for wars and           1877-1881:
(Berg, Lindeboom, and Portrait        epidemics.                                                   Boom T|T>2 = 66.0 years, Recession T|T>2 = 62.5 years
(2006)). Data from Historical                                                                      Boom T|T>5 = 70.8 years, Recession T|T>5 = 67.5 years
Sample of the Netherlands on                                                                       Regression results:
individuals born 1812-1903 with                                                                    Boom T|T>2 is 1.58 years greater than Recession T|T>2
date of death observed by 2000.                                                                    Notation: T|T>2 = average lifetime given survival past age 2
n=9,276. Merged with historical                                                                    T|T>5 = average lifetime given survival past age 5
macro time series data.

Evidence on early-life income and     Measured economic conditions in utero using income and No statistically significant relationship between poor early-life economic
late-life health from America's       yield from the same calendar year for those born in 3rd or conditions during the Dustbowl and late-life health outcomes such as heart
Dustbowl era                          4th quarter of the year and from the previous calendar      conditions, stroke, diabetes, hypertension, arthritis, psychiatric conditions, etc.
(Cutler, Miller, and Norton           year for those born in 1st or 2nd quarter. Regressions
(2007)). The Health and               include the in utero economic condition measure (log
Retirement Study. N=8,739 people      income, log yield), dummy for whether respondent's
born between 1929 and 1941.           father was a farmer and interaction of the dummy with
Agricultural data from National       the economic conditions. Controlled for region and year
Agricultural Statistics Service.      of birth fixed effects, region-specific linear time trends,
Income data from Bureau of            and region-year infant death and birth rates, and other
Economic Analysis.                    demographic characteristics.

Long-run health impacts of income     Regional variation in a large negative income shock      Decrease in wine production was not compensated by an increase in other
shocks: wine and Phylloxera in        caused by Phylloxera attacks on French vineyards between agricultural production (e.g. wheat), suggesting that this was truly a large
19th century France                   1863 and 1890. Shock dummy equal to 0 pre Phylloxera negative income shock.
(Banerjee et al. (2007)). See paper   and after 1890 (when grafting solution found). Dummy Main outcomes:
references for source of data on      equal 1 when wine production<80% of pre-level.           3-5% decline in height at age 20 for those born in wine- growing families
wine production, number of births,    Difference-in-difference comparing children born in      during the year that their region was affected by Phylloxera
and infant mortality. Department      affected and unaffected areas before and after.          Those born in Phylloxera-affected year are 0.35-0.38 pp more likely to be
level data on heights from military                                                            shorter than 1.56 cm.
records 1872-1912. n=3,485 year-                                                               No statistically significant effects on other measures of health or life
departments.                                                                                   expectancy.
IMPACTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL SHOCKS
Lifespan depends on the month of Used t tests to perform pairwise comparisons between                Note: Autumn-Spring = average difference in age at death between people
birth (Doblhammer and Vaupel     mean age at death by quarter of birth. To test whether the          born in Autumn (Oct-Dec) and in the Spring (Apr-Jun)
(2001))                          seasonal difference in the risk of death accounts for               Denmark: mean remaining life expectancy at age 50 = 27.52 years
                                 differences in adult life span by month of birth,                   0.19 years shorter lifespans for those born in 2nd quarter
                                 calculated monthly deviations from annual death rates               0.12 years longer lifespans for those born in 4th quarter. Correlation between
                                 and used weighted least squares regression with dummies             infant mortality at time of birth and adult mortality after age 50=0.87.
                                 for month of birth, current month, age since last birthday          Austria: average age at death = 77.70 years
                                 in months, sex,and birth cohort. To test whether selective          0.28 years shorter lifespans for those born in 2nd quarter
                                 survival or debilitation during the 1st year of life explains       Austria: average age at death = 77.70 years
                                 differences in life expectancy at age 50, calculated                0.28 years shorter lifespans for those born in 2nd quarter
                                 monthly death rates during 1st year of life and monthly             0.32 years longer lifespans for those born in 4th quarter. Additional results
                                 deviations from annual death rates during 1st year of life;         shown for specific causes of death.
                                 then used a multivariate regression without controls for            Australia: mean age of death = 78.00 years for those born in 2nd quarter;
                                 sex and birth cohort.                                               mean age of death = 77.65 years for those born in 4th quarter
                                                                                                     British immigrants born Nov.-Jan. have age of death .36 years higher than
                                                                                                     natives. Those immgrants born Mar-May have age of death .26 years lower
                                                                                                     than Australian natives.
Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and Clean Air Act imposed regulations on polluters in                 1% decline in TSP pollution results in 0.5% decline in infant mortality
the Clean Air Act of 1970           counties with TSP concentrations exceeding federal               rate.Most effects driven by reduction of deaths occuring within 1 month of
(Chay and Greenstone (2003)).       ceilings. Used nonattainment status as an instrument for         birth.
County-level mortality and natality changes in TSP.Also used regression discontinuity
data 1969-1974. Annual monitor methods to examine effect of TSP on infant mortality.
level data on total suspended
particles from EPA. N=501 county-
years.

Air Pollution and Infant Health:        Estimated linear models that approximate hazard models,      1.1 unit reduction in postnatal exposure to CO (the actual reduction that
What Can We Learn from                  where the risk of death is defined over weeks of life, and   occurred in CA in the 1990s) saved 991 infant lives - 4.6% decrease in infant
California's Recent Experience?         length of life is controlled for with a flexible             mortality rate. No statistically significant effects of prenatal exposure to any of
(Currie and Neidell (2005)). Data       nonparametric spline. Controlled for prenatal and            the pollutants.
on pollution from California EPA.       postnatal pollution exposure, weather, child's age, and
Individual-level infant mortality       numerous other child and family characteristics, as well
data from California vital statistics   as month, year, and zip code fixed effects. Examined
1989-2000. n=206,353.                   effects of ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), and
                                        particulate matter (PM10) on infant mortality.
Prenatal exposure to radioactive    Three empirical strategies:                                   Results from 1):
fallout (from Chernobyl) and        1) Cohort comparisons - Compared cohorts in utero             Probability of qualifying for high school reduced by 0.2% for cohort in utero
school outcomes in Sweden           before, during, and after Chernobyl with particular focus     during radiation; by 0.6% for cohort in utero 8-25
(Almond, Edlund, and Palme          on cohort 8-25 weekspost conception.                          Grades reduced by 0.4% for cohort in utero during radiation;by 0.6% for
(2007)). All Swedes born 1983-      2) Within-cohort comparisons- Use geographic variation        cohort in utero 8-25.
1988, n=562,637. Data on            in levelsof exposure. Define 4 regions, R0 (least             Results from 2): (R3 relative to R0)
radiation from Swedish Geological   exposure), R1, R2, R3.                                        Probability of qualifying for high school reduced by 3.6% for cohort in utero
Survey at parish level.             3) Diff-in-diff sibling comparison -Compared those            during radiation in R3; by 4% for cohort in utero 8-25 in R3.
                                    exposed to radiation in utero 8-25 to siblings who were       Grades reduced by 3% for cohort in utero during radiation in R3; by 5.2% for
                                    not.                                                          cohort in utero 8-25 in R3.
                                                                                                  Results from 3): (R3 relative to R0)
                                                                                                  Difference in probability of qualifying for high school between siblings
                                                                                                  increased by 6% in R3.
                                                                                                  Difference in grades between siblings increased by 8% in R3.
Air Pollution and Infant Health:    Mother fixed effects to estimate impact of exposure to        1 unit change in mean CO exposure during last trimester ofpregnancy
Lessons from New Jersey             pollution (during and after birth) on infant health           decreases average birth weight by 0.5%, increases likelihood of low birth
(Currie, Neidell, and Schmieder     outcomes.Air pollution measured from air quality              weight by 8%, and decreases gestation by 0.2%.
(2009)). Pollution data from EPA.   monitors and assigned to each childbased on home              1 unit change in mean CO exposure in first 2 weeks after birth increases
Individual-level data on infant     address of mother. Also included interactions b/n variable    likelihood of infant mortality by 2.5%.
births and deaths from the New      for pollution exposure and maternal smoking as well as        Estimated that a 1 unit decrease in mean CO exposure in first 2 weeks after
Jersey Department of Health 1989-   other maternal characteristics. Controlled for weather,       birth would save 17.6 per 100,000 lives.
2003. n=283,393 for mother fixed    pollution monitor locations, time trends, seasonal effects,   Effects of CO exposure on infant health at birth are 2-6 times larger for
effects models.                     and other background characteristics.                         smokers and mothers who are over age 35. Effects of PM10 (particulate
                                                                                                  matter) and ozone are not consistently significant across the specifications.

Fetal Exposures to Toxic Releases   Multivariate regression of infant health outcomes on          An additional thousand pounds per square mile of all toxic releases leads to:
and Infant Health                   amount of toxic releases in each county and year,             0.02% decrease in length of gestation
(Currie and Schmieder (2009)).      controlling for demographic and socio-economic                0.04% decrease in birth weight
Toxic Release Inventory data at     characteristics, mother drinking or smoking during            0.1% increase in probability of low birth weight
county-year level matched to        pregnancy, county employment, and county and year fixed       0.8% increase in probability of very low birth weight
county-year level natality and      effects. Compared effects of developmental toxins to other    1.3% increase in infant mortality
infant mortality data. N=5,279.     toxins, and "fugitive" air releases to "stack" air releases   Larger effects for developmental toxins and for fugitive air releases than for
                                    (since emissions that go up a smoke stack are more likely     other toxins or for stack air releases.
                                    to be treated in some way, and hence will affect those in     A 2-SD increase in lead releases decreases gestation by 0.02% and decreases
                                    the vicinity less).                                           birth weight by 0.05%. A 2-SD increase in cadmium releases decreases
                                                                                                  gestation by 0.03%, decreases birth weight by 0.07%, increases probability of
                                                                                                  low birth weight by 1.2%, increases probability of very low birth weight by
                                                                                                  1.4%, and increases infant mortality by 5%. Similar results for toluene,
                                                                                                  epichlorohydrin.
                                                                                                  Reductions in releases over 1988-1999 can account for 3.9% of the reduction
                                                                                                  in infant mortality over the same time period.
Traffic Congestion and Infant         Identification due to introduction of electronic toll       Results from Difference-in-Difference Method:
Health: Evidence From E-ZPass         collection (E-ZPass), which reduced traffic congestion      Reductions in traffic congestion generated by introduction of E-ZPass reduced
(Currie and Walker (2009)). Birth     and motor vehicle emissions in the vicinity of highway      incidence of premature birth by 10.8% and low birth weight by 11.8% for
records for Pennsylvania and New      toll plazas. Difference-in-difference, comparing infants    children of mothers living w/in 2km of a toll plaza. For those living w/in 3km
Jersey, 1994-2003. Data on            born to mothers living near toll plazas to infantsborn to   of a toll plaza, effects are 7.3% for premature births and 8.4% for low birth
housing prices for New Jersey.        mothers living near busy roadways (but away from toll       weight.
N=727,954 for diff-in-diff.           plazas), before and after introduction of E-ZPass. Also     Similar results using mother fixed effects. No effects of E-ZPass introduction
N=232,399 for mother fixed            estimated impacts of exposureto E-ZPass on infant health on housing prices or demographic composition of mothers living near toll
effects.                              using mother fixed effects methods. Controlled for various plazas.
                                      background characteristics, year and month fixed effects,
                                      and plaza-specific time trends. Also estimated impact of E-
                                      ZPass introduction on housing prices near the toll plaza.


Caution, Drivers! Children Present.   IV using traffic shocks (due to accidents or road closures) Note: only results from the IV regression are reported here.
Traffic, Pollution, andInfant         to instrument for air pollution. Preferred specifications   1 unit decrease in exposure to particulate matter (PM10) leads to 5% decrease
Health.                               include traffic flow, delays, and interactions between      in infant mortality rate (saves 14 lives per 100,000 births).
(Knittel, Miller, and Sanders         traffic and weather.
(2009)). Traffic data from the
Freeway Performance
Measurement System. Pollution
data from EPA. Birth data from
California Dept. of Public Health
2002-2006. N=373,800.


Note: Unless otherwise noted, only results significant at 5% level are reported.
Table 5: Impacts of Early Childhood Shocks on Later Outcomes
Study and Data                          Study Design                                   Results
CHILDHOOD PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH
Mental Health in Childhood and Human    Sibling fixed effects. Hyperactivity and       1 unit change in hyperactivity score:
Capital                                 agression scores based on"screener"            increases probability of grade retention by 10-12% in both US and Canada
(Currie and Stabile (2006))             questions asked of all children. Estimate      decreases math scores by 0.04-0.07 SD in both US and Canada
Data from NLSCY and NLSY. Canadian effect of hyperactivity on grade repetition,        increases probability of being in special ed by 11% in US
NLSCY: data on children aged 4-11 in    reading and math scores, special               decreases reading scores by 0.05 SD in US
1994. Mental health screening in 1994;  education, and delinquency. Controlled for     1 unit change in conduct disorder score (in the US only):
outcomes measured in 2002. n= 5604.     individual background characteristics.         increases probability of grade retention by 10%
US NLSY: data on children aged 4-11 in  Estimated same model omitting children         decreases math scores by 0.02 SD
1994. Mental health score averaged over with other learning disabilities besides       decreases reading scores by 0.03 SD
1990-1994. n=3758.                      those in the main explanatory variable.        1 unit change in aggression score (in Canada only)
                                                                                       decreases probability that a youth aged 16-19 is in school by 4%
                                                                                       High depression scores increase probability of grade retention by 10% in both US
                                                                                       and Canada.
                                                                                       No significant effects of interaction between mental health scores and income or
                                                                                       maternal education.
Disease and Development: Evidence from    Identification due to different pre-         Contemporaneous Effects of Infections on Children:
Hookworm Eradication in the American      eradication hookworm infection rates in      1 SD increase in lagged hookworm infection associated with:
South                                     different states. Compare individuals born   0.18-0.25 SD decrease in school enrollment.
(Bleakley (2007)). Data on hookworm       before and after eradication campains        0.21-0.28 SD decrease in full-time school enrollment
infection rates from the Rockefeller      funded by the Rockefeller Sanitary           0.1 SD decrease in literacy
Sanitary Commission surveys for 1910-     Commission (RSC)..Active years of RSC        Results robust to inclusion of state-year fixed effects, controlling for mean-
1914. Census data from IPUMS for 1880-    were 1910-1915. Considered                   reversion in schooling, and using state-level infection rates. Larger effects for
1990. n=115.                              contemporaneous effects on children as       blacks than for whites. No contemporaneous effects on adults.
                                          well as long-term effects on adult wages     Long-Term Effects of Infections in Childhood on Adults:
                                          and educational attainment. Controlled for   Being infected with hookworm in one's childhood leads to a reduction in wages of
                                          geographic and year fixed effects, as well   43% and a decrease in returns to schooling by 5%. 80% reduction in wages due to
                                          as some individual characteristics. In       hookworm infections explained by reduced returns to schooling. Being infected
                                          regressions for contemporaneous effects,     with hookworm in one's childhood leads to a reduction in occupational income
                                          geographic units are state economic areas.   score by 23% and a decrease in Duncan's Socio-Economic Index by 42%.
                                          In regressions for long-term effects,
                                          geographic units are states of birth.
Adult Health and Childhood Disease             Analyzed relationship b/n post-                 Survivors are expected to be positively selected relative to those who died, but
(Bozzoli, Deaton,and Quintana-Domeque          neonatalmortality (PNM, death after 28          may still be stunted by illness. In poor countries, the selection effect dominates,
(2009))                                        days and before first birthday) and adult       whereas in rich countries (with low mortality rates) the stunting effect dominates.
Data on height from the European               height. PNM is a measure of childhood           Overall correlation b/n PNM and average adult height of the same cohort in a
Community Household Panel, the Health          health environment. OLS regression with         given country = -0.79. In the US, PNM was 3x larger than in Sweden in 1970.
Survey of England, and the National Health     adult height as outcome variable,               This diff accounts for 20-30% of the 2-cm diff in average height b/n 30-yr-old
Interview Survey in the US for individiuals    controlling for country and year fixed          Americans and Swedes in 2000. After controlling for PNM, no relationship b/n
born in 1950-1980. Data on post-neonatal       effects and a time trend. Also controlled       adult height and GDP in the year and country of birth. Biggest determinant of
mortality from the World Health                for neonatal mortality rates and GDP in         differences in PNM rates across countries is mortality from intestinal disease,
Organization. n=316.                           year and country of birth. Considered           followed by mortality from pneumonia. Out of the 4 determinants of PNM, only
Also used data on women's heights from         mortality from pneumonia, intestinal            mortality from pneumonia has a significant negative effect on adult height.
the international system of Demographic        disease, congenital anomalies, and other
and Health Surveys on women aged 15-49         causes separately.
in more than 40 countries in the late 1990s-
2000s. Data on infant mortality from the
United Nations population division.
n=1514.
Stature and Status: Height, Ability and        Analyzed relationship b/n adult height and      Child's height and cognitive test scores at age 3:
Labor Market Outcomes                          cognitive ability as a potential explanation    1 SD increase in HFA z-score linked to a 0.05-0.1 SD increase in PPVT score.
(Case and Paxson (2008a)). Data from           for the significant and positive relationship   Child's height and cognitive test scores at ages 5-10: (reporting only mother
NCDS (on cohort of individuals born in         b/n adult height and earnings that is           fixed effects results)
week of 3/3/1958 in Britain), BCS, NLSY        observed. Adult height is a proxy for early     1 SD increase in HFA z-score linked to increased PIAT math score, PIAT reading
(on siblings in the US), and Fragile           childhood health conditions. OLS                recognition score, and PIAT reading comprehension score by 0.03 SD. Height
Families and Child Well-Being Study (on        regression of cognitive test scores on          does not explain differences in test scores across racial groups.
young children in the US). NCDS:               height-for-age (HFA) z-scores,controlling       Adult height, earnings, and cognitive test scores:
n=9155; BCS: n=9003; NLSY: n=13884             for background and demographic variables        Inclusion of cognitive test scores at ages 7, 10, and 11 makes the coefficient on
(total, not siblings); Fragile Families:       (using NCDS, BCS and Fragile Families           adult height insignificant for predicting hourly wages.
n=2150.                                        data). Same regression with mother fixed        Height difference b/n men and women does not account for the
                                               effects using NLSY79 data. OLS                  difference in earnings.
                                               regression of log hourly earnings on adult
                                               height, controlling for cognitive test scores
                                               at ages 7, 10, and 11, and other
                                               background and demographic variables.
Height, Health and Cognitive Function at      OLS regression of health and cognition         1 in increase in height associated with:
Older Ages                                    measures on adult height, controlling for      0.9% increase in delayed word recall score
(Case and Paxson (2008b)). Data from HRS      age, survey wave, race and sex. Adult          0.3% increase in probability of being able to count backwards
on men and women aged 50 and older from       height is a proxy for early childhood          0.3% increase in probability of knowing the date
1996 to 2004.                                 health and nutrition.Also estimated            1.4% decrease in depression score
n=72,258.                                     models including controls for childhood        0.4% decrease in health status scale (1 = excellent, 5 = poor)
                                              health (self-reported), completed              Childhood health, completed education, and employment in a white-collar
                                              education, and a dummy for employment          occupation all positively related to adult cognitive function and health. Inclusion
                                              in a white-collar occupation.                  of these controls makes the coefficients on adult height insignificant except for
                                                                                             the cases of delayed word recall and depression.

The Role of Childhood Health for the          Sibling fixed effects to estimate impact of    Mental health conditions reduce cognitive ability by 10% for the whole sample,
Intergenerational Transmission of Human       health conditions on cognitive and verbal      by 9% for college-educated sample, by 11% for less-educated sample. Asthma
Capital: Evidence from Administrative         ability at school entrance. Controlled for     reduces cognitive ability by 8% for less-educated sample only. Mental health
Data (Salm and Schunk (2008)).                individual background characteristics.         conditions reduce verbal ability by 11% for the whole sample, and by 13% for the
Administrative data from the departmentof     Used the Oaxaca (1973) decomposition           less-educated sample. Health conditions explain 18% of the gap in cognitive
health services in the city of Osnabrueck,    and a nonparametric decomposition to           ability and 65% of the gap in language ability b/n children of college-educatedand
Germany, collected during official school     estimate how much of the gap b/n children      less-educated parents.
entrance medical examinations on children     of college-educated parents and children of
aged 6 between 2002-2005. Sibling             less educated parents can be explained by
sample: n=947. 321 children had at least      chronic childhood health conditions.
one parent w/ college degree.


Long-Term Economic Costs of                   Sibling fixed effects to estimate the impact   Having had psychological problems during childhood leads to:
Psychological Problems During Childhood of reporting having had childhood                    20% reduction in adult earnings ($10,400 less per year; $17,534 less family
(Smith and Smith (2008))                      psychological problems (measured by            assets)
                                              depression, drug or alcohol abuse or other     reduction in number of weeks worked by 5.76 weeks per year
Data from PSID on siblings (with a special psychological problems before age 17) on          11pp reduction in likelihood of getting married
supplement designed by the authors in the later life socio-economic outcomes.                33.5pp reduction in educational attainment
2007 wave, asking retrospective questions Controlled for individual childhood                (means not reported, so can't calculate relative effect sizes)
about childhood health). Sample consists of physical illnesses (asthma, diabetes,            Costs of childhood psychological problems:
sibling children of the original participants allergic conditions, and many others) as       Lifetime cost: $300,000 loss in family income
who were at least 16 in 1968. Sibling         well as family background characteristics.     $3.2 trillion cost for all those affected
children were at least 25 in 2005.
Early Life Health and Cognitive Function     Identification due to variation in mortality   Decrease in infant mortality by half during 2nd year of life associated w/ an
in Old Age (Case and Paxson (2009))          rates across time and regions. OLS             increase in delayed word recall score by 0.1 SD. Significant negative impacts of
Region-level historical data on mortality    regression of later life outcomes on log       typhoid, influenza, and diarrhea mortality in 2nd year of life on delayed word
from infectious diseases, as well as total   mortality rates from various infectious        recall score. (Means not reported so can't calculate relative effect sizes).
infant mortality. Data for 1900-1936 from    diseases in year of birth and in 2nd year of   Weaker associations b/n disease mortality and ability to count backwards. No
Grant Miller's data archive on NBER          life in region of birth. Controlled for age,   significant impacts of disease mortality and overall mortality during year of birth,
website. Data for 1937-1950 from Vital       sex, race, and current census region of        once mortality in 2nd year of life is included, on either of the later life outcomes.
Statistics documents. Data on later life     residence.                                     Results not robust to adding census region-specific time trends.
outcomes from Health and Retirement
Study for 1996-2004 on men and women
aged 50-90. n=60,000

Child Health and Young Adult Outcomes        Sibling fixed effects of the long term         Results reported below are only those that control for health problems at all
(Currie et al (2009))                        effects of health problems at various child    age groups:
Administrative data on public health         ages controlling for health at birth (with     An additional major health condition at ages 0-3/4-8/14-18 increases the
insurance records from the Canadian          birth weight and congenital anomalies).        probability of being on welfare by 10%/9%/31%.
province of Manitoba on children born b/n    Key explanatory variables examined are:        Effects of major health conditions at younger ages on educational outcomes not
1979 and 1987, followed until 2006.          asthma, major injuries, ADHD, conduct          significant when controlling for health at ages 14-18.
n=50,000.                                    disorders, and other major health problems     ADHD/conduct disorders diagnosis: at ages 0-3/4-8/9-13/14-18 decreases
                                             at ages 0-3, 4-8, 9-13, and 14-18. Key         probability of being in grade 12 by age 17 by 4%/10%/17%/19%; at ages 4-8/9-
                                             outcome variables: achievement on              13/14-18 increases probability of being on welfare by 38%/44%/109%; at ages 4-
                                             standardized test on language arts in grade    8/9-13/14-18 decreases probability of taking a college prep math class by
                                             12, whether child took college-preparatory     11%/25%/35%; at ages 4-8/9-13/14-18 decreases literacy score by 0.15 SD/0.23
                                             math courses in high school,whether child      SD/0.27 SD.
                                             is in grade 12 by age 17, and welfare          Effects of asthma at younger ages not statistically significant once health at ages
                                             participation after becoming eligible at 18.   14-18 is controlled for.
                                                                                            Major injury: at ages 0-3/14-18 increases probability of being on welfare by
                                                                                            7%/9%; at ages 9-13/14-18 decreases probability of
                                                                                            being in grade 12 by age 17 by 2%/2%; at ages 9-13/14-18 decreases probability
                                                                                            of taking a college prep math class by
                                                                                            6%/8%; at ages 9-13/14-18 decreases literacy score by 0.03 SD/0.03 SD.
                                                                                            Children who have a major physical health condition and then recover do not
                                                                                            have significant adverse outcomes. Children with mental health conditions,
                                                                                            children with major health conditions at ages 14-18, and those with conditions
                                                                                            that persist for multiple age periods suffer worse outcomes.
The Impact of Childhood Health on Adult       Sibling fixed effects to estimate impact of    Better health during childhood increases adult family income by 24%, increases
Labor Market Outcomes                         self-reported retrospective childhood          adult family wealth by 200% (relative to mean=$2000), and increases adult
(Smith (2009))                                health status (on a 5-point scale) before      earnings by 25%.
Data on siblings from PSID. Childhood         age 16 on adult earnings, employment,          Better health during childhood increases probability of having worked the year
health measured as a self-                    education, marital status, etc., controlling   before by 5.4pp (mean not reported).
reportedretrospective health index            for demographics and family background.        About 2/3 of overall impact of poor childhood health on adult family income is
regardinghealth at ages younger than 17.                                                     present at age 25; the remaining 1/3 is due to a slower growth path after age 25
Adult outcomes measured in 1999.                                                             due to poor childhood health. About 1/2 of overall impact of poor childhood
n=2,248.                                                                                     health on individual earnings is present at age 25; the remaining 1/2 is due to a
                                                                                             slower growth path after age 25 due to poor childhood health. No statistically
                                                                                             significant impacts of childhood health on educational attainment.

The Effect of Childhood Conduct Disorder      Twin fixed effects to estimate impact of       Childhood conduct disorders lead to:
on Human Capital                              childhood conduct disorder (measured by        5-16% decrease in likelihood of high school graduation
(Vujic et al. (2009))                         various indicators based on diagnostic         100-228% increase in likelihood of being arrested (mean=.07)
Data from the Australian Twin Register on     criteria from psychiatry on educational        6-68% increase in likelihood of grade retention
twins born between 1964 and 1971. Data        attainment and criminal behavior in            20-60% increase in likelihood of having 3+ job quits (not significant in identical
collected in 1989-1990 and 1996-2000          adulthood. Controlled for birth weight,        twin sample)
n=5322 twins; 2250 identical twins            timing of the onset of conduct disorders,      50-325% increase in likelihood of telling lies (mean=.04)
                                              and other family and individual                37-526% increase in likelihood of going to jail (mean=.019)
                                              background characteristics. Conducted          Earlier occurrence of conduct disorder has larger negative effects than later
                                              separate analyses for all twins and            occurrence.
                                              identical twins.

Causes and Consequences of Early Life         Multivariate regression of educational         Results from NCDS, BCS, PSID, Whitehall II, and HRS:
Health                                        attainment, employment, log earnings, and      One inch of height is associated with: 0.05-0.16 more years of schooling; 0.2-0.6
(Case and Paxson (2010a))                     self-reported health status and cognitive      pp increase in likelihood of employment; 0.012-0.028 increase in average hourly
Data from NCDS, BCS, PSID, Whitehall II       function on adult height in inches (proxy      earnings for men; 0.007-0.027 increase in average hourly earnings for women.
Study (longitudinal study of British civil    for early childhood health) using 5            A 4-in increase in height leads to: 8% decrease in probability of long-standing
servants b/n ages 34 and 71, collected from   longitudinal data sets. Controlled for age,    illness; 40% decrease in probability of disability; 4% of SD decrease in depression
1985 to 2001), HRS, and NLSY79. See           ethnicity, sex, and survey wave. Used          score.
Case and Paxson (2008a) and (2008b) for       sibling fixed effects in NLSY79 to             Results from NLSY79 (reporting sibling fixed effects only) indicate that 1 pt.
more info on the data sets.                   understand what aspects of early life          increase in HAZ leads to: 0.3% increase in PIAT math score; 0.1% increase in
n=11,648 (NCDS), 11,181 (BCS), 63,995         health adult height captures - regressed       PIAT reading recognition score; 0.2% increase in PIAT reading comprehension
(PSID), 29,774 (Whitehall II), 66,269         children's test scores, grade level, self-     score; 0.9% increase in digital span test score; 0.4% increase in PPVT score. 2%
(HRS), n=3,200-46,000 (NLSY79)                perception in school, and childhood health     decrease in likelihood that child is in appropriate grade level for age (ages 6-14).
                                              outcomes on children's HAZ.                    1% increase in child doing school work quickly; 1% increase in child
                                                                                             remembering things easily; 0.9% increase in Total Scholastic Competence score.
                                                                                             8% decrease in likelihood that child has limiting emotional/neurological
                                                                                             condition; 0.105 increase in birth weight z-score (mean not reported).
The Long Reach of Childhood Health and       Since most Whitehall II study participants      Selectivity of Whitehall II study attenuates the impact of father's social class on
Circumstance: Evidence from the Whitehall    belong to the highest occupational classes,     various outcomes relative estimates that would be obtained in the full population.
II Study                                     estimated the selection effect using data       OLS regressions indicate significant correlations between family background
(Case and Paxson (2010b))                    from NCDS and BCS for comparison.               (father's social class), initial placement and likelihood of promotion. Significant
Data from the Whitehall II Study (see        OLS regressions of initial placement and        relationship between initial placement and promotion, height, and self-reported
above for description). n=10,308             promotion in Whitehall on height, family        health. Although some of the effects of health on placement and promotion are
                                             background characteristics, educational         mediated by educational attainment, there is an independent effect of health.
                                             attainment, and other individual                Individual fixed effects estimates indicate that cohort members who report
                                             characteristics. Also estimated individual      "excellent" or "very good" health are 13% more likely to be promoted (relative to
                                             fixed effects and first-differenced             lowest grade). No effect of grade in Whitehall on future health.
                                             regressions of future promotions on self-
                                             reported health, and of future health on
                                             grade in Whitehall.


HOME ENVIRONMENT
The Impact of Maternal Alcohol and Illicit   Estimated impact of maternal substance          No statistically significant relationship between maternal substance abuse and
Drug Use on Children's Behavior Problems:    abuse on children's behavior problems           child behavior in IV regressions, but 1st stage relationship is weak. Fixed effects
Evidence from the Children of the National   using OLS, IV, child-specific & maternal        suggest that 1 more drink consumed by mother in past month increases child BPI
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (Chatterji      family fixed effects models. In IV, used        by 1%.
and Markowitz (2000)).                       alcohol and illicit drug prices as              Maternal marijuana use in past month increases child BPI by 7-8%. Maternal
Data from the 1988, 1992, and 1994 waves     instruments for maternal substance abuse.       cocaine use in past month increases child BPI by 19%.
of NLSY-Child surveys on children who        Controlled for numerous demographic and
were 4-14 yrs old during the survey years.   background variables. Behavior problems
 n=6194 children in total sample; n=2498     measured by the Behavior Problems Index
mothers who have siblings in sample;         (higher BPI means more problems).
n=7546 obs for children who have 2 or 3
observations in sample.
Parental Employment and Child Cognitive      OLS to estimate the impact of maternal          20 more hrs worked each week by mother during child's 1st year:
Development (Ruhm (2004)).                   work in the year prior to child's birth, and    decrease PPVT Score by 0.06-0.10 SD (ages 3-4)
Data from the Children of NLSY79 for         in the first 4 years of child's life on child   20 more hrs worked each week by mother during child's age 2-3:
1986-1996 (mothers aged 29-38 at the end     cognitive test scores at ages 3-4 and 5-6.      decrease PIAT-Reading score by 0.06-0.08 SD (ages 5-6)
of 1995). n=3,042.                           Used a rich set of controls for maternal        decrease PIAT-Math score by 0.05-0.06 SD (ages 5-6)
                                             background, demographic, and socio-             Results robust to alternative specifications (measuring employment by weeks
                                             economic characteristics, as well as            worked or part-time vs. no employment). More negative effects on PPVT and
                                             assessment year fixed effects. Maternal         PIAT-Math scores for boys than girls. More negative effects on PIAT-Reading
                                             work measured both by hours and weeks           scores for girls than boys. More negative effects on PPVT an PIAT-Reading
                                             worked during the year. Controlled for          scores for whites than blacks. More negative effects on PIAT-Math scores for
                                             family income.                                  blacks than whites.
Maternity Leave, Early Maternal             OLS and propensity score matching to           Mother returning to work within 12 weeks of giving birth leads to:
Employment and Child Health and             estimate impact of maternal return to work     2.5% decrease in likelihood of well-baby visit
Development in the US                       within 12 weeks of birth on child health       12.8% decrease in likelihood of any breastfeeding
(Berger, Hill, and Waldfogel (2005))        and developmental outcomes. Models             40.4% decrease in number of weeks breastfed
Data from the Children of NLSY79 on         control for numerous background                4.3% decrease in child getting all DPT/Polio immunizations
children born b/n 1988 and 1996. n=1,678.   characteristics as well as state and year of   Results from OLS consistent with results from propensity score matching
                                            birth fixed effects. Sample limited to         methods. Larger negative effects of returning to work full-time within 12 weeks
                                            mothers who worked pre-birth.                  of giving birth compared to any work at all.


Evidence from Maternity Leave Expansions    Identification due to large expansions in      Expansions in parental leave policies led to a 48-58% increase in months of
of the Impact of Maternal Care on Early     parental leave policies in Canada on Dec.      maternal care during the 1st year of life and a 25-29pp decrease in non-parental
Child Development                           31, 2000 (from 25 to 50 weeks of leave).       care. No statistically significant effects of parental leave expansions on child
(Baker and Milligan (2009))                 OLS regression. Key explanatory variable       development indicators (motor/social development, behavior, physical ability,
Data from the NLSCY in Canada on            is a dummy for birth after Dec. 31, 2000.      cognitive development).
children up to age 29 months and their      Outcomes include child development
mothers in 1998-2003.                       indicators, maternal employment, and use
                                            of child care. Controlled for various
                                            individual and family background
                                            characteristics as well as labor market
                                            variables. Observations from Quebec
                                            omitted due to changes in childcare
                                            policies over the same time period.
                                            Observations from single-parent families
                                            omitted b/c of expansions in benefits to
                                            those families. Subsample analysis for
                                            women who returned to work within 1
                                            year of child's birth.
The Effect of Expansions in Maternity        Identification due to 3 policy reforms in       Despite significant delays in maternal return to work due to policy reforms, there
Leave Coverage on Children's Long-Term       Germany that expanded unpaid and paid           are no statistically significant impacts of expansions in maternity leave policies
Outcomes (Dustmann and Schonberg             maternity leave to estimate impact on           (paid or unpaid) on any long-run outcomes (wages, employment, selective high
(2009)).                                     adult wages, employment, and educational        school attendance, grade retention and grade attendance).
Administrative data on students in           outcomes. First reform in 1979 increased
Germany attending public schools in Hesse,   paid leave from 2 to 6 months. Second
Bavaria, and Schleswig-Holstein (3 states    reform in 1986 increased paid leave from
in Germany) for 2002-03 to 2005-06.          6 to 10 months.Third reform in 1992
n=101,257.                                   increased unpaid leave from 18 to 36
Administrative data on social                months. OLS regression, comparing
securityrecords for German individuals       children born one month before and after
born b/n July 1977 and June 1980.            each reform,controlling for background
n=140,387                                    variables and state fixed effects. Also
                                             difference-in-difference, comparing
                                             children born before and after leave
                                             expansions with children born in the same
                                             months the year before (hence not affected
                                             by expansions).
Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using      IV models of the effect of foster care          Children on the margin for placement into foster care are 1.5 times more likely to
Investigator Assignment to Estimate Causal   placement on measures of criminal               be arrested, 2.68 times more likely to have a sentence of guilty/withheld, 3.41
Effects of Foster Care (Doyle (2008)).       activity. Identification due to the fact that   times more likely to be sentenced to prison if they are placed into foster care.
Data from Computerized Criminal History      child protection cases are randomized to        Children on the margin are likely to include African-Americans, girls, and young
System from the Illinois State Police on     investigators, and investigators influence      adolescents.
arrests and imprisonment up to age 31 for    whether a child is placed in foster care or
2000-2005, linked with child abuse           remains at home. Model allows for
investigation data on individuals who are    treatment effect heterogeneity -- used
18-35 in 2005. n = 23,254.                   random coefficient model. IV where the
                                             instrument is the investigator's probability
                                             of using foster placement relative to the
                                             other investigators.
Long-term Consequences of Child Abuse        Multivariate regression with key                 Individuals who were maltreated as children:
and Neglect on Adult Economic Well-          explanatory variable being a dummy for           complete 4.3% less years of schooling (1989-95)
Being (Currie and Widom (2009)).             having been maltreated. Controlled for           score 5.3% lower on IQ test (1989-95)
Sample of abused/neglected children based    demographic and family background                have 24% lower imputed earnings (2003-04)
on court-substantiated cases of childhood    characteristics, as well as quarter of year at   are 0.52 times as likely to have a skilled job (1989-95)
physical and sexual abuse in 1967-1971 in    time of interview. Also estimated models         are 0.46 times as likely to be employed (2003-04)
one Midwestern metropolitan county.          separately for males and females and for         are 0.58 times as likely to own a vehicle (2003-04)
Maltreated children matched to controls on   the subsample of participants whose              For males, the only significant effects of maltreatment are for years of schooling
the basis of sex, race, and elementary       families received food stamps or welfare         and having a skilled job. For females, significant negative effects of maltreatment
school class/hospital of birth. Cases        when they were children.                         on years of schooling, IQ testscores, imputed earnings, being employed, owning a
restricted to children 11 yrs or younger.                                                     bank account,owning a stock, owning a vehicle, and
Adult outcomes measured at mean age 41.                                                       owning a home. Effects larger for females than for males.
Used info collected in 1989-95 and 2003-04
interviews. n=1195 in 1989-95; n=807 in
2003-04. Matched sample (both members
of matched pair interviewed during the 2
waves): n=358.
Child Maltreatmentand Crime                  OLS, propensity score matching, and twin         Only results that are significant in all 3 main specifications (OLS, propensity
(Currie and Tekin (2006))                    fixed effects methods. Estimate the impact       scores, and twin fixed effects) are reported.
Data from the National Longitudinal Study    of maltreatment on criminal activity.            Children who experienced any maltreatment are:
of Adolescent Health (AddHealth). First      Controlled for numerous demographic and          99-134% more likely to commit any non-drug related crime (mean=0.109)
wave: 1994-95; last wave: 2001-2002.         background characteristics as well as state      288-489% more likely to commit a burglary (mean=0.009)
n=13,509 (full sample), n=928 (twins         fixed effects. Also controlled for parental      113-181% more likely to damage property (mean=0.052)
sample).                                     reports of chlid being bad-tempered or           106-131% more likely to commit an assault (mean=0.049)
                                             having a learning disability.                    183-222% more likely to commit a theft>$50 (mean=0.018)
                                                                                              76-101% more likely to commit any hard-drug related crime (mean=0.085)
                                                                                              96-103% more likely to be a crime victim (mean=0.077)
                                                                                              Probability of crime increases if a person suffers multiple forms of maltreatment.
                                                                                              Being a victim of maltreatment doubles the probability that an individual is
                                                                                              convicted as a juvenile.
                                                                                              Cost-Benefit: Estimated costs of crime induced by abuse=$8.8-68.6 billion/year
                                                                                              Estimated costs of home visiting programs (that have been shown to reduce cases
                                                                                              of maltreatment by 50%)=$14 billion/year
The Effect of Maternal Depression and          OLS regression of the impact of maternal       Effects on maternal inputs:
Substance Abuse on Child Human Capital         depression and substance abuse on              Maternal depression leads to a 0.2 SD decrease in emotional stimulation sub-
Development                                    maternal inputs and children's outcomes in     component of the HOME score (ages 7-10, 11-14)
(Frank and Meara (2009))                       grades 1-5 and 6-9. Controlled for a rich      Maternal substance abuse leads to a 0.23 SD decrease in emotional stimulation
Data from Children of NLSY79 on children       set of demographic and background              sub-component of the HOME score (ages 11-14)
aged 1-5 in 1987. n=1587.                      variables including family measures of         Effects on child outcomes:
                                               parent and sibling behavior and health.        Maternal depression leads to a 0.46 SD increase in behavioral problems index
                                               For robustness, estimated models using         (ages 7-10, 11-14).
                                               sibling fixed effects (comparing siblings      Maternal alcohol abuse leads to a 0.31 SD decrease in child's PIAT math score
                                               born to the same mother) and propensity        (ages 11-14); 0.29 SD increase in behavioral problems index (ages 7-10); 377%
                                               scores.                                        decrease in likelihood of ever being suspended or expelled at any age
                                                                                              (mean=0.22).
ENVIRONMENTAL SHOCKS
Environmental Policy as Social Policy? The     Used state-by-state variation in the decline   Elasticity of violent crime with respect to lead exposure = 0.8.
Impact of Childhood Lead Exposure on           of lead exposure from gasoline between         Changes in childhood lead exposure in the 1970s are responsible for a 56%
Crime (Reyes (2007)).                          1975 and 1985 due to enforcement of the        decrease in violent crime in the 1990s (while abortion is responsible for a 29%
Data on lead in gasoline for 1950-1990 on      Clean Air Act to identify the impacts of       drop in violent crime). Weak evidence for link b/n lead exposure and murder or
a state-by-state level from Yearly Report of   childhood lead exposure on violent crime       property crimes.
Gasoline Sales by State, Petroleum             in young adulthood. Also estimated the         Cost-Benefit Analysis: Cumulative social cost of switching to unleaded gasoline:
Marketing Annual, and Petroleum Products       impact of lead exposure on levels of lead      $15-65 billion. Cumulative social benefit of reduced crime from reduced lead
Survey. Data on air lead exposure from the     in blood during childhood for robustness.      exposure: $1.2 trillion. Note, due to data limitations, it is not possible to make a
EPA's Aerometric Information Retrieval         Primary measure of lead exposure is the        direct connection between blood lead levels, lead in gasoline, and criminal
System. Data on per capita crime rates from    grams of lead per gallon of gasoline in        activity at the individual level.
the Uniform Crime Reports compiled by the      automobile sources. Calculated air lead
Federal Bureau of Investigation for 1985-      exposure (measure of average
2002. Data on Data on individual blood         concentration of lead in the air in each
lead levels from NHANES for 1976-1980          state and year). Calculated effective lead
only.                                          exposure relative to each crime in each
                                               state and year as the weighted average of
                                               lead exposure b/n ages 0 and 3 for all
                                               cohorts of arrestees. Regression of per
                                               capita crime rate on effective lead
                                               exposure, controlling for state and year
                                               fixed effects and other state-year
                                               characteristics that could affect crime
                                               rates.
The Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood      Identification due to geographical            A decrease in blood lead levels by 30 mg/Kg leads to:
Lead Exposure: Evidence from Sharp            variation in childhood lead exposure due      3% decrease in likelihood of being in the lower end of the GPA distribution
Changes in Local Air Lead Levels Induced      to a policy in Sweden that induced a phase-   0.6pp increase in average IQ for males
by the Phase-Out of Leaded Gasoline           out of leaded gasoline between 1973 and       0.05 yr increase in schooling attainment
(Nilsson (2009)).                             1981. Difference-in-difference comparing      0.7pp increase in likelihood of graduating high school
Data on air lead exposure from Swedish        children born in municipalities that          0.5pp decrease in likelihood of receiving welfare in adulthood
Environmental Protection Agency thatuses      experienced large reductions in lead          Effects of lead are stronger at lower end of ability/skills distribution and for
a nationwide grid of moss samples collected   exposure to those born in municipalities      children from poorer households. Effects of lead are stronger when exposure is at
in 1000 locations evenly spread across        with relatively no change, before and after   ages 0-2 than when exposure is at ages 5-7. No statistically significant difference
Sweden for average lead exposure levels for   policy went into effect, to estimate impact   in effects by gender. Nonlinear effects - significant and negative effects of lead
1972-74, 1977-79, and 1982-84. Individual     of childhood lead exposure on later life      exposure above 75th percentile (>50mg/kg). No statistically significant effects of
outcome data from the Educational             outcomes. Also used mother fixed effect       exposure to lead below 75th percentile levels.
database at the Institute for Labor Market    methods, comparing siblings who               Estimated that there exists a blood lead threshold of 60 mg/L below which
Policy Evaluation in Uppsala, Sweden on       experienced different levels of lead          reductions in lead exposure have no effect on outcomes. Similar results using
those born in 1972-74, 1977-79, and 1982-     exposure in childhood. Controlled for         mother fixed effects.
84.                                           various background characteristics as well    Note: means not reported, so relative effect sizes can't be calculated.
n=797,889                                     as year of birth and municipality of birth
                                              fixed effects.

Note: Unless otherwise noted, only results significant at the 5% level are reported. Percent changes reported relative to the mean.
Table 6: Effects of Income on Birth and Early Childhood Outcomes: Evidence from the US and Around the World
Study and Data                                 Study Design                                                Results
The link between AFDC participation and        IV: using parameters of AFDC, FSP and Medicaid as           OLS results suggest that AFDC has negative effects. Sibling fixed
birthweight (Currie and Cole (1993)). Data     instruments, controlling for child characteristics and      effects indicate no significant effects. IV results suggest that AFDC
from NLSY merged with state andcounty level    region fixed effects. Separate regressions for poor         during pregnancy causes large increases in mean birth weight among
data. Data on children born between 1979-      black and poor white women. Sibling FE: comparing           poor whites only. Hence, evidence suggests that AFDC has neutral or
1988. (n=5,000).                               sibs where mother on AFDC during pregnancy to               positive rather than negative effects. Negative estimates driven by
                                               others.                                                     selection.
Does Money Really Matter? Estimating           IV models use random assignment as instruments for          A $1000 increase in annual income raises cognitive achievement by
Impacts of Family Income on Children's         income, welfare receipt, and employment to estimate         0.06 of SD for children aged 2-5. No statistically significant effects of
Achievement with Data from Random-             impact of income on children's cognitive                    income on children aged 6-9 or 10-15.
Assignment Experiments                         achievement. Included dummies for sites in both             A 3-SD increase in the proportion of quarters that welfare is received
(Morris, Duncan, and Rodrigues (2004)). Data stages of the regression analysis. Cognitive                  leads to a 1.5 SD decrease in cognitive achievement among 10-15
from four studies that evaluated 8 welfare and achievement measured with test scores and                   year-olds.
anti-poverty programs with randomized          parent/teacher reports. Controlled for various
designs: Connecticut's Jobs First, the Los     baseline background family characteristics.
Angeles Jobs First GAIN, the New Brunswick
and British Columbia sites of the Canadian
Self-Sufficiency Project, and the Atlanta, GA,
Grand Rapids, MI, and Riverside, CA sites of
the National Evaluation of Welfare to Work
Strategies.
n=18,471 children aged 2-15 at the time of
random assignment.
Who Benefits from Child Benefit? (Blow,        Identification from variation in real value of Child        Spending out of unanticipated vs. anticipated change in CB:
Walker and Zhu (2005)). Data from UK           Benefit (CB) 1980-2000 due to inflation and policy          15x greater for alcohol in 2-parent households; 10x greater for adult
Family Expenditure Survey 1980-2000.           changes. Calculated anticipated and unanticipated           clothing in lone-parent households.
n = 9811 two-parent households; n = 2920 one- changes in CB payments. Examine the propensity to            Results suggest that parents fully insure children against income
parent households.                             spend CB on child goods (children's clothing) and           shocks so that unanticipated changes only affect spending on adult
                                               adult goods (alcohol, tobacco and adult clothing).          goods.

Effects of EITC on birth and infant health        Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences (DDD).           Birth weight: Increased by 0.4% for all women
outcomes. (Baker (2008)). U.S. Vital Statistics   Exploit the large expansion of EITC in 1993 (phased      Incidence of low birth weight: Decreased by 3.7% for all
Natality data file 1989-96. (n=781,535).          in 1994-96) that increased benefits to families with 2   No statistically significant effects on # prenatal visits or maternal
Exclude observations from 1994. Used data         or more children."Treatment" group=mothers giving        smoking during pregnancy.
from 1997 March CPS to compute proportion         birth to 3rd or higher child. Control 1=mothers
of treatment group that is eligible for EITC.     giving birth to 1st or 2nd child. Control 2=mothers
                                                  giving birth to 1st child. Used mothers with less than
                                                  High school as a proxy for EITC eligibility. Effect of
                                                  interest is interaction between <HS*treatment*after
                                                  EITC expansion.
The Impact of Family Income on Child             Identification based on EITC expansions in 1987-         A $1000 increase in income raises combined math and reading scores
Achievement: Evidence from the Earned            1993 and 1993-1997 that increased benefits for low-      by .06 SD.
Income Tax Credit (Dahl and Lochner (2008)).     and middle- income.Used simulated instrumental           Larger gains from contemporaneous income for children aged 5 to 10
Data from NLSY on children and their mothers     variables (IV): IV is predicted change in EITC           than for those aged 11-15.
for 1988-2000. n = 4720 children (2527           income. Controlled for family background and             Larger gains for children from disadvantaged families.
mothers).                                        demographic variables and for time-varying state-
                                                 specific policies that might affect child outcomes.
                                                 Examine contemporaneous and lagged income. Also
                                                 estimate OLS and child fixed effects models.

Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Well-being      Instrumental variables. Used variation in child          An increase in $1000 in simulated benefits leads to: 1.5% reduction
of Children? Evidence from Canadian Child        benefits across time, provinces, and number of           in likelihood of learning disability (if mom < HS);
Benefit Expansions (Milligan and Stabile         children per family to develop a measure of benefit      3.6% decline conduct disorder/aggression score 4-10; 4.3% of SD
(2008)). Data from Survey of Labor and           income as IV for child benefits in regressions of the    decline maternal depression;
Income Dynamics on families with children for    effect of child benefits on child outcomes. Controlled   11.6% SD decline in maternal depression (if mom < HS); 1.1%
1999-2004 for benefit simulation. Data from      for province-year fixed effects. Also reduced forms      decline in child ever experiencing hunger (if mom < HS)
Canadian National Longitudinal Study of          for simulated benefits' effect on child outcomes.        Larger positive impacts on education and physical health for boys
Children & Youth for 1994-2005 for children                                                               than girls; larger positive impacts on mental health for girls. Effects
10 and under. (n=56,000).                                                                                 on math and vocabulary scores, behavioral outcomes, maternal
                                                                                                          depression and likelihood of ever experiencing hunger persist at least
                                                                                                          4 years.

South African Child Support Grant (CSG):         Exploit varying lengths of exposure to CSG among         No gains in HAZ for treatments covering <=20% of the 0-3 window.
Unconditional cash transfer program with         children aged 0-3 due to the timing of the rollout of    HAZ 0.20 higher for treatment covering 2/3 of window than for a
payments made to child's primary caregiver.      CSG. Fit a quadratic OLS model to application            child receiving treatment covering 1% of window. Benefit-cost ratio
Intended to cover the country's poorest 30% of   delay (number of days between program creation and       of CSG: Between 1.06 and 1.48 (estimating lifetime earnings gains
children. Study of effects on child nutrition    child's enrollment) using data for children born <=2     from gains in HAZ, using annual 5% discount rate, and assuming
(Aguero et al. (2009)). Data from KwaZulu-       years prior to survey date. Calculated an expected       unemployed 33% of time).
Natal Income Dynamics Study. Main outcome        application delay variable for each child conditional    Results robust to checking for age cohort effects and location/spacial
measure: Height-for-Age z-score (HAZ).           on birth date, location and family characteristics,      effects.
T=245, C=886.                                    defined as % deviation in application delay from
                                                 expected delay. Conditional on family
                                                 characteristics, deviation in delay, and observables,
                                                 the extent of CSG treatment should be random.Use
                                                 generalized propensity scores, MLE.

Conditional Cash Transfer Programs (CCT)
Mexican "Progresa" program (now                     Program phased in. 320 treatment villages and 185        Treatment Effects:
"Oportunidades"): Conditional cash transfers        control villages randomly selected. Control villages     Newborns 25.3% less likely to be ill in past month.
of 20-30% of household income every 2               received benefits 2 years after start of program. They   Children 0-3 22.3% less likely to be ill in past month.
months. Families must take young children to        did not know this would be the case. Investigate 0/1     Height (12-36 mos) 1.2% higher.
health clinics, immunizations, get adequate         treatment dummy as well as different lengths of          Probability of being anemic (12-48 mos) 25.5% less.
prenatal care, & receive nutrition supplement.      program exposure.
(Families also to keep older children in school)
(Gertler (2004)). Data from survey collected
from experimental villages. Sample sizes:
7,703 children underage 3 at baseline; 1,501
newborns; Height analysis: T=1,049, C=503;
Anemia analysis: T=1,404, C=608.

"Attencion a Crisis" in rural Nicaragua.            Randomized experimental design. 4 groups: CCT,           Treatment Effects:
Conditional cash transfer ~ 15% average per         CCT + vocational training,CCT + productive               Developmental screener (DDST social-personal): increase by 0.13
capita expenditures. Women receive payments         investment grant, control. Subgroup analysis by          SDs
every 2 months if preschool children taken for      gender and age. Analyzed various transmission            DDST language: increase by 0.17 SDs
regular visits to health clinics. (Older children   mechanisms by estimating expenditures on different       Receptive vocabulary (TVIP): increase by 0.22 SDs. (Children made
must also be enrolled in school) (Macours et        foods (to measure nutrient intake), and differences in   up approx. 1.5 months of delay on TVIP)
al. (2008)). Sample sizes: T=3,002, C=1,019.        indicators for early childhood development.              Effects by age: DDST language: up 0.06 SDs 0-35 mos., 0.20 SDs 60-
Additional data from the 2001 Nicaragua                                                                      83 mos.
Living Standards Measurement Study.                                                                          TVIP: up 0.05 SDs 36-59 mos., up 0.36 SDs 60-83 mos. (Oldest
                                                                                                             children made up 2.4 months of delay on TVIP)
                                                                                                             No statistically significant differences by gender.
                                                                                                             Transmission mechanisms: Better diet; more likely to have books,
                                                                                                             paper, pencils;more likely to be read to; more likely to have checkup,
                                                                                                             vitamins,de-worming drugs; more likely to be enrolled; more likely to
                                                                                                             see doctor when ill.

Note: Unless otherwise noted, only results significant at 5% level are reported.
Percent changes (denoted by % instead of "pp") are reported relative to the mean, if means were reported in the paper.
T' = Treatment group, 'C' = Control group
Outcomes written as 'T>C' mean that treatment outcome greater than control outcome at 5% significance level.
Outcomes written as 'T=C' mean that there is no statistically significant difference in outcomes between 2 groups at 5% level.
Table 7: Impacts of Food Stamps on Birth and Early Childhood Outcomes
Study                                    Study Design                                              Results
Consumption responses to in-kind         Difference-in-difference using variation in county-       Introduction of FSP is associated with: 18% increase in total food
transfers: evidence from the             level implementation of FSP to estimate impact of         expenditures (whole sample);
introduction of the Food Stamp           FSP on food consumption and labor supply.                 26-28% increase in total food expenditures for female-headed HHs; 6-
program (Hoynes and Schanzenbach         Controlled for county and year fixed effects as well as   13% increase in total food exp. for non-white female-headed HHs. No
(2009)). Data from PSID for 1968-        state linear time trends. Included trends interacted w/   significant effect on meals out and cash expenditures on food at home.
78 and from the 1960, 1970, and          pre-treatment characteristics and three measures of       Elasticity of food spending with respect to income = 0.30. MPC for
1980 decennial censuses.                 annual per capita county transfer payments.               food out of cash income = 0.09 (for whole sample);
n=39,623 person-year obs.                                                                          MPC for food out of cash income = 0.111 ( <$25,000 income); MPC
                                                                                                   for food out of FSP income = 0.16 (for whole sample);
                                                                                                   MPC for food out of FSP income = 0.238 (<$25,000 income).
                                                                                                   Decrease in whether the HH head reports any work by 21%.

There's no such thing as a free lunch:Analyzed 3 nutrition programs in the UK: free school         Free school lunch reduces food expenditure by 15% of the purchase
Altruistic parents and the response oflunch for children from poor HHs, free milk to poor          price of the lunch.
household food expenditures to        HHs w/ pre-school children, and free milk at day care        Free pint of milk reduces milk expenditure by 80%.
nutrition program reforms             for pre-schoolers in attendance regardless of income.
(Bingley and Walker (2007)). Data     For identification, exploited 1988 reform that ended
from UK Family Expenditure            eligibility for poor HHs with working parents.
Surveys for 1981-1992. n = 29,222.    Difference-in-difference (DD). Also did DD using the
                                      fact that free school lunches available only during
                                      term time, and summer holidays begin earlier in
                                      Scotland.
Impact of Food Stamp Program (FSP) Difference-in-difference, using the fact that FSP was           IIntroduction of FSP in 3rd trimester led to: 0.06-0.08% (0.1-0.2%)
on birthweight, neonatal mortality,   introduced to different counties at different times due      increase in birth weight for whites (blacks); a 1% (0.7-1.5%) decrease
and fertility (Almond et al. (2009)). to available funding and policy changes. Key                 in fraction of low birth weight for whites (blacks). Insignificant
Birth and death micro data from the policy/treatment variable is the month and year that           impacts of exposure to FSP during earlier trimesters.
National Center for Health Statistics each county implemented FSP. Estimated the impact            Results robust to adding fixed-effect and other controls, as well as
merged with county-level data for     of FSP on county-level birth outcomes, using county          various time trends to the analysis. Results robust to conducting an
1968-77. FSP data from USDA.          and time fixed effects. Main outcomes concerned with         event study analysis.
County characteristics from 1960      availability of FSP during 3rd trimester of pregnancy.
City and County Data Book. Data on
government transfers and per-capita
income from REIS. Participation
rates calculated using CPS. n=97,785
whites; 27,274 blacks.
Effects of FSP benefits on weight       Random effects models using Heckman and Singer            Increasing average monthly FSP benefits from $0 to $100 decreases
gained by expectant mothers (Baum       method to model unobserved heterogeneity.                 probability of gaining too little weight by 11.8-13.7%. No effect on
(2008)). Data from the NLSY.            Dependent variable is whether women gain correct          probability of gaining too much weight. No statistically significant
Limited to low-income black and         amount of weight during pregnancy based on pre-           difference in effects of FSP on weight gain between first-time and non-
Hispanic women w/ pregnancy             pregnancy BMI. Assume state variation in FSP              first-time mothers.
information in the surveys.             eligibility rules, and program administration affects
n=1477 pregnancy-level obs.             FSP takeup but not weight gain. Control for
                                        gestation, pre-pregnancy FSP, WIC.

Impact of FSP on birth outcomes in      Difference-in-difference using county-level variation     FSP introduction led to a 10% increase in number of first births to
California (Currie and Moretti          in timing of FSP introduction. FSP measured using         white teen mothers (only in Los Angeles);
(2008)). Data on FSP from state         dummy (=1 if FSP introduced), log expenditures,or         a 24% increase in number of first births to black teen mothers; a 12%
records and REIS. Data from birth       log participation. FSP dummy refers to 9 months prior     increase in number of first births to all blacks;
records in CA for 1960-74.              to birth. County fixed effects and county-specific time   a 0.1% increase in probability infant 1500-2000g survives for whites; a
Aggregated data into cells defined      trends included. Examined teenage mothers and LA          4% decrease in probability infant <3000g survives for blacks; a
using county, race, year of birth,      county separately.                                        4% increase in probability of low birth weight among white teens.
maternal age group, parity, and the
third of the year.
n=38,475 cells.

Note: Unless otherwise noted, all reported results are statistically significant at 5% level.
      Percent changes (denoted by % instead of "pp") are reported relative to the mean.
Table 8: Effects of Housing and Neighborhoods on Child Outcomes
Study and Data                         Study Design                                                       Results
Housing and Child Outcomes
Are Public Housing Projects Good       Two-sample instrumental variable (TSIV) of the effects of          First stage results: Having siblings of different sex increases likelihood
for Kids? (Currie and Yelowitz         living in public housing projects on child's education, housing    of family living inproject by 24%.
(2000)                                 conditions. Outcome variables are in SIPP and Census.              Second stage results: Families who live in projects are 16pp (mean =
Data from SIPP for 1992-1993,          Endogenous regressor is in CPS. Instrument is a dummy for          .04)l ess likely to be overcrowded; and 12pp (mean =.02) less likely to
March CPS for 1990-1995, and US        siblings being of different sexes since families with different    live in high-density housing. Children who live in projects are 111%
Census for 1990 on families w/ 2       sex children get larger apartments in public housing than          less likely to have been held back in school (larger effects for boys than
children (under 18) and income         families with same sex children. Controlled for per-capita         for girls). Black children who live in projects are 19% less likely to
<$50,000.                              availability of projects, vouchers, Section 8 subsidies, as well   have been held back in school. No statistically significant effect for
n=279,129                              as other neighborhood and family background characteristics.       white children.

The Long-Term Effects of Public        Amemiya generalized least squares regression where the             Living in public housing as a child leads to an increase in the
Housing on Self-Sufficiency            instrument was the vector of residuals from a regression for       probability of any employment b/n ages 25 and 27 of 7.8%; an increase
(Newman and Harkness (2002)).          the number of public housing units per eligible family in the      in annual earnings b/n ages 20 and 27 of 14.3%; an increase in the
Data from PSID - Assisted Housing      area on demographic characteristics of the area. Instrumented      number of years not on welfare b/n ages 20 and 27 of 11.3%. No
Database on cohorts born b/n 1957      for whether child lived in public housing to estimate impact       statistically sigificant effect on household earnings relative to the
and 1967. Sample limited to            on various adult outcomes. Controlled for numerous                 poverty line. Note: above results significant at 6% level.
individuals whose families were        background characteristics and state and year fixed effects.
eligible for public housing b/n ages
10 and 16. n=1183. Adult
outcomes measured at ages 20-27.




Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, Instrumental variables regression of the effect of living in a          No statistically significant effect of living in high-rise projects on
and Student Achievement:             public housing project on student outcomes. Identification           student outcomes. Living in a building that was demolished leads to an
Evidence from Public Housing         from variation in timing of housing demolitions in Chicago in        8.2% increase in probability that students>14 yrs drop out of school
Demolitions in Chicago (Jacob        the 1990s. Instrumented for living in public housing with a          within 3 years relative to those that lived in buildings scheduled for
(2004)).                             dummy for whether the student lived in a unit scheduled for          demolition that had not yet been demolished (12% more likely for girls;
Administrative data from the         demolition at the time of the closure announcement. Controls         4% more likely for boys).
Chicago Housing Authority and        for background characteristics and project and year fixed
Chicago Public Schools for 1991- effects.
2002 on students who lived in high-
rise public housing for at least one
semester n=10 556
Public Housing, Health and Health    Instrumental variables regression.Three instruments: gender      Note: only reporting IV estimates with complete combination of
Behaviors: Is There a Connection?    composition of household, the supply of public housing in        instruments here.
(Fertig and Reingold (2007)). Data   each city, and length of waiting list. Three subsamples.         Effects of moving into public housing between childbirth and one-
from the Fragile Families and        "Control" group is mothers who have below 80% of median          year interview:
Child Well-Being Studyon children    income in their area but are not in public housing.              1.63 point increase in mother's health index (5 point scale, mean
born in 20 U.S cities between 1998   "Treatment 1" is mothers who live in public housing at time      not reported, can't calculate effect size)
and 2000. Sample 1: T=422,           of first interview immediately after childbirth. "Treatment 2"   55pp decrease in likelihood that mother has limiting health condition
C=2,055; Sample 2: T=323,            is mothers who have moved into public housing between            (mean=.08)
C=1,999; Sample 3: T=150,            childbirth and second interview at child's age 1 ("move-in"      41pp decrease in likelihood that mother is underweight (mean=.07)
C=919.                               subsample)."Treatment 3" is the "move-in" subsample limited      18% increase in mother's BMI
                                     to mothers with two or three children at second interview.       Decrease in domestic violence (imprecise coefficient estimate)
                                     Controlled for family, background, neighborhood, and other       No statistically significant effects on child's birth weight or PPVT
                                     demographic and socio-economic characteristics.                  scores.
Neighborhood Characteristics and Child Outcomes
The Long-Run Consequences of      Among families who apply for housing projects, assignment           The quality of housing project or neighborhood has no statistically
Living in a Poor Neighborhood     to a particular project is approximately random - based on 1st      significant impact on total income, annual earnings, or number of years
(Oreopoulos (2003)). Data from    available unit. Compared housing-project means of various           on welfare in adulthood. Family characteristics account for up to 30%
the Intergenerational Income Data adult outcomes across neighborhood quality (measured by             of total variation in adult outcomes.
base for 1978-1999 (taken from    density of housing, total size of project, proportion of the
income tax files) on individuals  census tract below the low-income cutoff, and whether the
living in Toronto, born b/n 1963  project is all high-rises).
and 1970 n=4 060
Neighborhood Effects on Crime for      OLS regression of crime outcomes on dummy for whether            Assignment to a restricted voucher leads to a 31% decrease in violent
Female and MaleYouth: Evidence         family used a voucher (instrumented by whether family was        crime arrests for female youths. Use of restricted voucher leads to a
from a Randomized Housing              assigned to treatment group) or on voucher type, and on an       76% reduction in violent crime arrests among female youths. No
Voucher Experiment                     age-treatment interaction variable. Instrument necessary since   statistically significant effects on males for violent crime arrests.
(Kling, Ludwig and Katz (2005))        not all families who were assigned a voucher chose to use it -   Assignment to a restricted voucher leads to a 33% decrease in property
Data from Moving to Opportunities      some remained in their initial housing.                          crime arrests for female youths. Use of restricted voucher leads to a
(MTO) experiment. Families living                                                                       85% decrease in property crime arrests forfemale youths. Assignment
in public housing projects in                                                                           to a restricted voucher leads to a 32% increase in property crime arrests
Boston, Los Angeles, NewYork                                                                            for male youths.
City, Baltimore, and Chicago were                                                                       Use of restricted voucher leads to a 77% increase in property crime
randomly chosen to stay in their                                                                        arrests for male youths.
current home, to receive a section 8
housing voucher, or to receive a
section 8 housing voucher
restricted to use in neighborhoods
w/ poverty rate less than 10%.
Surveys conducted in 2002. Data
on youths aged 15-25. Data on
arrest records for MTO states.
n=4,475.
Neighborhoods and Academic             Same regression as Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005) for            Children in families assigned to a restricted voucher attend better
Achievement                            educational outcomes.                                            quality schools: the mean rank of schools on state exams is 30% greater
(Sanbonmatsu et al. (2006))                                                                             than the control group mean, and the mean proportion of school-lunch-
Data from MTO experiment                                                                                eligible children is 8% lower. No statistically significant effects of
surveys for 2002 (see above) on                                                                         either voucher on child educational outcomes (school attendance,
youths aged 6-20. n=5,074                                                                               whether child does homework, child's behavior in class, whether child
                                                                                                        attended class for gifted students or class for special help, and
                                                                                                        Woodcock-Johnson Revised reading and math test scores).
Close Neighborhoods Matter:          Authors assume that a child's birthdate will impact his/her     1 SD increase in the proportion of neighboring youth that were held
Neighborhood Effects on Early        own educational outcomes, but not the outcomes of his/her       back in school at age 15 increases the probability of being held back at
Performance at School                neighbors. (Proportion of 15-yr-olds held back a grade is       age 16 by 0.2 SD.
(Goux and Maurin (2005))             15pp higher among those born at the end of the year relative
Data from the French Labor Force     to those born at the beginning of the year). IV regression,
Survey for 1991-2002 on 16-year-     where first stages are: regression of being held back at age 15
old youths. n=13,116.                on timing of birthday and regression of proportion of
                                     neighborhood youths held back at age 15 on their birthdays.
                                     Second stage is regression for being held back at age 16 on
                                     having been held back at age 15 and proportion of
                                     neighborhood youths held back at age 15. Controlled for year
                                     fixed effects, gender, and nationality.
Experimental Analysis of              Same regression as Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005) for          Assignment to an unrestricted voucher leads to a decrease in likelihood
Neighborhood Effects                 health and behavior outcomes.                                   of experiencing anxiety symptoms by 62%/91% among females/males;
(Kling, Liebman, and Katz                                                                            a decrease in marijuana use by 44% among females; an increase in the
(2007)).                                                                                             likelihood of non-sports injury by 130% among males; an increase in
Data from MTO experiment                                                                             incidence of smoking by 121% among males.
surveys for 2002 (see above) on                                                                      Assignment to restricted voucher leads to a decrease in likelihood of
youthsaged 15-20. n=1,807                                                                            experiencing psychological distress by 100% among females; a
                                                                                                     decrease in likelihood of experiencing anxiety by 57% among females;
                                                                                                     a decrease in marijuana use by 50% among females; an increase in
                                                                                                     likelihood of non-sports injury by 140% among males; an increase in
                                                                                                     incidence of smoking by 82% among males.




Note: Unless otherwise noted, only results significant at 5% level are reported here.
Table 9: Randomized Trials of Home Visiting Programs
Study/Program Name          Data, Program Description, and Study Design              Results
The Comprehensive Child     Biweekly visits starting 0-1, ending at 5 years.         Developmental Checklist: T=57.93, C=57.51
Development Program         Population Served: 43% African-American, 26%             Found no significant effects on wide range of outcomes including: Development
(CCDP)                      Hispanic; all below poverty.                             and Behavior scores, medical care, mortality, HOME scores, maternal depression,
(St. Pierre and Layzer      Background of Home Visitors: paraprofessionals           welfare use, maternal income, education or employment, maternal substance use.
(1999))                     Sample Sizes: T=2,213, C=2,197                           Total cost per participant: $37,488 Total benefit per participant: $91. Net present
                            Evaluation Sites: 21 sites throughout the US             value = -$37,397.
                            Age of children at last follow-up: 5 years old
Healthy Start               Weekly visits, fading to quarterly                       Some positive effects on parenting practices and negative effects on domestic
(Duggan, McFarlane,         Age of Participation: Birth to 5 years.                  violence in some sites.
Windham, et al. (1999))     Population Served: Low-income, at-risk families of       E.g. Hawaii partner violence: T=16%, C=24%. Less corporal/verbal punishment
(Duggan et al. (2004))      newborns recruited through an HSP screening and          T<C (odds ratio .59).
(Harding et al. (2007))     assessment protocol. All English-speaking.               Health effects in some sites but not others, e.g. VA: birth complications T=.2,
(DuMont et al. (2006))      Background of Home Visitors: paraprofessionals.          C=.48; New York: low birth weight T=3.3%, C=8.3%; maternal depression T=23%,
                            Sample Sizes: Alaska: T=179, C=185; Hawaii:              C=38%.
                            T=373, C=270, 6 sites;                                   Increases in child Bayley Scale for Infant Development in San Diego, Arkansas.
                            Virginia: T=422, C=197, 2 sites. 19 additional sites     Increases in maternal education and decreases in serious child abuse only in New
                            discussed in Harding et al. (2007). Age of children at   York (T 12.5% less than C).
                            last follow-up: 2 years old (3 in San Diego)             All sites tested for a wide range of possible effects, with generally insignificant
                                                                                     effects on other measures of child well being and child abuse.


The Nurse-Family            Weekly visits, fading to monthly, prenatal to 2 yrs.     Preterm births for women who smoked more than 4 cigarettes per day: T=2.08%,
Partnership Program         Population Served: disadvantaged first-time mothers      C=9.81% (mothers also less likely to smoke during pregnancy, better nutrition
(Olds, Henderson, Cole et   less than 30 weeks pregnant (62% unmarried, 47%          during pregnancy, more likely to use WIC). For children: fewer emergency room
al. (1998))                 teenage, 23% poor, unmarried and teenage).               visits at 0-12, 12-24 months.
                            Background of Home Visitors: Nurses. Sample Sizes:       AT 15-YR FOLLOW-UP
                            C1=90, C2=94, T3=100, T4=116 (see below for              Mother's number of months receiving AFDC: T4=60.4, C=90.3; Mother's substance
                            description of groups)                                   use impairments: T4=0.41, C=0.73;
                            Evaluation Site: Elmira, New York.                       Mother's arrests: T4=0.18, C=0.58; Convictions: T4=0.06, C=0.28; Substantiated
                            C1 = screening; C2 = screening & transportation; T3 =    reports of child abuse and neglect, 0 to 15 yrs: T4=0.29, C=0.54; Child's incidence
                            screening, transportation, & prenatal home visits;       of arrests: T4=0.20, C=0.45; Child's convictions and probation violations: T4=0.09,
                            T4 = screening, transportation, prenatal and postnatal   C=0.47;
                            home visits.                                             Child's number of sex partners: T4=0.92, C=2.48; Child's number of days drank
                            Prenatal analysis: T=T3+T4, C=C1+C2; Postnatal           alcohol: T4=1.09, C=2.49.
                            analysis: T=T4, C=C1+C2                                  COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS:
                            Age of children at last follow-up: 15 years old.         Total Cost per child: $10,300 ; Total Benefit per child: $30,000. Net Present
                                                                                     Value = +$19,700.
                                                                                     Most benefits due to reduced crime on part of the child and reductions in child
                                                                                     abuse on part of parent
The Nurse-Family           Weekly visits, fading to monthly, prenatal to 2 yrs.     During first 2 years of child's life:
Partnership Program        Population Served: first-time mothers less than 29       Number of health encounters for injuries/ingestions: T=0.43, C=0.56
(Olds, Kitzman, Hanks et   weeks pregnant and at least 2 of the following:          Number of outpatient visits for injuries/ingestions: T=0.11, C=0.20
al. (2007))                unmarried, less than 12 yrs of education, or             Number of days hospitalized for injuries/ingestions: T=0.04, C=0.18
                           unemployed 92% African-American, 98% unmarried,          Mother attempted breast-feeding: T=26%, C=16%
                           64% 18 yrs of age or younger, 85% at or below            Subsequent live births: T=22%, C=31%
                           poverty level.                                           AT 9-YR FOLLOW-UP
                           Background of Home Visitors: nurses. Sample Sizes:       Child GPA (low-resource only): T=2.68, C=2.44
                           C1=166, C2=515, T3=230, T4=228 (see below for            Reading and Math Achievement (low-resource only): T=44.89, C=35.72
                           description of groups).                                  Mother's # months with current partner: T=51.89, C=44.48
                           Evaluation Sites: Memphis, Tennessee.                    Number of months on AFDC/TANF per year: T=5.21, C=5.92
                           C1 = transportation; C2 = screening & transportation;    Number of months on food stamps per year: T=6.98, C=7.80
                           T3 = screening, transportation, prenatal home visits,    Maternal mastery: T=101.03, C=99.50
                           one visit postpartum in hospital, one postpartum visit   No. of months with employed partner: T=46.04, C=48.43
                           at home; T4 = T3 plus home visits through child's 2nd    No significant effects on ER visits for injuries in first 2 years, health at birth, use
                           birthday.                                                medical care, maternal health.
                           Prenatal analysis: T=T3+T4, C=C1+C2; Postnatal
                           analysis: T=T4, C=C2. Age of children at last follow-
                           up: 9 years old
Early Start                Weekly visits for 1st month, then varying                Average number of doctor's visits 0-36 mo: T>C by 0.24 SD.
(Fegusson et al. (2005))   Age of Participation: prenatal to 3 years.               Percentage of up-to-date well-child checks 0-36 mo: T>C by 0.25 SD.
                           Population Served: families recruited through the        Percentage enrolled w/ dentist 0-36 mo: T>C by 0.20 SD.
                           same screening process as in Hawaii Healthy Start.       Percentage attended hospital for accident/injury or accidental poisoning 0-36 mo:
                           Background of Home Visitors: "family support             T<C by 0.22 SD.
                           workers" with nursing or social work qualifications.     Mean duration of early childhood education: T>C by 0.22 SD.
                           Sample Sizes: T=220, C=223. 1 site in New Zealand.       Mean number of community service contacts: T>C by 0.31 SD.
                           Age of children at last follow-up: 3 years old.          Positive parenting attitudes score: T>C by 0.26 SD.
                                                                                    Nonpunitive parenting attitudes score: T>C by 0.22 SD.
                                                                                    Overall parenting score: T>C by 0.27 SD.
                                                                                    Percentage of parental report of severe physical assault: T<C by 0.26 SD.
                                                                                    Child internalizing (negative) behavior score*: T<C by 0.26 SD.
                                                                                    Child total negative behavior score*: T<C by 0.24 SD.
Effectiveness of Home       Weekly visits for first 6 months, then biweekly          Recurrence of physical abuse or neglect based on hospital records: T=24%, C=11%
Visitation by Public        Age of Participation:                                    Also tested, but found no statistically significant effects on: Recurrence of abuse or
Health Nurses in            Entry: 0-13 yrs old, program lasted 3 years.             neglect based on CPA records; HOME score; child's behavioral, anxiety, attention
Prevention of the           Population Served: parents who have a reported           problems, aggression or conduct disorder scores; parenting behavior scores or CAP
Recurrence of Child         episode of physical abuse or neglect in the 3 months     score
Physical Abuse and          prior to joining program.
Neglect: A Randomized       Background of Home Visitors: public health nurses.
Controlled Trial            Sample Sizes: T=73, C=66. 1 site in Hamilton,
(MacMillan et al. (2005))   Canada.
                            Note: Control group received standard services from
                            the child protection agency CPA). Treatment group
                            also received the standard services in addition to the
                            home visiting. Age of children at last follow-up:
                            Varied (3-year follow-up).


Economic Evaluation of      Weekly visits                                            Maternal sensitivity (CARE Index): T>C by 13%
an Intensive Home           Age of Participation: prenatal to 18 months old.         Infant cooperativeness (CARE Index): T>C by 18%
Visiting Programme for      Population Served: Pregnant women identified by          Likelihood infant placed on child protection register: T>C (1.35 times more likely)
Vulnerable Families: A      community midwives as being at risk for child abuse      Proportion of children removed from home: T=6%, C=0%
Cost- Effectiveness         or neglect.
Analysis of a Public        Background of Home Visitors: paraprofessionals who
Health Intervention         received program training . Sample Sizes: T=67,
(McIntosh et al (2009))     C=64.
                            1 site in the UK. Age of Children at Last Follow-up: 1
                            year old


Notes: Some cost-benefit analysis from Aos et al. (2004), Technical Appendix.
T' refers to treatment group, 'C' refers to control group. 'T=C' means no discernable difference between groups at 5% significance level.
Table 10: Selected Studies of Special Supplemental Feeding Progr
Study                                       Study Design                                             Results
IMPACT ON BIRTH OUTCOMES
Bitler and Currie (2005). Data from         Compared WIC participants and non-participants in the    WIC mothers are negatively selected into the program relative to all
Pregnancy Risk Assessment                   sample of women whose deliveries were paid by            Medicaid recipients. WIC participants are 1.4-1.5 times more likely to
Monitoring System (PRAMS),                  Medicaid. Addressed selection bias by comparing a        have had prenatal care in 1st trimester; 0.7 times as likely to give birth to
(n=60,731).                                 broad range of observable characteristics between        low birth weight infant; 0.9 times as likely to give birth to infants who are
                                            eligible WIC participants and non-participants.          below the 25th percentile of birth weight given gestational age; 0.9 times
                                                                                                     as likely to have their infant admitted to the Intensive Care Unit. WIC
                                                                                                     associated with increases in maternal weight gain, gestation, and birth
                                                                                                     weight. Larger impact for more disadvantaged women (such as those who
                                                                                                     received public assistance, high school drop-outs, teen mothers, single
                                                                                                     mothers).
Figlio et al. (2009). Matched data on    Instrumental variables comparing marginally eligible        WIC participation reduces the likelihood of low birth weight by 12.9pp
births in Florida during 1997-2001       and ineligible WIC women. Marginally ineligible for         (imprecise estimate). No statistically significant effect of WIC on
with school records of older siblings of WIC=families not participting in NLSP during                gestational age or likelihood of prematurity.
the infants to identify whether the olderpregnancy, but participating during either the year
child receives free lunch or reduced-    before or after. Marginally eligible=families that
price lunch though the NSLP (those on    received NSLP during the pregnancy, but did not
NSLP are WIC eligible). Marginally       receive the lunches at least one adjacent year. A federal
Eligible: n=2,530; Marginally            policy change that increased income reporting
Ineligible: n=1,744                      requirements for WIC eligibility in September 1999,
                                         made it more difficult for eligibles to obtain WIC. The
                                         instrument for WIC participation is an interaction
                                         between an indicator for the policy change and
                                         eligibility.
Gueorguieva, Morse, and Roth (2009). Adjusted for selection using propensity scores.                 A 10% increase in percent of time during pregnancy in WIC associated
Data on mother-infant pairs from birth "Treatment" is percent days on WIC during pregnancy.          with a 2.5% decrease in probability of a full-term and SGA infant; 2.0%
files on all singleton births in Florida Main outcome is SGA ("small for gestational age").          decrease in probability of a late preterm and SGA infant; 3.7% decrease in
hospitals between 1996 and 2004.         Separate analyses for full-term, late preterm, very         probability of a very preterm and SGA infant.
Merged with Medicaid eligibility and preterm, and extremely preterm births.
WIC participation data from the
Florida Department of Health.
(n=369,535)
Joyce, Gibson, and Colman (2004).          Multivariate regression with dummies for WIC               Among US-born blacks, WIC participants are 2.4pp less likely to
Data from birth certificate files in New   participation, interacted with year of birth. To address   experience a low birth weight birth than non-WIC participants in 1988-
York City between 1988 and 2001 on         selection bias, limited analysis to women with first       1991. No statistically significant effects of WIC participation for foreign-
women who were on Medicaid and/or          births who initiated prenatal care in first 4 months of    born Hispanic women. In twin analysis, for US-born blacks, WIC
WIC during pregnancy. (n=35,415 in         pregnancy. Estimated separate models by race,              participation is associated with a 55 g increase in birthweight adjusted for
1988-1990; n=50,659 in 1994-1996;          ethnicity, nativity, and parity. Estimated same model      gestation, and a 3.9pp decrease in SGA rates. Effects biggest for US-born
n=52,608 in 1999-2001)                     comparing twin births.                                     black women under age 25. (Note, means for subgroups not reported, so
                                                                                                      effect sizes can't be calculated).

Joyce, Yunzal-Butler and Racine            Multivariate regression with dummies for WIC in each       Conditional on gestational age, mean birth weight is 40g greater among
(2008). Pregancy Nutrition Surveilance     trimester. To deal with selection bias, estimated          prenatal enrollees than post-partum enrollees. Rates of SGA are 1.7pp
System (PNSS) data (n=2,870,031).          separate models by race/ethnicity. Also analyzed           (14%) less, and rates of term low birth weight are 0.7pp (30%) less.
Included all women who were enrolled       subgroups whose pre-pregnancy characteristics put          Difference between 1st and 3rd trimester enrollees in mean birth weight is
in WIC during pregnancy and re-            women at high risk for anemia, low weight gain, and        13.5g.
enrolled postpartum. Comparison            intrauterine growth retardation. Finally, analyzed
group is women who enrolled in WIC         subgroup of first-births.
after delivery but were not exposed to
WIC during pregnancy.

Kowaleski-Jones and Duncan (2002).         Sibling fixed effects.                                     Increase of 7 ounces in mean birthweight. Positive effect on temperament
NLSY Mother-Child data. 2,000                                                                         score. No effect on social or motor skills test scores.
children 1990-96. 104 sibling pairs, 71
pairs in which one child participated
and one didn’t.
Hoynes, Page, and Stevens (2009).          Difference-in-difference, using variation in the timing    If WIC is available in a county by the third trimester, average birth weight
Data on county-level WIC availability      of WIC implementation across different counties in         increases by 0.1% (estimate not scaled by participation rate). Among
in 1971-1975 and 1978-1982 from lists      1972-1979, to estimate impact of WIC availability on       women with low levels of education, WIC increases average birth weight
of local agencies that provided WIC        birth weight. Controlled for three measures of per         by 10% (esimate scaled by participation rate) and reduces the fraction of
services. Data on birth weight from        capita government transfers, an indicator for Food         births classified as low birth weight by 11% (estimate scaled by
vital statistics records. Data on          Stamp program availability, other demographics, and        participation rate). No effects of WIC on fertility - so results not driven by
population of women by county-year         county and year fixed effects, and state-year fixed        selection into birth.
from the CANCER-SEER population            effects. Scaled estimates by WIC participation rates.
data. Data on various control variables    Also conducted sub-group analysis in county-year-
from 1970 IPUMS. (n=18,517 county-         maternal education level cells.
year cells)

IMPACT ON BREAST FEEDING AND INFANT FEEDING PRACTICES
Chatterji et al. (2002). NLSY Mother- IV with WIC state program characteristics as                    OLS and IV indicate WIC reduces breastfeeding initiation, but no effect
Child file. 1,282 children born 1991- instruments. Sibling fixed effects.                             on duration. Fixed effect suggests reductions in length breastfeeding.
95. 970 siblings born 1989-95.
IMPACT ON NUTRITION AND HEALTH OUTCOMES OF CHILDREN
Black et al. (2004). Data from surveys Compared WIC-eligible families who participated in           Compared to infants who received WIC assistance, those who did not
administered by The Children's          WIC with those who did not due to self-reported access      receive WIC assistance were more likely to be underweight (weight-for-
Sentinel Nutritional Assessment         problems. Multivariate regression including a               age z-score = -0.23 vs. 0.009), short (length-for-age z-score = -0.23 vs. -
Program in a multi-site study at urban participation dummy, controlling for relevant                0.02), and perceived as having fair or poor health (adjusted odds ratio =
medical centers in 5 states and         background characteristics.                                 1.92). No statistically significant differences in rates of food insecurity.
Washington, DC in 1998-2001.
(n=5,923: 5,395 received WIC
assistance, 528 did not).
Lee and Mackey- Bilaver                 Multivariate regression with sibling fixed-effects, using   Effect of WIC:
(2007). Data from IL Integrated         participation dummies for FSP, WIC, and FSP-WIC             Abuse or neglect rates decrease by 84% (mean=.10).
Database on Children's Services.        jointly. (Note, sibling FE only make sense for WIC,         Incidence of anemia decrease by 41% (mean =.195).
Includes info on Medicaid, FSP, WIC effects of FSP estimated using OLS. Also, most                  Failure to thrive decrease by 78% (mean=.128).
enrollment.                             families on WIC also receive FSP).                          Nutritional deficiency decrease by 115% (mean=.038).
All IL children born between 1990 and
1996 who entered Medicaid within first
month.
Tracked to 2001.
Total sample=252,246.
sibling fe sample=36,277.
Note: Unless otherwise noted, only results significant at 5% level are reported here.
       Percent changes (denoted by % instead of "pp") are reported relative to the mean.
Table 11: Selected Recent Evaluations of Early Childhood Programs with Randomized Designs

Study/Program Namea             Data, Program Description, and Study Design          Results
hb                              Preschoolers: full-day child care                    Follow-up at 21 years of age:
                                School age: parent program                           Grade retention: T = 34%, C = 65%, age 21
                                Sample sizes:                                        Special education: T = 31%, C = 49%, age 21
                                Initial: T=57, C=54                                  High school dropout: T = 33%, C = 49%, age 21
                                Age 8: T=48, C=42                                    College attendance: T = 36%, C = 13%, age 21
                                Age 15: T=48, C=44                                   Crime rate: T=C, age 21
                                Age 21: T=53, C=51                                   Employment status: T=C at age 21
                                Age of participation in program:                     Average age first child born: T>C at age 21
                                Entry: 6 weeks to 3 months old                       Cost/Benefit Analysis: (using 5% discount rate, $2002)
                                Exit: 5 to 8 years                                   Net cost per child = $34,599
                                                                                     Net Benefit of program = $72,591 per participant

Infant Health and               Home visits, full-day child care                     Math achievement: T>C by 6.8%, age 18 HLBW
Development Project Follow-     Sample sizes:                                        Reading achievement: T>C by 5.6%, age 18 HLBW
up at 18 years of age.          Initial: T=377, C=608                                Risky behaviors: T>C by 23.3%, age 18 HLBW
(McCormick et al (2006)).       Followup at age 8: T=336, C=538                      IQ: T=C, age 18 HLBW
                                Followup at age 18: T=254, C=381 (divided in 2       *Note: For all outcomes: T=C, age 18 LLBW
                                groups: lighter low birth weight (LLBW) and
                                heavier low birth weight (HLBW))
                                Entry: birth (home visits), 1 year (care). Exit: 3
                                years.



A Reevaluation of Early         Abecedarian: T=57, C=54                              Outcomes include: IQ, grade repetition, special ed., high school, college
Childhood Intervention --       Perry: T=58, C=65                                    attendance, employment, earnings, receipt transfers, arrests, convictions, durg
Abecedarian, Perry Preschool    ETP: T=44, C=21                                      use, tenn pregnancy, marriage. Summary index pools multiple outcomes for a
and Early Training Project --   Ages of entry:                                       single test. Separate tests by gender.
With Emphasis on Gender         Abecedarian/Perry/ETP: 4.4 mo./3 yrs./3-4 yrs.       Effects on summary index for girls 5-12:
Differences and Multiple                                                             ABC/Perry: increase by 0.45/0.54 SDs
Inference. (Anderson 2008).                                                          Effects on summary index for girls 13-19:
                                                                                     ABC/Perry/ETP: increase by 0.42/.061/0.46 SDs
                                                                                     Effects on summary index for women over 21-40:
                                                                                     ABC/Perry: increase by 0.45/0.36 SDs.
                                                                                     No statistically significant effects on males of any age
High/Scope Perry Preschool        Home visits, preschool program                         Arrests: T=32%, C=48%; In jail: T=6%, C=17%.
Project Follow-up and cost-       Sample sizes:                                          Report of stopping work for health reasons: T=43%, C=55%
benefit analysis at 40 years of   Initial: T=58, C=65                                    Hard drug use: T=22%, C=29%; Abortions: T=17%, C=32%.
age                               Age 40: T=56, C=63                                     Cost-Benefit Analysis:
(Barnett et al (2006))            Age of participation in program:                       Main result: Benefit of $12.90 for each $1 cost
                                  Entry: 3 to 4 years, Exit: 5 years.                    Most benefits due to reduced crime rates for males.
                                                                                         Cost: $15,827 ($2000) per student.
                                                                                         Total Net Private Benefit = $17,730 per participant.
                                                                                         Total Net Public Benefit = $180,455 per participant.


National Evaluation of Early      17 Early Head Start sites selected to reflect EHS      Mental Development Index (MDI): T>C by 0.12 SD
Head Start (Administration on     programs funded in 1995-96. Random assignment          PPVT-III Vocabulary score: T>C by 0.13 SD
Children, Youth and Families      within site (possible given wait lists). Sample:       Percentage with PPVT score <85 pts: T<C by 0.12 SD
(2002) & Love et al. (2005))      T=1513, C=1488. Age of participation in program:       Aggressive behavior: T<C by 0.11 SD
Cost-Benefit                      Entry at 0-1 year, exit 3 years.                       Supportiveness during parent-child play: T>C by 0.15 SD
(Aos et al. (2004)).                                                                     HOME score: T>C by 0.11 SD
                                                                                         Index of severity of discipline: T<C by 0.11 SD
                                                                                         No statistically significant effects on parental mental or physical health or on
                                                                                         measures of family functioning.
                                                                                         Cost-Benefit Analysis:
                                                                                         Total Cost per child: $20,972
                                                                                         Total Benefit per child: $4,768           NPV: -$16,203



Head Start Impact Study           Congressionally-mandated study of Head Start.          Summary of Effects for 4-year-old entry cohort at end of 1st grade:
(U.S. Department of Health        Children from wait lists randomly assigned to one      PPVT: T>C by 0.09 SD; Withdrawn behavior: T<C by 0.13 SD; Shy/socially
and Human Services (2010))        of 383 randomly selected Head Start centers across     reticent: T>C by 0.19 SD; Problems with teacher interaction: T>C by 0.13 SD.
                                  23 different states. Baseline data collected in fall   No statistically significant impacts at age 4, kindergarten, or 1st grade on: math
                                  2002; annual spring follow-ups through spring          scores, Spanish language tests, oral comprehension, and several parent- and
                                  2006. Sample Sizes: T=2783, C=1884.                    teacher-reported measures of emotional and behavioral outcomes. No
                                  Entry: 3-4 years old; Exit: 4-5 years old.             statistically significant impacts at kindergarten or 1st grade on: school
                                                                                         accomplishments, promotion, language and literacy ability, math ability, and
                                                                                         social studies and science ability.
                                                                                         Summary of Effects for 3-year-old entry cohort as of 1st grade (selected
                                                                                         results): Oral comprehension: T>C by 0.08 SD. No significant effect on other
                                                                                         outcomes.
The Rates of Return to the      See Barnett et al. (2006) entry for sample sizes and Estimated social rates of return to the Perry Preschool Program are 7-10%.
High/Scope Perry Preschool      information about the Perry Preschool Program.       Estimated benefit-cost ratio = 2.2 to 31.5 (depends on discount rate used, and
Program                         Randomization was compromised because of             the measure of cost of murder).
(Heckman et al. (2009))         reassignment after initial randomization. Standard
                                errors on the rate of return estimates adjusted for
                                failure of randomization using bootstrapping and
                                Monte Carlo methods. Also, adjusted for the
                                deadweight loss due to taxation (assuming 0%,
                                50%, and 100% deadweight losses). Used a wide
                                variety of methods for within-sample imputation of
                                missing earnings. Used local data on costs of
                                education, welfare participation, and crime instead
                                of national data, wherever possible. Used several
                                methods to extrapolate benefits and costs beyond
                                age 40 (after last follow-up). Used several
                                measures of the statistical cost of life to estimate
                                costs of murder.




Notes:
a
Programs are grouped such that those enrolling children younger than three years old appear first, followed by those enrolling children after age three.
Throughout the table, 'T' refers to treatment group and 'C' refers to control or comparison group.
Outcomes listed as T>C or C>T were statistically significant at the 5% level.
Table 12: Selected Studies of Large-Scale Public Early Childhood Programs
Study/Program Name and Data                  Study Design                                       Results
EVALUATIONS OF HEAD START
Does Head Start Make a Difference? Does      Estimate sibling fixed effects models of effects   Achievement tests: T>C (1/3 SD whites and Hispanics only)
Head Start Help Hispanic Children            of Head Start and other preschool attendance       Grade retention: T<C (~50% whites and Hispanics only)
(Currie & Thomas (1995, 1999)).              on various outcomes. Examine differences           Immunization rates: T>C (8-11%)
NLSCM. Sample size: T=896, C=911             between siblings that might potentially explain    Child height-for-age: T=C
Hispanic study: T=182, C=568                 differential attendance by siblings.
Entry: 3 to 5 years; Exit: 5 to 6 years.


Long Term Effects of Head Start (Garces et   Compared Head Start participants to their own      High school graduation: T>C (~25% for whites only)
al (2002)).                                  siblings who did not participant. Outcomes         Arrests T<C (~50% for African-Americans only)
PSID, Sample size: T=583, C=3502             measured between ages 18 and 31.                   College T>C (~25% for Whites)
Entry: 3 to 4 years; Exit 5 to 6 years.      Retrospective reports on Head Start                Teen pregnancy T=C
                                             participation.                                     Welfare T=C

Effect of Head Start on health and          Regression discontinuity around cutoff at           Effects of Participation in Head Start:
schooling                                   which counties were eligible for assistance in      Mortality, age 5-9: T<C by 35-79%
(Ludwig and Miller (2005))                  applying for Head Start in 1965. T = 300            High school completion rates: T>C by 5.2-8.5%
                                            poorest counties in 1965 C = 301-600th poorest      Some college+: 16.2-22.4% for oldest cohort only
Vital Statistics Compressed Mortality Files counties 80% of treatment counties received
1973-83; Individual data from NELS,         funding vs. 43% of all counties nationwide.
where
T = 649, C = 674.
Head Start Participation and Childhood      Estimated the effect of Head Start on likelihood    Head Start reduces probability of obesity at ages 5-10 among blacks. No
Obesity (Frisvold (2006)).                  of a child being overweight or obese. Assume        effect in full sample of children or in chidlren over 10. Estimates are
PSID Child Development Supplement.          that # of spaces available in a community is a      large relative to sample means implying ~100% reductions in
Sample size=1332.                           valid instrument for Head Start participation..     overweight/obesity.
Evidence from Head Start On Lifecycle        Sibling fixed effects estimates of benefits of    Test scores: T>C by 0.145 SD ages 5-6, by 0.133 SD ages 7-10, by 0.055
Skill Development (Deming (2009)).           Head Start.                                       SD ages 11-14. Noncognitive school-age outcomes index: T>C by 0.265
Data from NLSY Children for cohort                                                             SD. Long-term effect on index* of young adult outcomes: T>C by 0.228
enrolled in Head Start between 1984 and                                                        SD. Large fade-out in test scores of African Americans, none for whites
1990. Children in study at least 5 years old                                                   or Hispanics. No effects on criminal activity. Summary: Head Start
in 1990. Sample size: 3415 total.                                                              increases index of long term outcomes by 0.23 SD (~1/3 of gap attendees
                                                                                               and others). Projecting wages implies that benefits (~$1,500 in greater
                                                                                               earnings per year), exceed program costs of ~$6,000.
                                                                                               * index includes: graduate high school, complete 1 yr college idle (no
                                                                                               job, not in school), poor health.



Preventing Behavior Problems in               Head Start eligibility rules create               USING REDUCED FORM ESTIMATION
Childhood and Adolescence: Evidence           discontinuities in income eligibility. Compare   Head Start participation impacts on 12-13 year-old males:
from Head Start (Carneiro and Ginja           families above and below the cutoff.             behavioral problems index decreases by 38%
(2008)).                                      Identification strategy requires that families   probability of grade retention decreases by 33.3%
NLSY Children data. Sample size = 1786        are not able to strategically locate above or    probability of obesity decreases by ~100% for blacks only
males. Behavior problems, grade rep. and      below cutoff.                                    Head Start participation impacts on 16-17 year-old males:
obesity at 12-13. Depression, crime, and                                                       Depression (CESD) decreases by 23.4%
obesity at 16-17.                                                                              probability of obesity decreases by 57.9%
Oldest in data -- born in 1974; youngest in                                                    probability of being sentenced decreases by >100% for blacks only
data -- born in 1992.                                                                          USING STRUCTURAL EQUATIONS
                                                                                               Head Start participation impacts on 12-13 year-old males:
                                                                                               probability of grade retention decreases by >100%
                                                                                               Head Start participation impacts on 16-17 year-old males:
                                                                                               probability of being sentenced decreases by >100%
                                                                                               probability of obesity decreases by >100%
                                                                                               probability of being sentenced decreases by >100% for blacks only
                                                                                               probability of obesity decreases by >100% for blacks only
                                                                                               Note: baseline means are for sample of children with incomes between
                                                                                               5% and 195% of Head Start eligibility cut-off.
Investing in Health: The Long-Term         Compared smoking of siblings who did and did      Results from 1999 data:
Impact of Head Start on Smoking            not attend Head Start or any preschool using      Head Start participants are 58% less likely to smoke than siblings
(Anderson, Foster, and Frisvold (2009)).   sibling fixed effects. Controlled for family      Results from 2003 data:
Data from the PSID. Used smoking data      background characteristics specific to the age    Head Start participants are 65% less likely to smoke than siblings.
from 1999 and 2003 on individuals aged     children were eligible for Head Start.            Including control for educational attainment makes results statistically
21-36 in 1999.                             Examined sibling differences that might be        insignificant.
n = 922 in 1999; n = 1005 in 2003.         predictive of Head Start attendance. Examined     Cost-Benefit: PV reduction in smoking is $9,967 per participant (using
                                           spillover effects by including interactions       3% discount rate, accounting for medical expenses and productivity
                                           between Head Start and birth order.               losses) Average cost per Head Start participant in 2003 is $7,092.
                                                                                             Depending on discount rate used, the value of reduction in smoking is
                                                                                             associated with 36-141% of program costs.


Expanding Exposure: Can Increasing the      Estimated the effect of full-day vs. half-day    First Stage Results: 10pp increase in percentage of full-day slots
Daily Exposure to Head Start Reduce        Head Start on obesity at end of school year.      increases likelihood of full-day attendance by 85% (relative to
Childhood Obesity?                         Identification via elimination of a grant which   baseline=11% enrollment in full-day slots in 2003).
(Frisvold and Lumeng (2009))               led to a decrease in the # of full- day classes   Second Stage Results: Full-day enrollment in Head Start decreases
                                           from 16 classrooms in 2002 to 4 classrooms in     likelihood of obesity by 143%. This implies that children who attended
Administrative data from a Michigan        2003. (IV=% full-day funded slots). Controls      full-day classes would have been almost 3 lbs heavier had they attended
Head Start for 2002-2006.                  for observable family characteristics.            half-day classes. Simulation results suggest that the 143% change in the
n = 1833 obs. (from 1532 children, since                                                     likelihood of obesity can be explained by a change in caloric intake of 75
some attend for multiple years)                                                              calories per day with no change in physical activity.
Full-day class sample=424 obs.
Half-day class sample=1409 obs.
STUDIES OF PUBLIC PRE-K/K AND CHILD CARE PROGRAMS
Impact of Early Childhood Care and         Identification from changes in Quebec's child     Subsidies increase the number of hours in child care by 5.5-7.4 hours per
Education on Children's Preschool          care subsidies. On Sep. 1, 1997, child care       week for children aged 4-5. Effect larger for mothers in highest
Cognitive Development: Canadian Results facilities offered $5-per-full-day services to       educational group. No effects on 4-year-old children's PPVT scores.
from a Large Quasi-Experiment              children who were 4 yrs old by Sep. 30th. In      Decrease in PPVT scores of 0.33 SD for 5-year-old children.
(Lefebvre, Merrigan, and Verstraete        the following years, age cutoffs decreased and
(2006))                                    the number of spaces increased. No similar
                                           policies in other provinces of Canada in 1994-
Data from Canada's NLSCY on 4- and 5- 2003. Difference-in-difference (DD) and
yr old children from 5 consecutive cycles. Difference-in-difference-in-difference (DDD)
n = 15,546                                 designs, comparing Quebec's preschool
                                           children with children of similar ages from
                                           other provinces using the fact that different
                                           cohorts of children were exposed to different
                                           numbers of treatment years.


Promoting School Readiness in              Regression discontinuity design arising from      Cognitive/knowledge score: T>C by 0.39 SD
Oklahoma: An Evaluation of Tulsa's Pre-K   cutoff of Sept. 1 to enroll in Pre-K in a given   Motor skills score: T>C by 0.24 SD
Program (Gormley, Jr. and Gayer (2006a).   year. Compare kindergarden children who just      Language score: T>C by 0.38 SD
Data from Tulsa Public Schools (TPS) on    completed Pre-K with slightly younger children    Largest impacts for Hispanics, followed by blacks, little impact for
test scores of Pre-K and Kindergarten      who were ineligible to attend. Used quadratic     whites. Children who qualify for free school lunch have larger impacts
children from test administered in Aug.    polynomial to fit underlying age/test score       than other children.
2001.                                      relationship.
T=1112, C=1284 (T = children who just
completed Pre-K, C = children who are
about to begin Pre-K).
Entry: 4 years old; Exit: 5 years old.
Does Prekindergarten Improve School        Primary method is a multivariate regression to      Pre-K attendance: increases reading scores at school entry by 0.86 SD
Preparation and Performance?               estimate the impact of Pre-K attendance on          (IV); increases aggression at school entry by 0.69 SD (IV). No effect on
(Magnuson, Ruhm, and Waldfogel (2007))     various outcomes. Robustness checks using           math scores or self control in IV. Effect sizes for all outcomes are larger
Data from ECLS-K. n = 10,224.              teacher fixed effects, propensity score             for Pre-K than for other forms of child care, but Pre-K children have
                                           matching, and instrumental variables (IV). IV       different characteristics than other children. Among children attending
                                           is different measures of access to pre-K in a       Pre-K in the same public school as their kindergarten, higher reading
                                           given state. Dependent variables are measured       scores are not accompanied by increased behavioral problems. For
                                           in the fall of kindergarten and in the spring of    disadvantaged children, cognitive gains are more lasting than in the
                                           first grade to assess any lasting impacts of Pre-   whole sample. Effect sizes for cognitive outcomes much lower in spring
                                           K.                                                  of 1st grade than at school entry. Effect sizes for behavioral outcomes are
                                                                                               the same.


The Effects of Oklahoma's Pre-K Program See Gormley, Jr. and Gayer (2006) entry.               Letter-Word Identification Test score: T>C by 0.846 SD
on Hispanic Children (Gormley (2008)).                                                         Spelling score: T>C by 0.52 SD
Tests administered by Tulsa public schools                                                     Applied Problems score: T>C by 0.38 SD
in Aug. 2006. T = 194, C=295.                                                                   Significant effects only for Hispanic students whose primary language
(T= children who just completed Pre-K,                                                         at home is Spanish.
C=children who are about to begin Pre-K)
Entry: 4 years old; Exit: 5 years old.




Universal Child Care, Maternal Labor       Compare outcomes in Quebec, which began $5          Increase in use of any child care/institutional care/mothers working by
Supply, and Family Well-Being (Baker,      per day daycare for 4 year olds in 1997,            35%/>100%/14.5%.
Gruber, Milligan (2008)). Canadian         extended program to 3 year olds in 1998, 2          Crowding out of other informal child care.
NLSCY (1994-2003) includes only            year olds in 1999, and all children <2 in 2000,     Increase in emotional disorder anxiety score (physical aggression and
married women and their children.          to rest of Canada. Difference in differences.       opposition) by 12% (9%) for 2-3 yr olds.
Average of 2000 children at each age per                                                       Decrease in standardized motor and social development score by 1.7%.
yr. Primary sample ages 0-4, robustness                                                        Increase in mother depression score by 10%.
checks ages 8-11.                                                                              40% of the cost of the child care subsidy are offset by increased taxes on
                                                                                               extra labor supply.
Impacts of New Mexico Pre-K on               Regression discontinuity design due to a          Vocabulary (PPVT) score: T>C by 0.25 SD
Children's School Readiness at               birthday eligibility cut-off of Aug. 31st to      Math score: T>C by 0.50 SD
Kindergarten Entry: Results from the         enroll in Pre-K in a given year. Compared         Early literacy score: T>C by 0.59 SD
Second Year of a Growing Initiative          "young" kindergarten children who just            No statistically significant difference in effects between Pre-K programs
(Hustedt et al (2008)). Data on children     completed Pre-K with slightly younger children    funded by the Public Education Department and those funded by the
who participated in the 2nd year of the Pre- who are about to being Pre-K. Used linear         Children, Youth and Families Department.
K program during 2006-2007 and entered model for vocabulary score as dependent
kindergarten in Fall 2007. T = 405, C =      variable, quadratic model for early literacy
519 (T= children who just completed Pre- score as dependent variable, cubic model for
K, C = children who are about to begin Pre- math score as dependent variable.
K). Entry: 4 years old; Exit: 5 years old.



An Effectiveness-Based Evaluation of Five    Regression discontinuity design due to a strict Intent-to-Treat Results:
State Pre-Kindergarten Programs (Wong        birthday eligibility cut-off. Looked at effect size MI: T>C by 0.53 SD for math; 1.09 SD for Print Awareness. NJ: T>C
et al (2008)).                               differences due to programmatic variation           by 0.36 SD for PPVT, 0.23 SD for math, 0.32 SD for Print Awareness.
Data on test scores from fall 2004 from      between states. Used a polynomial                   OK: T>C by 0.28 SD for PPVT, 0.78 SD for Print Awareness. WV: T>C
Michigan, New Jersey, Oklahoma, South        approximation to the continuous function on by 0.92 SD for Print Awareness.
Caroline and West Virginia.                  the assignment variable in the regressions.         Treatment-on-Treated Results:
Sample sizes: T=485, C=386 (MI);                                                                 MI: T>C by 0.47 SD for math, 0.96 SD for Print Awareness. NJ: T>C by
T=1177, C=895 (NJ); T=431, C=407                                                                 0.36 SD for PPVT, 0.23 SD for math, 0.50 SD for Print Awareness.
(OK); T=353, C=424 (SC); T=379, C=341                                                            OK: T>C by 0.29 SD for PPVT. SC: T>C by 0.79 SD for Print
(WV).                                                                                            Awareness.
(T=children who just completed Pre-K,                                                            No statistically significant results for WV. No clear relationship between
C=children who are about to begin Pre-K) .                                                       state funding for Pre-K programs and effect sizes. State Pre-K programs
Entry: 4 years old; Exit: 5 years old.                                                           have larger effect sizes than Head Start.
Do Investments in Universal Early         Analyzed effect of expansion of public             White children aged 5 after the typical state reform are 2.5% less likely
Education Pay Off? Long-term Effects of   kindergarten on long-term outcomes.                to be high school drop-outs and 22% less likely to be institutionalized as
Introducing Kindergartens into Public     Identification from the variation in the timing adults. No significant effects on grade retention, college attendance,
Schools                                   of funding initiatives among treated states.       employment, or earnings. No significant effects for blacks, despite
(Cascio (2009)). Data from 4 Decennial    Event study model, comparing individuals aged comparable increases in enrollment in public kindergartens post reform.
censuses for 1970, 1980, and 2000 from    5 before and after the initiatives were            Potential explanation is that state funding for public kindergartens
the Public Use Microdata Samples.         implemented. Included dummies for cohorts          reduced the likelihood that a black 5-year-old attended Head Start by
n=840 whites, 425 blacks. Data from       interacted with dummies for 3 different groups ~100%. Reduction in Head Start attendance may account for 16% of the
PSID on Head Start enrollment: n=174      of treated states defined on the basis of average 1.13 pp increase in the black-white gap in high school drop-out rates.
whites, 126 blacks.                       education expenditure per pupil in the early       Difference in effects on educational attainment between whites and
                                          1960s. Also controlled for cohort-by- region-of- blacks are driven by females.
                                          birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Units
                                          of observation are cohort-state cells.
No Child Left Behind: Universal Child        Difference-in-differences. Exploited a child        TT Effects (ITT effects in parentheses)
Care and Children's Long-Run Outcomes        care reform in 1975 in Norway, which assigned       One more child care place: increases educational attainment by 2.7%
(Havnes and Mogstad (2009)).                 responsibility for child care to local              (0.4%)
Data from Statistics Norway on individuals   governments, and thus resulted in great             decreases probability of dropping out of HS by 22.8% (3.8%)
from 1967 to 2006. Household information     variation in child care coverage for children       increases probability of college enrollment by 17% (2.5%)
from the Central Population Register.        aged 3-6 both between cohorts and across            decreases probability of having little or no earnings by 23.3% (3.9%)
Administrative data on child care            municipalities. T = municipalities where child      increases probability of having average earnings by 7.4% (1.3%)
institutions and their locations for 1972-   care expanded a lot; C = municipalities where       decreases probability of being on welfare by 31.9% (5.6%)
1996. Restricted sample to individuals       child care did not change much. Compared            decreases probability of parenthood by 10.4% (1.8%)
whose mothers were married at the end of     changes in outcomes for treatment and control       increases probability of being single with no children by 23.3% (4%)
1975.                                        adults who were 3-6 years old before and after      Almost all of the reduction in probability of being a low earner is driven
n = 499,026 children; 318,367 families.      the reform. Also investigated heterogeneity of      by females. Women more likely to delay child bearing and family
Adult outcomes measured between ages 30      effects. Controlled for various child and family-   formation than men as a result of increased child care. Most benefits of
and 33.                                      specific characteristics, as well as municipality   universal child care are for children of low-educated mothers.
                                             fixed effects. Robustness checks: included a        Subsidized formal child care crowds out informal child care with
                                             time trend, checked for placebo effect by           almost no net increase in total child care use or maternal
                                             comparing the two groups before the reform,         employment. No impact of child care reform on maternal education.
                                             and used sibling fixed effects comparing            Cost-Benefit Analysis: Cost: Annual budgetary cost per child care place
                                             siblings exposed to the reform to those who         = $5400
                                             were not.                                           Benefit: Increase in 0.35 yrs of education implies an increase in $27,000
                                                                                                 in lifetime earnings.




Notes: See Barnett and Karoly et al. for more information about some of the studies described in this table. Unless otherwise noted, none of these evaluations was rando
T' refers to the treatment, and 'C' refers to the control or comparison group. T>C means that the difference was significant at the 5% level.
a
A very similar study by Gormley Jr., Gayer, Phillips, and Dawson (2005) evaluates the effects of Oklahoma's Universal Pre-K program on school readiness
using the same regression discontinuity design, but measuring outcomes with the Woodcock-Johnson Achievement Test. They find a 0.79 SD increase in the
Letter-Word Identification score, a 0.64 SD increase in the Spelling score, and a 0.38 SD increase in the Applied Problems score.
Table 13: Effects of Medicaid and other Public Health Insurance on Birth and Early Childhood Outcomes
Study and Data                                   Study Design                                                   Results
EFFECTS ON BIRTH WEIGHT AND HEALTH AT BIRTH
The efficacy and cost of changes in the Medicaid Exploited variation between states in the timing of            The percentage of 15-44 yr old women eligible for Medicaid (had
eligibility of pregnant women (Currie and        expansions of Medicaid eligibility. Use a fixed sample to      they become pregnant) rose from 12.4% to 43.3% b/n 1979 and
Gruber (1996)).                                  simulate the fraction eligible under different state rules.    1991.
Note: Authors also conduct an analysis of        Distinguish "targeted" changes affecting very low income       A 30% increase in eligibility leads to a 1.9% decrease in
Medicaid take-up, which is not included in the women from "broad" changes to women further up the               incidence of low birth weight (sig. at 10% level) and a 8.5%
results here.                                    income distribution. Instrument the actual fraction of         decrease in infant mortality rate. For targeted program changes, a
Data from CPS and Vital Statistics. Data on      women eligible in each state and year with the simulated       30% increase in eligibility decreases low birth weight (infant
Medicaid expenditures from the Health Care       eligibility measure. Controlled for state fixed effects and    mortality) by 7.8% (11.5%). For broad program changes a 30%
Financing Administration. Data on the use of     time varying state characteristics.                            increase in eligibility decreases low birth weight (infant
medical services by pregnant women from the                                                                     mortality) by 0.2% (2.9%).
NLSY. Simulated model for targeted changes
estimated for 1979-1992. Simulated model for
broad changes estimated for 1987-1992. (n=600).



Canadian National Health Insurance and Infant      Used variation in timing of implementation of national       Introduction of national health insurance leads to declines of 4%
Health (Hanratty (1996)).                          health insurance across provinces in Canada over 1962-       in infant mortality rates; 1.3% in low birth weight (whole
County-level panel data on infant mortality from   72. Logit of outcomes on a dummy for having national         sample); 8.9% in low birth weight (single parents). No impact on
10 provinces in 1960- 1975 from the Census of      health insurance in a particular county-year, controlling    birth weight among married women.
Canada and from Canada's Division of Vital         for demographic and socio-economic factors, a time
Statistics. (n = 204 counties). Data on birth      trend, and year fixed effects.
weight from a sample of all birth records in
Canada from 1960 to 1974.


Changes in Prenatal Care Timing and Low Birth      Difference-in-difference, subtracting difference in          Results from Diff-in-Diff Within SES:
Weight by Race and Socioeconomic Status:           obstetrical outcomes (rates of late initiation of prenatal   Medicaid expansions associated with decreases of:
Implications for the Medicaid Expansions for       care and rates of low birth weight) b/n 1980 and 1986        12-21% prenatal care initiation after 1st trimester for white
Pregnant Women (Dubay et al. (2001)). Data on      from difference in outcomes b/n 1986 and 1990, within        women; 3-5% in low birth weight among white women w <12
births from the 1980, 1986, and 1993 Natality      socioeconomic (SES) groups. Also compared changes in         years education;
Files. n = 8,100,000 births.                       obstetrical outcomes in 1986-93 b/n women of low and         10-13% in prenatal care initiation after 1st trimester for black
                                                   high SES (since high SES women were not affected by          women w <12 years education;
                                                   Medicaid expansions). SES defined by marital status and      13-27% in prenatal care initiation after 1st trimester for black
                                                   years of schooling. Medicaid expansions occurred in          women w 12-15 years of education;
                                                   1986-93. Controlled for year, age of mother, parity, and     12-35% in prenatal care initiation after 1st trimester for black
                                                   age-parity interactions.                                     women >15 years of education.
                                                                                                                Association with a 3% increase in likelihood of low birth weight
                                                                                                                for unmarried black women with <12 years education
                                                                                                                Similar results using diff-in-diff across SES for 1986-93.



Effects of Medicaid expansions and welfare         Logit regression that includes dummies for state-level       Medicaid caseload increases by 0.233 for each 1% increase in
contractions on prenatal care and infant health    Medicaid administrative reforms; income eligibility          welfare rate. Medicaid caseload increases by 0.664 for each
(Currie and Grogger (2002)).                       cutoffs; rates of welfare participation; unemployment        100% increase in income cut-off (for those not receiving cash
Data on birth outcomes from VSDN files 1990-       rates; and maternal observable characteristics. Also         benefits). Increase in income cutoff from 100% to 200% of
1996. Data on fetal deaths from vital statistics   estimated auxiliary regressions that examine the effect      poverty line increases probability of adequate prenatal care by
fetal deaths detailed records. Data on Medicaid    of policy variables on aggregate Medicaid caseloads.         0.4% for whites. 2pp increase in welfare rate associated w/ 1.1%
administrative reforms from National Governor's                                                                 increase in probability that prenatal care was initiated in 1st
Association Maternal and Child Health                                                                           trimester; 0.7% increase in probability of adequate care for
newsletters. Data on welfare caseloads from the                                                                 whites; 2% increase for both for blacks.
US Department of Health and Human Services.                                                                     Increase in income cutoff from 100% to 200% of poverty line
n=3,985,968 whites; 4,014,935 blacks.                                                                           associated w/ a decrease of 1720 fetal deaths per year among
                                                                                                                blacks
                                                                                                                2% increase in welfare associated w/ 10% decrease in fetal
                                                                                                                deaths per year among blacks. Most administrative reforms have
                                                                                                                no effect. But using mail-in forms (instead of in-person
                                                                                                                interviews) increases probability that prenatal care was initiated
                                                                                                                in 1st trimester by 0.7% for blacks and
                                                                                                                horter forms increase probability that prenatal care was initiated
                                                                                                                in 1st trimester by 3% for whites. Using mail-in forms decreases
                                                                                                                probability of
                                                                                                                low birth weight by 26%; of very low birth weight by 38% for
                                                                                                                whites.
Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to Identify   Two sources of identification: "The 133% expansion"          The 100% expansion led to 7-11% take-up rates, while the 133%
the Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions      (children under age 6 living in families with incomes        expansion had <5% take-up rates. No evidence for other
on Low-Income Children (Card and Shore-             below 133% of poverty line became covered in 1989) and       insurance crowd-out in SIPP data. Results from CPS data
Sheppard (2004)). Data from SIPP for 1990-93,       "the 100% expansion" (children born after September 30,      suggest that the 133% expansion led to decline in other health
March CPS for 1990-96, and Health Interview         1983 in families with incomes below the poverty line         insurance coverage by approximately the same amount as the
Survey for 1992-1996 on children under 18 years     became covered). Difference-in-difference design             take-up in Medicaid. Similar results using Health Interview
old. n= 10,268 to 16,196 across the different       comparing age-6 and age-5 children in families with          Survey data.
years in SIPP.                                      incomes between 100% and 133% of the poverty line for
                                                    the 133% expansion, and comparing children born before
                                                    and after Sep. 30 , 1983 for the "100% expansion".
                                                    Regression of Medicaid enrollment on dummy for being
                                                    below poverty level, dummy for being born after
                                                    9/30/1983, their interaction, dummy for age <6 years old,
                                                    interaction between dummy for age <6 years old and
                                                    dummy for being between 100% and 133% of poverty
                                                    line, a flexible function of age and family income, and
                                                    other background characteristics as well as year fixed
                                                    effects.




Effects of Medicaid managed care on prenatal       Exploited the county-by-county variation in                   Probability of starting prenatal care in 1st trimester: decreased by
care and birth outcomes (Aizer, Currie, Moretti implementation of Medicaid managed care, which                   9-10% in both COHS and 2-plan counties.
(2007)). Data on birth outcomes from the           resulted from a phase-in policy in California that required   Use of induction/stimulation of labor: increased by 43.8% in
California Birth Statistical Master File 1990-2000 women enrolled in Medicaid to switch to managed care          COHS counties. Use of fetal monitors: increased by 25.9% in
and Birth Cohort files for the same time period. plans. Some counties switched to COHS plan, others              COHS counties.
Hospital-level data from Vital Statistics records. switched to 2 or more plan system. Multivariate               Incidence of low birth weight: increased by 15% in both COHS
n = 55,000 births.                                 regression with county fixed effects, and mother fixed        and 2-plan counties. Incidence of short gestation: increased by
                                                   effects, as well as other observable characteristics.         15% in both
                                                   Robustness checks: Estimating same model for married          COHS and 2-plan counties. Incidence of neonatal death:
                                                   women only (unlikely to be on welfare, hence unlikely to      increased by 50% in 2-plan counties.
                                                   be subject to MMC); controlling for mobility b/n
                                                   counties; regression discontinuity design to eliminate
                                                   time trend effects; adding interaction terms b/n time trend
                                                   and several dummies; "intent- to-treat" models to control
                                                   for the MMC adoption being not exogenous to counties.
EFFECTS ON LATER CHILD OUTCOMES
Medicaid Eligibility and the Incidence of            Difference-in-difference, comparing the change in          For children aged 2-6 in families with <$25,000 income,
Ambulatory Care Sensitive Hospitalizations for       ambulatory care sensitive (ACS) hospitalizations before incidence of ACS hospitalizations due to dehydration,
Children (Kaestner, Joyce and Racine (2001)).        and after Medicaid expansions b/n poor and non-poor        convulsions and non-asthma illnesses declined by 10-20%.
Data from the Nation-wide Inpatient Sample of        children. Poverty status determined by median family       Estimated effect sizes of 40-80% for those affected by Medicaid
the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project for      income in child's zip code of birth. Two treatment groups: expansions.
1988 and 1992. n = 36,000.                           income<$25,000 and $25,000<income<$35,000. Control For children aged 2-6 in families with $25,000<income<
                                                     group: income>$35,000. Separate estimates for children $35,000, incidence of ACS hospitalizations due to non-asthma
                                                     aged 2-6, 7-9. Controlled for hospital-specific, year, and illnesses and pneumonia declined by 10-14% (only when
                                                     individual factors. Incidence of ACS hospitalizations      denominator is total births).
                                                     calculated using both non-ACS hospitalizations and total For children aged 7-9 in families with $25,000<income<
                                                     births in the denominator.                                 $35,000, incidence of ACS hospitalizations due to asthma
                                                                                                                declined by 22-30%; hospitalizations due to eye, nose and throat
                                                                                                                illnesses declined by >100%.
                                                                                                                No significant effects on children aged 2-6 in $25,000<
                                                                                                                income<$35,000 group or on children aged 7-9 in <$25,000
                                                                                                                income group.



Low Take-Up in Medicaid: Does Outreach               Examined effects of CA outreach campaign launched in           Access to bilingual application assistants increases new monthly
Matter and for Whom? (Aizer (2003)).                 June 1998, which consisted of community-based                  Medicaid enrollment by 4.6% among Hispanic children, and by
Data on monthly Medicaid enrollment for              application assistants and a media campaign to raise           6% among Asian children (relative to other children in same
children aged 0-15 in CA from 1996 to 2000           awareness about Medicaid, on Medicaid enrollment.              neighborhood). A 1,000-child increase in Medicaid enrollments
linked with information on the number of             Multivariate regression with key explanatory variable          decreases ACS hospitalizations by 3.26 hospitalizations (mean
community-based application assistants in each       being the number of community-based application                not reported, so can't calculate relative effect size).
zip code in the month of application by age and      assistants in each zip code in the month of application by
race. n = 324,331 for analysis of take-up. n =       age and race. Included zip code and month fixed effects
121,806 for analysis of hospitalizations.            as well as controls for changes in business cycle and the
                                                     demographic compositions of the state. Also examined
                                                     effect of early Medicaid enrollment on ACS
                                                     hospitalizations by instrumenting Medicaid enrollment
                                                     with outreach measures.


Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:         Investigated impact of Medicaid expansions on                  A 10pp increase in Medicaid eligibility leads to a 8.4% increase
Access and Efficiency Effects (Dafny and Gruber      hospitalizations using the variation in Medicaid eligibility   in total hospitalizations, an 8.1% increase in unavoidable
(2005)).                                             b/n states, over time, and by age. Key explanatory             hospitalizations, and no statistically significant impact on
Data from NHDS on child discharges for 1983 to       variable is the eligibility rate measured by the fraction of   avoidable hospitalizations. Assuming access to hospital care
1996. Cells defined for 4 age categories (<1, 1-5,   children eligible for Medicaid in each age- state-year cell.   increases the likelihood of all kinds of hospitalizations equally,
6-10, 11-15) for each state and year.                Controlled for age, state, and year fixed effects as well as   these results imply that increased use of primary care engendered
n = 2308 cells. Used age-state-year populations      state-year interactions. Used the fraction eligible            by Medicaid expansions mitigated the increase in total
from the Census Bureau to calculate                  calculated using a fixed sample to instrument for actual       hospitalizations by reducing the increase in avoidable
hospitalization rates for each cell.                 eligibility in each state, year, and age group. Also           hospitalizations that would have otherwise occurred.
                                                     examined effect of Medicaid eligibility on length of stay      A 10pp increase in eligiblity leads to a 3.1% decrease in the
                                                     in hospital and the number of procedures performed.            length of hospital stay, a 5% increase in the # of procedures
                                                                                                                    performed, and a 6.6% increase in the likelihood of having any
                                                                                                                    procedure performed, i.e. leads to more aggressive care.




Public Health Insurance, Program Take-Up and         See Aizer (2003) entry. Additional analysis: Examined          Proximity to an additional bilingual application assistant
Child Health (Aizer (2007)).                         heterogeneity in effects on take-up by age. Examined           increases new monthly Medicaid enrollment by 7-9% among
See Aizer (2003) entry for description of data.      nonlinear effects on take-up. Examined effects of English      Hispanics and by 27-36% among Asians. Smallest effects for
                                                     and Spanish language advertisements on take-up.                infants who were already largely eligible; largest effects for ages
                                                                                                                    6-15. Effect is linear for Hispanics; slightly concave for Asians.
                                                                                                                    English language advertisements increase Medicaid enrollment
                                                                                                                    in the following month by 4.7% among all children, and Spanish
                                                                                                                    language advertisements increase Medicaid enrollment in the
                                                                                                                    following month by an additional 2.5% among Hispanic
                                                                                                                    children.
                                                                                                                    Increasing the # of children w/ Medicaid by 10% results in a 2-
                                                                                                                    3% decline in avoidable hospitalizations.
Has Public Health Insurance for Older Children     Identification due to the fact that expansions in              For children aged 9-12, the coefficient on income in a model of
Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and          Medicaid/SCHIP eligibility for older children relative to      health status declined by 20% over 2000-2005. For children aged
Health Outcomes? (Currie, Decker, and Lin          younger children happened at different times in different      13-17, it declined by 18% over 1996-2000 and by 25% over 2000-
(2008)).                                           states. Instrumented for individual Medicaid/SCHIP             05.
Data from the National Health Interview Surveys    eligibility using an index of generosity of the state's        For children 0-3/4-8/9-12 the coefficient on income in a model of
for 1986-2005. n = 474,164 children <18 yrs old.   public health insurance programs calculated using a fixed      doctor visits declined by 64%/62%/50% between 2000-2005.
Instrument data from the CPS.                      group of children. Then, estimated impact of public            For children aged 13-17 there was no significant change in the
                                                   health insurance eligibility on the relationship b/n family    income coefficient. Significant declines in the income
                                                   income and child health status and on the relationship b/n     coefficient over 1991-1995 and 1996-2000 for children aged 0-3
                                                   family income and doctor visits in the previous year. Also     and 4-8 as well.
                                                   tested whether the relationship b/n income and outcomes        No statistically significant impact of contemporaneous health
                                                   changed over time within age groups by running separate        insurance eligibility on child health status.
                                                   regressions for 4 age groups: 0-3, 4-8, 9-12, 13-17.           A 100 pp increase in the fraction eligible at age 3 would reduce
                                                   Finally, estimated relationship b/n health outcomes and        the probability that the average child aged 9-17 is in less than
                                                   the fraction of children eligible in child's birth cohort in   excellent health by 11%. A 100 pp increase in the fraction
                                                   the child's current state of residence for children aged 9-    eligible at ages 1 and 2 would reduce the probability that the
                                                   17. Controlled for family background variables and year        average child aged 9-17 had no doctor
                                                   and state fixed effects.                                       visit in the past year by 41%.




The Impact of Children's Public Health Insurance   Examine the impact of public health insurance at birth on      A 50 pp increase in eligibility at birth increased reading test
Expansions on Educational Outcomes (Levine         4th and 8th grade reading and math test scores.                scores by 0.09 SD relative to 4th and 8th grade combined mean
and Schanzenbach (2009)).                          Difference-in-difference-in-difference using cross-state       scaled score. No effect on math test scores. Expansions to
Data on state-level average scaled test scores     variation over time and across ages in children's health       public health insurance eligibility at birth associated w/ 1.6%
from the National Assessment of Educational        insurance eligibility due to Medicaid and SCHIP                reduction in low birth weight rate for whole sample and 6.7%
Progress for 1990 to 2003. (n=431).                expansions. Instrumented for public health insurance           reduction in infant mortality rates among women with at least a
Data for simulated instruments from March CPS.     eligibility using the simulated fraction eligible (as in       high school degree. A 50% increase in low birth weight (infant
Data on child health from Vital Statistics for     Currie and Gruber (1996) see above). To test whether           mortality) rate would decrease reading test scores by 0.12 SD
1984-2003 (n=1020).                                changes in educational outcomes are due to                     (.07SD).
                                                   improvements in health status or to additional household
                                                   income generated if the availability of public health
                                                   insurance crowds out private health insurance, they
                                                   estimated the direct impact of health at birth on
                                                   educational outcomes. Controlled for state and year fixed
                                                   effects and state-specific time trends.




Public Insurance, Crowd- Out and Health Care   Regression discontinuity design using family income cut-           Public insurance eligibility increases public insurance coverage
Utilization (Koch (2009)). Data from the       offs that determine eligibility for Medicaid and SCHIP.            by 21% and decreases private insurance coverage by 24%. So
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. Focus on     To distinguish b/n children who are eligible for public            overall decrease in insurance coverage of about 4.8%. Eligibility
subsample of children <18 yrs whose families   insurance w/out access to private insurance and those              decreases the number of office visits/self-reported health
have incomes b/n 50% and 400% of poverty line. whose private insurance may be crowded-out due to                  status/total expenditures by 12%/87%/23%. Increases the
(n=32,609). Data on public insurance           expansions in public health insurance, constructed a               number of ER visits by 18%.
reimbursement rates from the American          measure of private-insurance "offer" (=1 if any of the             Eligibility decreases the number of office visits by 18% for those
Academy of Pediatrics for 1998-2001.           following holds: child is privately insured at the time of         with outside private health insurance. No statistically significant
                                               the eligibility measurement or a family member is                  effects on ER visits, prescriptions, or refills.
                                               privately employed at the time and either has insurance            Children just eligible for public health insurance are 4% less
                                               through the job or turns down the insurance at the job).           likely to have a usual source of care and 4% more likely to go
                                               Estimated impacts of public health insurance eligibility           without care. No statistically significant effects on hospital or ER
                                               on measures of care utilization (doctor's visits, etc.) as         visits.
                                               well as on private insurance take-up. Also estimated the           Eligibility increases children's BMI by 2%. Parents of just
                                               differential effect of eligibility on those w/ and w/out           eligible children are 5% less likely to be given advice about their
                                               private health insurance by interacting the eligibility            child's eating healthfully. No significant effects on asthma
                                               variable with the "offer" variable. Controlled for                 diagnosis. Conditional on taking medication for asthma,
                                               background characteristics as well as state and year fixed         eligibility increases probability of taking inhaled steroids (gold
                                               effects. Also looked at impacts of differential                    standard treatment) by 32%. A $4 increase in reimbursement for
                                               reimbursement rates across states and years on access to           office visits leads to a 5% increase in the number of office visits.
                                               care for the publicly insured.




Note: Percent changes (denoted by % instead of "pp") are reported relative to the mean.
