                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE EFFECT OF HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE ON THE USE OF MEDICAL
                               SERVICES

                                          Michael Anderson
                                           Carlos Dobkin
                                             Tal Gross

                                        Working Paper 15823
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15823


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Michael Anderson, Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Health Insurance Coverage on the Use of Medical Services
Michael Anderson, Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross
NBER Working Paper No. 15823
March 2010
JEL No. G22,I11,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

Substantial uncertainty exists regarding the causal effect of health insurance on the utilization of care.
Most studies cannot determine whether the large differences in healthcare utilization between the insured
and the uninsured are due to insurance status or to other unobserved differences between the two groups.
In this paper, we exploit a sharp change in insurance coverage rates that results from young adults
“aging out” of their parents’ insurance plans to estimate the effect of insurance coverage on the utilization
of emergency department (ED) and inpatient services. Using the National Health Interview Survey
(NHIS) and a census of emergency department records and hospital discharge records from seven
states, we find that aging out results in an abrupt 5 to 8 percentage point reduction in the probability
of having health insurance. We find that not having insurance leads to a 40 percent reduction in ED
visits and a 61 percent reduction in inpatient hospital admissions. The drop in ED visits and inpatient
admissions is due entirely to reductions in the care provided by privately owned hospitals, with particularly
large reductions at for profit hospitals. The results imply that expanding health insurance coverage
would result in a substantial increase in care provided to currently uninsured individuals.


Michael Anderson                                      Tal Gross
Department of Agricultural                            Department of Economics
 and Resource Economics                               University of Miami
207 Giannini Hall, MC 3310                            517-J Jenkins Building
University of California                              5250 University Drive
Berkeley CA 94720-3310                                Coral Gables, FL 33146
mlanderson@berkeley.edu                               talgross@business.miami.edu

Carlos Dobkin
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
cdobkin@ucsc.edu
       1. INTRODUCTION


Over one-quarter of nonelderly adults in the United States lacked health insurance during at
some point in 2007 (Schoen et al. 2008). A large body of research documents a strong
association between insurance status and particular patterns of health care utilization. The
uninsured are less likely to consume preventative care such as diagnostic exams and routine
checkups (Ayanian et al. 2000). They are more likely to be hospitalized for conditions that –
if treated promptly – do not require hospitalization (Weissman et al. 1992). Such correlations
suggest that when individuals lose health insurance, they alter their consumption of health
care and their health suffers as a result.


But would the uninsured behave differently if they had health insurance? Individuals without
health insurance have different discount rates, risk tolerances, and medical risks than those
with health insurance, making causal inference difficult. Little evidence exists that overcomes
this empirical challenge. Several studies leverage quasi-experimental variation to measure the
impacts of Medicare and Medicaid, the two largest public insurance programs in the United
States.1 Such studies, however, provide little insight about the likely effects of coverage
expansions on the current population of uninsured individuals for two reasons. First, they
focus only on the near-elderly or the very young, both of whom are at low risk of being
uninsured. Most of the uninsured are non-elderly adults, particularly young adults. Estimates
of this population’s reaction to changes in health insurance status are essential to evaluate
public policies that would expand access to health insurance. Second, studies that focus on
Medicare or Medicaid cannot separate the effects of gaining health insurance from the
effects of a transition from private to public insurance.


In this paper, we overcome these challenges by exploiting quasi-experimental variation in
insurance status that results from the rules insurers use to establish the eligibility of
dependents. Many private health insurance contracts cover dependents “eighteen and under”
and only cover older dependents who are full-time students. As a result, five to eight percent
of teenagers become uninsured shortly after their nineteenth birthdays. We exploit this
variation through a regression discontinuity (RD) design and compare the health care

1   See, for instance, papers by Dafny and Gruber (2005), Card et al. (2008, 2009), and Currie et al. (2008).


                                                          1
consumption of teenagers who are just younger than nineteen to the health care
consumption of those who are just older than nineteen.


We examine the impact of this sharp change in coverage using data from the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS); emergency department records from Arizona, California,
Iowa, New Jersey, and Wisconsin; and hospital admission records from Arizona, California,
Iowa, New York, Texas and Wisconsin. We find that the decrease in insurance coverage
results in a decreased level of contact with health care providers. We estimate sizable
reductions in emergency department (ED) visits, contradicting the conventional wisdom that
the uninsured are more likely to visit the ED. We also find substantial reductions in non-
urgent hospital admissions. The decrease in both ED and inpatient visits is driven in large
part by a drop in visits for less-severe medical conditions. Overall, these results suggest that
an expansion in health insurance coverage would substantially increase the amount of care
that currently uninsured individuals receive and require an increase in net expenditures.


The paper proceeds as follows. The following section describes previous research on
insurance and utilization. Section 3 outlines our econometric framework. We document the
change in insurance coverage in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6 present results for ED visits and
inpatient hospitalizations respectively. In Section 7 we discuss the potential generalizability
of our results. Section 8 concludes.


   2. PRIOR EVIDENCE ON THE HEALTH CARE CONSUMPTION OF THE UNINSURED


The uninsured tend to consume expensive health care treatments when cheaper options are
available. Weissman et al. (1992) find that the uninsured are much more likely to be admitted
to the hospital for a medical condition that could have been prevented with timely care.
Similarly, Braveman et al. (1994) estimate that the uninsured are more likely to suffer a
ruptured appendix, an outcome that can be avoided with timely care. Dozens of similar
studies are summarized in an Institute of Medicine (2002) report, and nearly all find a robust
correlation between a lack of insurance and reliance on expensive, avoidable medical
treatments. Some evidence also suggests that the uninsured are more likely to seek care in
the ED than the insured (Kwack et al. 2004), and it is commonly assumed that uninsured


                                               2
patients visit the ED for non-urgent problems and contribute to ED crowding (Abelson
2008, Newton et al. 2008). 2


Given the substantial underlying differences between the insured and the uninsured, the
correlations documented in these studies may not represent causal effects. To our
knowledge, only two sets of studies have used credible research designs to determine the
causal effect of insurance status on health care utilization. The first of these evaluates
Medicaid expansions. Dafny and Gruber (2005) estimate that Medicaid expansions led to an
increase in total inpatient hospitalizations, but not to a significant increase in avoidable
hospitalizations. The authors conclude that being insured through Medicaid leads individuals
to visit the hospital more often and, potentially, to consume health care more efficiently.


Other papers study the effect of Medicare on health care utilization. Finkelstein (2007)
studies the aggregate spending effects of the introduction of Medicare, and Card et al. (2008,
2009) study the effects of Medicare on individual health care consumption. All three papers
conclude that Medicare leads to a substantial increase in health care consumption.


One limitation of such studies is that individuals who gain health insurance through
Medicaid and Medicare are often insured beforehand. Cutler and Gruber (1996) demonstrate
that fifty percent of new Medicaid enrollees were previously enrolled in employer-provided
insurance plans. Similarly, Card et al. (2008) conclude that much of the increase in
hospitalizations that occurs after people become eligible for Medicare is likely due to
transitions from private insurance to Medicare rather than from no insurance to Medicare.
Consequently, these papers do not isolate the causal effect of being uninsured on health care
consumption, which is the object of interest here.


The other limitation of studies focused on Medicare and Medicaid is that their estimates are
based on the demographic groups at lowest risk of being uninsured. Precisely as a result of
these two programs, only a small fraction of children or the elderly lack health insurance.
Most of the uninsured are non-elderly adults, and over half of uninsured non-elderly adults
2In spite of the positive cross-sectional correlation between uninsured status and ED utilization, however,
Kwack et al. (2004) find no significant effect of the implementation of a managed care program on ED use
patterns for formerly uninsured patients.


                                                    3
are between the ages of 19 and 35 (Kriss et al. 2008). Estimates of the effects of health
insurance coverage on the near-elderly and children are unlikely to be very informative about
the effects of insurance coverage expansions, as such expansions will disproportionately
affect young adults.


This study contributes to the literature on health insurance in several respects. First, it
isolates the effects of uninsured status, avoiding contamination by transitions from private to
public insurance. Second, it focuses on young adults, a group that is more representative of
the uninsured population than either children or the elderly. Third, it introduces a corrected
instrumental variables estimator for data based on a self-selected population, in this case,
those who present at the hospital.


      3. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK


Consider a reduced-form model of the effects of health insurance coverage on health care
utilization:


(1)


In this model, Yi represents the utilization of care of individual i, and Di is an indicator
variable equal to unity if individual i has health insurance. The error term, εi, corresponds to
all other determinants of the outcome Yi. The coefficient        represents the causal effect of
health insurance on utilization.


It is difficult to obtain consistent estimates of       because health insurance status, Di, is
correlated with unobserved determinants of utilization. An individual chooses to acquire
health insurance based on her health and other characteristics that affect both the choice to
be insured and health outcomes. Some of these characteristics are observable to researchers
but many are not; uninsured individuals likely have different discount factors, risk tolerances,
and medical risks than those with health insurance. In the first two columns of Table 1 we
present summary statistics by health insurance status for young adults (age 18–19) from the
NHIS. Insured individuals are less likely to be minorities, less likely to be male, less likely to


                                                4
smoke, and more likely to be attending school. Since observable characteristics are correlated
with insurance status, it is likely that unobservable characteristics are also correlated with
insurance status. Consequently, we rely on an instrumental variables strategy, and identify the
causal effect of health insurance via the sharp discontinuity in insurance coverage rates at age
19.


Let Zi = 1{Ai > 19} be an indicator variable equal to unity if individual i is older than 19.3
When young adults turn 19, they become less likely to be insured. We assume, however, that
no other variables in equation (1) are affected. In particular, we assume that                                  is
continuous at a = 19. This assumption would be violated if other factors affecting health
care such as employment, school attendance, or risky behaviors, change discontinuously
when young adults turn 19. We discuss this assumption below and present empirical
evidence that it holds in the fifth and sixth columns of Table 1.


Since age is not the sole determinant of insurance coverage, the RD design that we
implement is a “fuzzy” RD (Campbell 1969). We estimate the reduced form effect of age 19
on each outcome of interest Yi:


(2)


We estimate the first stage – the share of young adults who lose insurance coverage at age 19
– in two ways. First, we estimate a straightforward version of equation (2) in the NHIS with
insurance coverage on the left-hand side. Second, we estimate the first stage using hospital
records. This poses an additional econometric challenge, however, as the records contain a
census of visits rather than individuals. In Section 5 we describe the problem and develop a
method for consistently estimating the first stage using the hospital records.




3 Many private health plans cover dependents through the last day of the month in which the dependent turns
19 (Kriss et al 2008). In Appendix 1 we present empirical evidence that this is the case for the majority of plans
in California. In the regressions that follow, we code Zi accordingly. The abrupt decrease in private coverage
documented in Figures 5 and 8 is further evidence that this coding is correct. However, to simplify the
discussion we describe people as aging out when they turn 19.


                                                        5
We can identify γ1, the causal effect of health insurance coverage (Di) on outcome Yi, by
combining the first stage and reduced form results. We identify this parameter by dividing
the effect of turning 19 on outcome Yi by the effect of turning 19 on health insurance
coverage, Di. This strategy is analogous to using the age 19 discontinuity as an instrument to
identify the causal effect of health insurance (Hahn et al., 2001).


    4. THE CHANGE        IN   INSURANCE COVERAGE RATES            AT   19, RESULTS   FROM THE

        NHIS


Figure 1 plots the age profile of insurance coverage, ED visits, and inpatient hospital stays.
The solid line plots the share uninsured by age. It demonstrates a sharp increase at age 19,
one that is larger than the decrease in share uninsured at age 65 (due to Medicare). The figure
reveals that young adults are the age group most likely to be uninsured and that the
probability of being uninsured peaks around age 22.


Figure 1 also suggests that young adults are not atypical in their consumption of inpatient
and ED visits when compared to the majority of the adult population. Young adults near age
19 have a similar probability of having had at least one inpatient visit in the prior year –
roughly 9% – as adults through age 55. The probability of an ED visit is somewhat higher
for young adults than middle-aged adults, suggesting that young adults may be more
representative of the typical ED visitor.


We explore the change in insurance coverage rates more closely by restricting the NHIS
sample to those within one year of their nineteenth birthday. The NHIS includes questions
on the type of insurance coverage that a respondent has and whether the respondent has lost
coverage due to age or leaving school. We combine NHIS data from 1997 to 2007 and keep
only respondents between 18 and 20 years of age. This trimmed sample includes 24,260
observations. Figure 2 plots the age profiles of four insurance coverage types: private
insurance, uninsured, Medicaid, and other insurance. Immediately at age 19, there is a four-
percentage-point increase in the share of NHIS respondents who report being uninsured.




                                                6
The figure makes clear that the increase is driven primarily by a decrease in those covered by
private insurance, and less so by respondents losing Medicaid and other forms of insurance.4


The abrupt drop in coverage rates is due in large part to a decline in insurance coverage rates
among people not enrolled in school. In Figure 3 we present the proportion uninsured by
age for NHIS respondents that are not attending school and for NHIS respondents that are
attending school.5 The age profiles in the figure reveal a much larger loss of coverage among
the group that is not in school than for the general population.6 Though the proportion of
the total population that is uninsured increases by only 4.1 percentage points (Figure 2), the
proportion of out of school respondents who are uninsured increases by 7.1 percentage
points (Figure 3). This difference is due to the mechanism behind the change in coverage
rates; many private insurance plans cover dependents beyond age 18 only if the dependents
are enrolled in school.


Figure 4 provides further evidence that the abrupt decline in insurance coverage at age 19 is
due to people aging out of their parents’ plans. The NHIS asks respondents why they do not
have health insurance. Figure 4 plots, by age, the share of respondents who report having
lost coverage due to age or leaving school.7 For individuals who are not in school, the
proportion who report losing insurance for this reason jumps by 5.6 percentage points at age
19. This increase accounts for almost all of the 7.1 percentage point increase in the
proportion uninsured for this group. In contrast, the proportion of people who are still in
school that lose coverage due to age or leaving school increases by only 0.5 percentage
points at age 19.


4 “Other forms of insurance” include Medicare (for disabled individuals), State Children’s Health Insurance
Program (SCHIP), military health care (e.g., Veterans Affairs health care), and other public, non-
Medicaid/Medicare health care (e.g., Indian Health Service).
5 NHIS respondents are asked if they have a job or are looking for work. Those that respond negatively can

choose among several explanations, one of which is “Going to School.” We coded people who responded
“Going to School” as in school, though the pattern of questions makes it likely that some individuals that are in
school but are working will be coded as not in school.
6 Note that the group sizes change with age. The number of individuals in school trends downward with age,

while the number of individuals not in school trends upwards with age. However, as can be seen in Table 1,
there is no evidence of discrete changes in the group sizes at the age 19 threshold.
7 In the National Health Interview Survey the respondent is asked the following question regarding all

household members that are currently without health insurance: “Which of these are reasons (you/subject
name) stopped being covered or do not have health insurance?” One possible answer they can choose from is,
“Ineligible because of age/left school”.


                                                       7
In Table 2 we present estimates of the discrete change in insurance coverage at age 19 for
the overall population and for the two subgroups examined in Figure 3. We estimate the size
of the discrete change in coverage by estimating equation (2) using the individual-level NHIS
data, restricting our sample to people surveyed within 12 months of the month in which
their 19th birthday falls.8 Each coefficient represents the effect of turning 19 on a specified
outcome (we report only            , the coefficient on the age 19 indicator, Zi = 1{Ai > 19}). Each
main row in Table 2 presents results for a different demographic group (all respondents, not
attending school, attending school), and each main column presents results for a different
outcome (privately insured, uninsured, Medicaid, and other insurance).9 Within each main
column, the left sub-column reports results for the specification described in equation (2),
and the right sub-column reports results for a modified specification that also includes
indicator variables for marital status, employment status, race and gender. The additional
covariates slightly increase precision but generally do not affect the point estimates,
providing further evidence that demographic covariates do not change discontinuously at the
threshold.10


In the first two columns of Table 3 we present the regression estimates corresponding to
Figure 4. Overall, there is a 4.3 percentage point increase in NHIS respondents who report
losing insurance at age 19 due to age or leaving school. The NHIS also classifies insurance
status by whether the respondent is insured in his or her own name or is covered by another
person’s plan. The third and fourth columns demonstrate that there is no discrete increase in
the proportion of individuals with coverage in their own name, suggesting that people are
not replacing their parents’ insurance with their own insurance.11


8 We use a uniform kernel and a bandwidth of 365 days. The regressions are estimated via a procedure that
takes into account the stratified sampling frame and the deliberate oversample of minorities in the NHIS. In
Appendices 2–4 we present evidence that the regression results are fairly robust to the bandwidth choice.
When estimating the change in insurance coverage using hospital records datasets, we find that the results are
insensitive to bandwidth choice.
9 The full age profiles by level of education that correspond to the second and third rows of the table are

presented in Appendices 5 and 6.
10
   The third row of Table 2 suggests that respondents in school are gaining private insurance at age 19.
However the estimates are only marginally significant at conventional levels. Furthermore, we find that
estimates for this group are sensitive to the inclusion of covariates, unlike the estimates in the first and second
rows of the table.
11 The age profiles corresponding to the regression results are presented in Appendix 7.




                                                        8
In sum, we find a large, sudden increase in the share uninsured at age 19 in the NHIS data.
This increase is driven largely by the individuals that are not in school and thus are at risk of
aging out of their parents’ insurance plans. In the following sections, we exploit this
discontinuity in insurance status to determine how insurance status affects the consumption
of health care services.12


     5. THE EFFECTS OF HEALTH INSURANCE ON EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT VISITS


Many young adults receive health care at hospital emergency departments. From 2005 to
2007, approximately 26 percent of 18 and 19 year old NHIS respondents reported receiving
treatment in an emergency department in the prior 12 months. ED utilization is of
substantial policy interest for two reasons. First, ED crowding is a serious public health issue
(Fatovich 2002; Trzeciak and Rivers 2003; Kellermann 2006). Whether insurance coverage
expansions will alleviate or exacerbate ED crowding depends on how insurance coverage
affects ED utilization. Second, the ED is an expensive location to receive care. Bamezai et
al. (2005) estimate that the marginal cost of a non-trauma ED visit is $300, a number that
exceeds the average price, let alone the marginal cost, of a doctor’s visit.13,14 Whether
insurance coverage increases or decreases net ED usage thus affects the net cost of
insurance coverage expansions.



12 We find evidence in the NHIS that at age 19 there is an increase in the proportion of respondents that forgo
or delay care due to cost in the last 12 months and no discernable change in the proportion of respondents that
have seen a health care professional in the last two weeks. However, we do not present these results in the
body of the paper because the first two results are substantially biased downward due the retrospective nature
of the questions and the third result is imprecise due to the modest sample size. These results are presented in
Appendices 8-10, where the bandwidth has been increased to 1.75 years so as to reduce the amount of
attenuation bias and increase the precision of the estimates.
13 The average total payment for a doctor visit recorded in the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey is $120.
14 A minority view, put forward by Williams (1996), posits that the marginal cost of an ED visit is relatively

low, and that EDs charge high prices to transfer the costs of uncompensated care onto the insured. Market-
based tests suggest, however, that ED visits are indeed more expensive than visits to a private doctor. Health
maintenance organizations (HMOs) generally enjoy bargaining power over hospitals but still reimburse
hospitals hundreds of dollars for each ED visit (Polsky and Nicholson 2004). Additionally, some HMOs own
hospitals and therefore absorb the true marginal cost of an ED visit when their customers visit EDs. Were ED
visits less costly than doctor visits, one would expect such HMOs to shift their customers into the ED. But
these HMOs still provide incentives for patients to use doctor offices rather than EDs. A representative plan
for the individual market from HMO Kaiser Permanente, for example, charges a $150 copayment for an ED
visit but a $50 copayment for a doctor visit.


                                                       9
The questions regarding ED visits in the NHIS ask about visits in the last year. This,
combined with the modest sample size, make it impossible to generate precise estimates of
how much the probability of an ED visit changes when a person loses their health insurance
coverage. As an alternative we examine a near census of emergency department visits from
Arizona, California, Iowa, New Jersey, and Wisconsin.15 The records for Arizona and
California span the 2005 to 2007 calendar years, the records for Iowa and New Jersey span
the 2004 to 2007 calendar years, and the records for Wisconsin span the 2004 to 2006
calendar years. For the age group that is the focus of our analysis, 18 and 19 year olds, we
observe 1,744,394 emergency department visits. For each visit, we observe basic
demographic information including race, ethnicity, gender, type of health insurance, and age
in months. In addition the dataset includes detailed information on the cause of the visit to
the ED and the treatment received.


Figure 5 presents the age profile of insurance status for visitors to the emergency
department.16 Specifically, we plot the proportion with each type of insurance coverage for
non-overlapping cells of one month of age and superimpose the fitted values from equation
(2). For most of the states in our sample we are only able to compute age in months as the
exact date of treatment is not available due to confidentiality concerns. However, this does
not result in any attenuation bias as the indicator variable Zi is measured without error.17 The
figure reveals that the proportion of individuals with private coverage drops steadily with
age, while the proportion that is uninsured increases with age. Though the age profile of
insurance coverage has a similar shape to the general population estimates from the NHIS in
Figure 2, some of the levels are notably different. Estimates from the emergency department
data show lower rates of private coverage and higher rates of Medicaid and lack of insurance
coverage. Estimates from the NHIS of the insurance coverage of young adults that have
received treatment in the emergency department in the prior year show a distribution of



15 Emergency Department visits at hospitals that are not under state oversight such as Veteran Affairs hospitals
are not included in these datasets.
16 The expected payer is reported on the medical records.
17 In all the datasets we observe both the month of birth and the month in which treatment is received. Since

people age out of their parents insurance at the end of the month in which their birthday falls, we can correctly
code the instrument Zi using only these two variables. In addition, the coarse age variable does not substantially
bias or reduce the precision of our estimates, as can be seen in Appendix 11.


                                                       10
health care coverage that is reasonably close to the distribution found in the emergency
department data.18


Figure 5 also reveals that there is a discrete reduction in private insurance coverage
immediately after teenagers turn 19 and a corresponding increase in the proportion
uninsured. The proportion privately insured decreases by 5.0 percentage points, and the
proportion uninsured increases by 5.7 percentage points.19 Regression estimates of this
change, however, understate the true size of the reduction in the percentage insured. This
attenuation bias stems from the decrease in visits (apparent in the analysis below) that occurs
as the newly uninsured become less likely to visit the ED.


The estimates in Figure 5 come from the sample analog of the following equation:


(3)


where Di is an insurance coverage indicator and Ai is age. The quantity                       represents the
discrete change in the proportion insured that occurs at age 19 among people visiting the
emergency department. However,                is a biased estimate of the true reduction in insurance

coverage because                            is estimated from a population that is more likely to be

uninsured and thus less likely to visit the ED. The population of ED visitors post-19 is
therefore not comparable to the population of ED visitors pre-19.20


Under standard RD assumptions we can adjust our estimates of the first stage to estimate
population-level parameters of interest. Suppose that Di(1) and Yi(1) indicate whether an
individual is insured and whether they visit the ED, respectively, when they are older than



18 The proportion with private, Medicaid and no coverage in the ED data are (0.42, 0.25, 0.25). In the general
population estimates from the NHIS, they are (0.62, 0.10, 0.20). In the NHIS estimates restricted to people
with a visit to the emergency department in the past year, they are (0.53, 0.19, 0.18).
19 These estimates are robust to choice of bandwidth, as can be seen in Appendix 12.
20 These issues would not affect our estimates if we had population-level estimates of the first-stage equation.

The sample size of the NHIS, however, is too small to generate a precise estimate of the first-stage effect of
age 19 on insurance coverage when restricted to the states for which we have ED visit data.


                                                      11
19. The indicator functions Di(0) and Yi(0) are defined similarly for individuals younger than
19. We would like to estimate:


(4)                                                                    .


That is, we wish to measure the change in the probability of being insured at age 19
conditional on visiting the ED before age 19. Instead, what we observe in the data is:


(5)                                                                .


We observe the share insured, but for two distinct populations: those who visit the ED after
they turn 19 and those who visit the ED before they turn 19. These two populations are not
directly comparable because, as we document below, insurance coverage affects the
probability that a person receives treatment in the ED. We correct for the bias in our first-
stage estimates under the assumption that the net change in observed ED visits at age 19 is
driven only by individuals who lose insurance coverage. This assumption is implied by the
standard IV exclusion restriction.


We adopt the following notation for counts of visits and insured patients: y0 indicates visits
made before age 19, d0 indicates number of insured patients younger than 19, and y1 and d1

are defined similarly for patients older than age 19. The ratios       and       thus represent the

fraction of insured ED patients before and after 19 respectively. We show in Appendix A
that the following bias-corrected estimator converges to the quantity of interest:



(6)                                                                          .



Intuitively, the term (y0 – y1) “adds back in” the individuals who stop visiting the ED because
they lose insurance coverage. We thus consistently estimate the average change in insurance
coverage for individuals who visit the ED prior to turning 19. Translating equation (6) into
RD quantities yields a bias-corrected first-stage equation of:


                                               12
(7)



In practice, these quantities are estimated via local linear regressions in which the dependent
variables are observed insurance status or ED visit rates. The samples for these regressions
are limited to be either one year less than age 19 (for                    ) or one year greater than age 19
(for           ). We estimate the sample analogs of the elements of this equation along with the
corresponding variance-covariance matrix via Seemingly Unrelated Regression.21 We then
estimate the standard errors via the Delta Method.


In Table 4 we present estimates of the change in insurance coverage at age 19, adjusting for
the bias described above. We estimate a 3.3 percent reduction in admissions at age 19 (see
Table 5), and this effect shifts the estimated change in the proportion privately insured from
–5.0 percentage points to –6.3 percentage points. It also shifts the estimated change in the
proportion uninsured from 5.7 percentage points to 8.1 percentage points. The drop in
private insurance coverage is complemented by a 1.7 percentage point reduction in the
proportion of people covered by Medicaid.22 The table also presents estimates for men and
women separately and reveals that men and women experience similarly sized reductions in
insurance coverage.


Figure 6 presents the age profile of the rate of emergency department visits per 10,000
person years. The figure reveals that the rates are increasing throughout this age range for
both men and women. The figure also reveals evidence of a discrete reduction in treatment
at age 19.23 In the first column of Table 5 we present the regression estimate of the discrete


21   The corresponding bias-corrected first stage estimator for the increase in the proportion uninsured at age 19

is                                                      , where Ui equals one if individual i is uninsured and zero
otherwise.
22 As can be seen in Appendix 13, the estimated magnitudes of the changes in insurance coverage are similar

across the five states included in the sample. In addition this table reveals that in three states (Iowa, New Jersey,
and Wisconsin) people are aging out of Medicaid at 19.
23 As a falsification test, we run similar specifications for ED visits at age 20 and find no evidence of either a

break in insurance coverage or a change in admissions. These results of this analysis are presented in Appendix


                                                         13
change in the natural log of admissions at age 19 for the entire population and for men and
women separately. The regressions reveal that men and women experience a 3.3 percent
decrease in visits. 24 Non-pregnant women experience a slightly higher 3.6 percent decrease
in visits. In Figure 7 we present the age profile of emergency department visits by hospital
type. The figure shows substantial decreases in the number of people treated in emergency
departments in non-profit hospitals and for-profit hospitals but no evidence of any decrease
in the number of people treated in public hospitals. The corresponding regression estimates
are in the second through fourth columns of Table 5. The two classes of privately-controlled
hospitals account for almost the entire reduction in the number of people treated.25


The reduced-form estimates in Table 5 measure the average change in the probability of
visiting the ED at age 19 (see Appendix A). If we assume that losing insurance weakly affects
individuals’ propensity to visit the ED in one direction, 26 then the reduced-form coefficients
estimate the average causal effect of insurance (Di) for individuals that visit the ED before
age 19 and are “compliers” (i.e., lose insurance when turning 19), multiplied by the first-stage
estimand (see Appendix A):


(8)                                                                                                      .




24. We do not perform similar tests at age 18 because it is the age of majority or at age 21 because it is the age
at which people are allowed to start purchasing alcohol.
24 These estimates are fairly robust to bandwidth choice, as can be seen in Appendix 14. In addition the

estimates for each of the five states in the sample are not significantly different than the overall estimate of
–3.3, as can be seen in Appendix 15.
25 This is not necessarily evidence of a violation of the Federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Active

Labor Act, a federal law that mandates that EDs treat all individuals needing emergency treatment, regardless
of ability to pay. It may be that that people choose not to go to the emergency department, decline treatment
when they are informed that they lack insurance, or present with conditions that are not emergencies.
26 The additional “monotonicity” assumption that losing insurance weakly affects individuals’ propensity to

visit the ED in one direction is not guaranteed to hold. It is possible that losing insurance induces some people
to stop visiting the ED but induces others to start. Our reduced-form estimates indicate that the former group
dominates the latter group, but the latter group may nevertheless exist. Relaxing the additional monotonicity
assumption (referred to as “Extended Monotonicity” in Appendix A), we show that the reduced form estimates
a weighted average causal effect for two groups: compliers that visit the ED before age 19 and compliers that
visit the ED after age 19 (see Appendix A). We derive a modified first-stage estimator that converges to the
sum of the reduced-form weights. Under reasonable assumptions, we establish a lower bound on the
magnitude of the average effect of losing insurance on ED visits for compliers that could potentially visit the
ED. This lower bound is 0.364, as compared to the estimate of 0.404 reported in this section. Relaxing the
Extended Monotonicity assumption thus does not qualitatively change our conclusions.


                                                       14
We can thus estimate the impact of insurance coverage on the use of emergency department
services by dividing the estimates of the percent change in admissions from Table 5 by the
estimates of the percentage point change in insurance coverage rates from Table 4. This ratio
estimates the expected reduction in ED utilization for individuals that visit the ED before
age 19 and are compliers. These elasticities are presented in Table 6. The estimate for the
overall population is –0.404, implying that individuals that lose their insurance coverage
reduce their emergency department visits by 40 percent.27 The reductions for men and
women are very similar.


     6. THE EFFECTS OF HEALTH INSURANCE ON INPATIENT ADMISSIONS


Inpatient visits to the hospital are less common than ED visits. Among young adults,
approximately 6 percent have had an inpatient admission in the past year. Nevertheless, such
visits are expensive; approximately 34 percent of total health care spending is driven by
inpatient admissions.28 As such, the effect of insurance coverage on inpatient visits is a
critical object of interest.


To examine the impact of insurance coverage on hospital admissions, we use a census of
hospital discharges from six states: Arizona, California, Iowa, New York, Texas, and
Wisconsin.29 Between the six states we observe a total of 849,610 hospital visits among 18
and 19 year olds. These records contain the same demographic variables available in the ED
data along with detailed information on the cause of admission and treatment received in the
hospital.


We analyze changes in inpatient visits separately for men, pregnant women, and women who
are not pregnant. Among young adults, approximately 9.1 percent of women and 2.4 percent
of men have an inpatient hospitalization in any given year. The gender difference is almost


27 As can be seen in Appendix 16, the estimates of the elasticity across the five states in the sample range from
-0.586 to -0.191.
28 Authors’ own calculations from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.
29 The hospital records include discharges occurring in the following time periods and states: 2000–2007 in

Arizona, 1990–2006 in California, 1990–2006 in New York, 2004–2007 in Iowa, 1999–2003 in Texas and
2004–2007 in Wisconsin. Discharges from hospitals that are not regulated by the states’ departments of health
services are not included amongst these records.


                                                       15
entirely due to admissions of pregnant women. Women who are pregnant are generally
provided with public insurance through Medicaid and thus have a different insurance-age
profile than the other two groups. Since there is no change in the proportion uninsured for
pregnant women at age 19 (see Table 7), we eliminate these women from our graphical
analysis.


Figure 8 presents the age profile of insurance coverage for males and non-pregnant females
admitted to a hospital. The figure reveals that the proportion of individuals with private
insurance drops with age, while the proportion uninsured or covered by Medicaid increases
with age. Overall, the proportion uninsured is far lower than the levels observed in either the
general population (as estimated using the NHIS data) or in the population of visitors to the
ED. The figure also reveals a decline in private coverage at exactly age 19. This decline is
matched by an increase in the proportion uninsured or covered by Medicaid at the same
age.30 Note, however, that the increase in proportion covered by Medicaid is primarily an
artifact of the decrease in the total number of inpatient admissions at age 19.31


These estimates of the change in insurance coverage at age 19 are biased by a change in
composition similar to the one that affects the ED estimates. The first row of Table 7
presents estimates of the discrete change in insurance coverage that occurs at age 19 for the
overall inpatient population (including pregnant women), corrected for bias in the manner
described in the prior section. The estimates reveal that among all admissions, approximately
41 percent of the loss in private coverage is offset by increases in Medicaid coverage, so that
the proportion uninsured increases by only 2.7 percentage points.32 Most of the increase in
Medicaid coverage, however, is concentrated among pregnant women. The other rows of
Table 7 present estimates by gender, separating women into pregnant and non-pregnant.
These estimates reveal that, for men, aging out of private insurance results in a 6.3
percentage point increase in the proportion that are uninsured. Women who are not


30 As can be inferred from the linear age profiles in Figure 8 and can be seen directly in Appendix 17, the
estimates of the change in insurance coverage are robust to the choice of bandwidth.
31 The conclusion that there is little increase in the proportion covered by Medicaid at age 19 (except among

pregnant women) is supported by the NHIS and ED results, both of which reveal small declines in Medicaid
coverage at age 19.
32 As can be seen in Appendix 18, the increase in the proportion uninsured is between 2.5 and 3 percentage

points in four of the six states in the sample.


                                                     16
pregnant experience an approximately 5.0 percentage point increase in the proportion
uninsured. There is little increase in the proportion covered by Medicaid within these two
groups.33 Pregnant women, however, experience little change in the proportion uninsured.34
For them, Medicaid absorbs most of the loss in private insurance coverage.


In Figure 9 we present the age profile of hospital admissions for men and non-pregnant
women by the route through which they are admitted to the hospital. The figure reveals only
a small decline in admissions through the emergency department after people lose their
insurance coverage. Many of these admissions are for medical conditions that are emergent
and may be less sensitive to price. It is also likely that many of these admissions are subject
to the Federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act. We see more
substantial drops in admissions directly to the hospital. These admissions are typically
planned admissions and may be elective. In Table 8 we present estimates of the change in
the natural log of admissions at age 19, estimated from equation (2). The table reveals that
inpatient admissions through the emergency department drop by about 2 percent for men
and 1 percent for non-pregnant women. Inpatient admissions directly to the hospital drop
by 6.7 percent for men and 6.0 percent for women.35,36 Pregnant women exhibit no
statistically significant change in hospital admissions. In the bottom three rows of the table
we present the estimates of the change in hospital admissions by ownership type. There is a
1.4 percent decrease in admissions to non-profit hospitals and a 4.0 percent decrease in
33 One of the primary contributions of this paper is that it isolates the effects of uninsured status, avoiding
substantial contamination by transitions from private to public insurance. It is thus instructive to compare these
“first-stage” results to the “first-stage” results in Card et al. (2008). Among males, the change in uninsured
individuals at age 19 is 8.7 times larger than the change in Medicaid-covered individuals. Among non-pregnant
females, the change in uninsured individuals at age 19 is 4.1 times larger than the change in Medicaid-covered
individuals. In Card et al. (2008), the change in uninsured individuals at age 65 is 6.3 times smaller than the
change in Medicare-covered individuals. Thus the private-to-public “contamination problem” is one to two
orders of magnitude smaller in this paper than it is in Card et al. (2008).
34 Most hospitals try to enroll people that are uninsured when they present at the hospital in Medicaid so that

they can recover the cost of treating them. Pregnant women are much more likely to qualify for Medicaid than
men or non-pregnant women.
35 Almost all of the reduction in inpatient admissions comes through scheduled admissions, which suggests that

the Extended Monotonicity assumption is unlikely to be violated in the inpatient analysis. The Extended
Monotonicity assumption could plausibly be violated in the ED data because a lack of primary care might cause
a non-serious condition to develop into an emergent condition, necessitating a visit to the ED. However, most
of the reduction in inpatient admissions comes through scheduled admissions, which are unlikely to result from
emergent conditions. We thus conclude that there is no substantial violation of the Extended Monotonicity
assumption in the inpatient data.
36 As can be inferred from Figure 9 and seen directly in Appendices 19 and 20, these estimates are robust to

bandwidth choice. As can be seen in Appendix 21, the estimates vary somewhat across states. The largest
reduction in visits is observed in Wisconsin, which also has the largest first-stage effect.


                                                       17
admissions to for profit-hospitals. There is no evidence, however, of a change in overall
admissions to hospitals under public control.


In Table 9 we present the instrumental variables estimates of the impact of insurance
coverage on the probability of an inpatient admission. The estimate for men is –0.61 and for
non-pregnant women is –0.66, implying that losing insurance coverage reduces the
probability of an inpatient admission by 61 percent for men and 66 percent for non-
pregnant women.37 These estimates are even larger than the estimates for emergency
department visits and suggest that insurance coverage is an important determinant of
whether people will receive inpatient treatment. When we examine the results by route into
the hospital, it is clear that the overall drop in admissions is due largely to the large decline in
admissions directly to the hospital, which are typically elective admissions.


     7. DISCUSSION


Three issues affect the generalizability of our regression discontinuity results. First, the
estimates are local average treatment effects based on the response of the “compliers”,
individuals who become uninsured upon turning 19. Second, the estimates are based only on
young adults. Third, the estimates represent the short-run response to uninsured status
rather than the long-run response. We examine each of these issues below.


     7.1 LOCAL AVERAGE TREATMENT EFFECTS


As with all instrumental variables designs, the estimates reported above represent local
average treatment effects; they capture the average effect of uninsured status for individuals
who lose coverage at age 19. These individuals differ from the typical 19 year old in
numerous ways. For example, they are much less likely to attend college (see Figures 2 and
3). Nevertheless, the estimates recover information that is useful for policy makers because
the compliers make up a substantial fraction of total uninsured 19 year olds.



37 As seen in Appendix 22, the estimates vary somewhat across states, though all the precisely estimated
elasticities fall between -0.84 and -0.48.


                                                  18
For policy purposes, the parameter of interest is the average effect of insurance coverage for
the currently uninsured. The compliers constitute less than 10 percent of total 19 year olds
but a much larger share of uninsured 19 year olds. The discontinuities in the NHIS data
suggest that almost 20 percent of uninsured 19-year-olds are compliers, and the fraction
compliers is even higher in the ED and inpatient data (roughly 25 to 30 percent of uninsured
in either case).38 Furthermore, the age-out mechanism itself affects an even larger fraction of
uninsured 19 year olds. Nearly 30 percent of uninsured 19-year-old NHIS respondents
report having lost insurance due to age or leaving school, and the total proportion uninsured
roughly triples from age 16 to age 22. This suggests that a large fraction of all uninsured
young adults have lost insurance in a similar manner.


Of course, a portion of uninsured 19 year olds did not lose insurance through the age out
mechanism, and our estimates do not apply directly to them. These chronically uninsured
individuals are, in the language of Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996), “never-takers.” In
most health insurance contexts, a central concern is that insurance coverage choice is
intimately related to underlying health; the chronically uninsured (never-takers) may
therefore be significantly healthier than the recently uninsured (compliers). Such a
relationship would diminish the response of never-takers to insurance coverage relative to
compliers. In this case, however, it is unlikely that adverse selection causes a significant
divergence in the mean health of never-takers and compliers. This is because the compliers’
pre-19 insurance coverage is an artifact of their parents’ insurance plans rather than a
reflection of their own poor health (if it were not, they would not drop coverage immediately
after turning 19). The typical adverse selection mechanism thus does not apply in this
context.


Moreover, we find no evidence that never-takers are significantly less healthy or consume
less health care than uninsured compliers. To test for any differences, we first use the
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), a two-year panel survey of health care


38In the NHIS data, we observe a 4.1 percentage point increase in the share uninsured at age 19. Roughly 20
percent of 18-year-olds in the NHIS are uninsured. In the ED and inpatient data, we observe increases in the
share uninsured at age 19 of 8.1 percentage points and 2.7 percentage points respectively. Roughly 21.5 percent
of 18-year-olds in the ED data are uninsured, and roughly 7.6 percent of 18-year-olds in the inpatient data are
uninsured.


                                                      19
consumption. We isolate respondents who enter the survey at age 18 with insurance and
then lose insurance during the second year of the survey. Such respondents are likely to be
“compliers.” We compare these respondents to respondents likely to be never-takers.39
Though there are few such respondents in the survey, we find no significant differences in
either self-reported health or total expenditures in the second year of the survey (when both
compliers and never-takers are uninsured).40


We confirm the null result in the MEPS with a similar exercise using NHIS data. We isolate
all NHIS respondents who are between 18 and 20 years of age and report being uninsured.
Using that selected sample, we test for a discontinuity at age 19 in the share of uninsured
respondents who report to be in bad health or report a functional limitation that prevents
them from certain activities. Such a regression discontinuity would suggest a sudden change
in the composition of the uninsured at age 19.41 We find no such discontinuity, confirming
our results from the MEPS. Overall, we find no evidence of significant compositional
differences between the compliers and the never-takers.


     7.2 AGE-SPECIFIC TREATMENT EFFECTS


All regression discontinuity designs estimate treatment effects at a particular threshold. In
this case, our estimates apply specifically to individuals close to their 19th birthday, though
they are likely to generalize to young adults in their late teens or early twenties.42 Older
individuals may react differently to a loss of health insurance. On the one hand, the overall

39 Such respondents are 18 years old at the end of the first survey year, and uninsured during both the first and
second years of the survey.
40 Specifically, we find 318 respondents who are “likely compliers” and compare them to 1,070 respondents

who are consistently uninsured (never-takers). In a comparison of means, likely compliers are 5.1 percentage
points less likely to report being in good health. This difference is statistically insignificant (t-statistic of 1.06)
and small relative to the proportion of consistently uninsured 18–20 year olds that report being in good health
(48.0 percent). Likely compliers also consume 43.61 dollars per year more in health care once uninsured. This
difference is again statistically insignificant (t-statistic of 0.24) and small relative to the mean health care
consumption of consistently uninsured 18–20 year olds (681.46 dollars per year).
41 For physical limitations, we estimate a statistically insignificant discontinuity of 0.000 (t-statistic of 0.00). The

mean of the physical limitations variable for 18–20 year olds is 0.036. For bad health, we estimate a statistically
insignificant discontinuity of 0.010 (t-statistic of 1.00). The mean of the bad health variable for 18–20 year olds
is 0.042.
42 In Appendix 23 we present the estimates of the discrete change in insurance and ED treatment rates that

occurs at age 23 when individuals that are still in school age out of their parents’ insurance. The change in
insurance coverage at age 23 is smaller than the one at age 19, but the difference between the elasticity
estimated at age 19 and the one estimated at age 23 is not statistically significant.


                                                          20
utilization of EDs and hospitals is relatively stable until at least age 50 (Figure 1). On the
other hand, older adults are susceptible to different medical conditions and may have greater
financial resources than uninsured young adults. These factors could affect their response to
the provision of health insurance.


We can only speculate as to how the estimates for 19-year-olds translate to the general
population. Nevertheless, simple “back-of-the-envelope” calculations suggest that even if the
behavioral response estimated above is twice as large as the average response, our results still
imply that universal coverage would lead to substantial increases in utilization. In 2005,
uninsured individuals constituted 16.7 percent of ED visits and 7.2 percent of inpatient stays
(Nawar, Niska, and Xu 2007; DeFrances, Cullen, and Kozak 2007). Suppose therefore that
universal coverage generates a 17 percentage point reduction in the share uninsured in EDs
and a 7 percentage point reduction in the share uninsured in hospitals. If the elasticities that
we estimate for 19-year-olds apply directly to the general population, then universal coverage
would generate an 11.4 percent increase in ED visits and an 11 percent increase in inpatient
visits. Such an increase, at present levels, amounts to an additional 13.1 million ED visits and
3.8 million inpatient hospital stays each year. Even if our estimates are twice as large as the
average response to uninsured status, universal coverage would generate an additional 6.6
million ED visits and 1.9 million inpatient hospital stays each year. Supply constraints might
attenuate an overall increase of this magnitude; however, in that case prices would likely rise
as well.


    7.3 SHORT RUN AND LONG RUN EFFECTS


Our results represent the short-run response to a change in health insurance coverage. The
short-run response, however, may differ from the long-run response for three reasons. First,
individuals may shift the timing of health care visits across the age 19 threshold. Second,
individuals may be able to postpone consumption in the short run but not in the long run.
Third, a reduction in preventative care visits may have no impact in the short run but could
increase demand for health care in the long run.




                                              21
The short time horizon in our study may allow individuals to shift the timing of health care
visits from the uninsured period to the insured period. When losing insurance, individuals
may “stockpile” health care shortly before coverage expires. When gaining insurance,
individuals may postpone health care until shortly after coverage begins. In either case, the
regression discontinuity we document would be confounded by such behavior. The
estimates would reflect the inter-temporal substitution response to a sharp, anticipated
change in health care prices and would overstate the net change in health care consumption.


However, there exists little evidence that individuals shift the timing of health care visits in
anticipation of gaining or losing insurance coverage. In an analysis of private insurance
claims records, Gross (2010) finds no evidence that teenagers who lose coverage at age 19
consume more hospital visits or prescription medication in the weeks before they lose
coverage. Card et al. (2008) find no evidence that individuals nearing age 65 postpone
inpatient care in significant numbers until they qualify for Medicare, and Long et al. (1998)
find little evidence of health care stockpiling for the general population. Additionally, the
figures of ED and inpatient visits above do not exhibit an increase in consumption in the
months immediately before people turn 19.


A similar estimation problem may arise if individuals postpone care in the hopes of regaining
coverage. If newly uninsured 19-year-olds expect to regain insurance coverage within the
next six months, for example, they may postpone care until that point. The empirical
evidence suggests that this dynamic is not present, however. The age profiles in ED and
inpatient care utilization (Figures 6, 7, and 9) show no evidence of postponement. If
individuals were postponing care immediately after losing coverage, then we would expect
the slope of the age profile to become steeper after age 19. Instead, in every case the slope of
the age profile becomes less steep after age 19.


Finally, the RD approach isolates individuals who are insured one day and uninsured the
next. As a result, it provides estimates of the effect of health insurance independent from the
effect of insurance on health itself. In the long run, though, insults to health accumulate, care
may become more critical, and individuals may become less price sensitive. In that case, our
estimates could overstate the long-run increase in care that would ensue from an expansion


                                               22
of health insurance coverage. While the long run effect of health insurance on health is an
important research question, it is beyond the scope of this paper. To our knowledge, little
convincing evidence exists that can quantify the extent to which coverage affects health in
the long run.


Nevertheless, a substantial share of the uninsured are without coverage for a short period of
time. Among the currently uninsured, 25 percent have been uninsured for less than one year,
and 45 percent have been uninsured for less than three years.43 Our estimates apply directly
to this large group of the “recently uninsured.”


     8. CONCLUSION


We leverage a sharp discontinuity in health insurance coverage that occurs when dependents
age out of their parents’ insurance plans at age 19. By exploiting that discontinuity, we
estimate the effects of health insurance coverage on utilization of care. We find that losing
health insurance coverage reduces utilization of both emergency department care and
inpatient care. The estimated responses are large – a 10 percentage point decrease in the
insurance coverage rate among ED patients reduces ED visits by 4.0 percent, and a 10
percentage point decrease in the insurance coverage rate among hospital patients reduces
hospital visits by 6.1 percent. The reduction in hospital visits is stronger for non-urgent
admissions, and the reductions in ED and hospital visits are concentrated among for-profit
and non-profit hospitals, as opposed to public hospitals.


The net effect of losing health insurance on utilization of care is unambiguously negative for
our study population. The results clarify several uncertainties about the impacts of insurance
coverage on utilization of care. First, losing insurance coverage results in a net decrease in
emergency department care. This suggests that newly uninsured patients do not substitute
emergency department care for primary care (or, if they do substitute care towards the
emergency department, the substituted care is swamped by a reduction in their normal

43 These calculations are based on the NHIS. Note that the proportion of uninsured spells that are short-term
is even larger than the proportion of currently uninsured individuals who will be short-term uninsured. Cutler
and Gelber (2009) find, for example, that from 2001 to 2004, 76 percent of uninsured spells last less than two
years among 18 to 61 year olds.


                                                     23
emergency department visits). Second, any increase in uncompensated charity care is
insufficient to offset the decrease in paid care, as total ED and inpatient care both fall.
Finally, losing insurance does increase the proportion of care that individuals receive at
public hospitals. However, this increase is solely due to a decrease in care received at for-
profit and non-profit hospitals. The total amount of care at public hospitals does not
increase.


Our results apply specifically to young adults that lose insurance coverage by aging out of
their parents’ insurance plans. Nevertheless, evidence suggests that the coefficients may
generalize to the greater population of uninsured young adults, and 19 to 35 year olds
comprise over half of uninsured non-elderly adults. Applying our estimated elasticities to all
non-elderly adults, we project that near-universal coverage could raise total hospital stays by
3.8 million per year and ED visits by 13.1 million per year, subject to supply constraints.
Near-universal coverage would thus increase the amount of care received by currently
uninsured individuals and require a substantial increase in net expenditures.




                                              24
                                         REFERENCES


Abelson, R. 2008. “Uninsured Put a Strain on Hospitals.” The New York Times.


Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin. 1996. “Identification of Causal
        Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
        91(434): 444-455.


Ayanian, John Z. et al. 2000. “Unmet Health Needs of Uninsured Adults in the United
        States.” Journal of the American Medical Association 284(16): 2061-2069.


Bamezai, Anil, Glenn Melnick, and Amar Nawathe. 2005. “The Cost of an Emergency
        Department Visit and its Relationship to Emergency Department Volume.” Annals of
        Emergency Medicine 45(5): 483-490.


Braveman, P. et al. 1994. “Insurance-Related Differences in the Risk of Ruptured
        Appendix.” The New England Journal of Medicine 331(7): 444-449.


Campbell, Donald. 1969. “Reforms as Experiments.” American Psychologist: 409–429.


Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2009. “Does Medicare Save Lives?.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 597-636.


Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2008. “The Impact of Nearly Universal
        Insurance Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare.” American
        Economic Review 98(5): 2242-2258.


Care Without Coverage. 2002. Institute of Medicine.




                                                25
Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker, and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. “Has Public Health Insurance for
       Older Children Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?.”
       Journal of Health Economics 27(6): 1567-1581.


Cutler, David, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
       Insurance?.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391–430.


Cutler, David M, and Alexander M Gelber. 2009. “Changes in the Incidence and Duration of
       Periods without Insurance.” The New England Journal of Medicine 360(17): 1740-1748.


Dafny, Leemore, and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:
       Access and Efficiency Effects.” Journal of Public Economics 89: 109–129.


DeFrances, Carol J, Karen A Cullen, and Lola Jean Kozak. 2007. “National Hospital
       Discharge Survey: 2005 annual summary with detailed diagnosis and procedure
       data.” Vital and Health Statistics. Series 13, Data from the National Health Survey (165): 1-
       209.


Fatovich, Daniel M. 2002. “Recent developments: Emergency Medicine.” British Medical
       Journal 324(7343): 958–962.


Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
       Introduction of Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1–37).


Gross, Tal. 2010. “Using Insurance Before you Lose It: Health Care Consumption at the
       End of Coverage.”.


Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and
       Estimation of Treatment Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design.”
       Econometrica 69(1): 201-209.




                                                26
Kellermann, Arthur L. 2006. “Crisis in the Emergency Department.” The New England Journal
       of Medicine 355(13): 1300-1303.


Kriss, Jennifer L et al. 2008. “Rite of Passage? Why Young Adults Become Uninsured and
       How New Policies Can Help, 2008 Update.” Issue Brief (Commonwealth Fund) 38: 1-24.


Kwack, H. et al. 2004. “Effect of Managed Care on Emergency Department Use in an
       Uninsured Population.” Annals of Emergency Medicine 43(2): 166-173.


Long, Stephen H., M. Susan Marquis, and Jack Rodgers. 1998. “Do People Shift Their Use
       of Health Services Over Time to Take Advantage of Insurance?.” Journal of Health
       Economics 17(1): 105–115.


Nawar, Eric W, Richard W Niska, and Jianmin Xu. 2007. “National Hospital Ambulatory
       Medical Care Survey: 2005 emergency department summary.” Advance Data (386): 1-
       32.


Newton, M. F et al. 2008. “Uninsured Adults Presenting to US Emergency Departments:
       Assumptions versus Data.” Journal of American Medical Association 300(16): 1914-1924.


Polsky, Daniel, and Sean Nicholson. 2004. “Why Are Managed Care Plans Less Expensive:
       Risk Selection, Utilization, Or Reimbursement?.” The Journal of Risk and Insurance
       71(1): 21–40.


Schoen, C. et al. 2008. “How Many Are Underinsured? Trends Among US Adults, 2003 and
       2007.” Health Affairs 27(4): w298.


Trzeciak, S, and E P Rivers. 2003. “Emergency Department Overcrowding in the United
       States: an Emerging Threat to Patient Safety and Public Health.” Emergency Medicine
       Journal: EMJ 20(5): 402-405.




                                             27
Weissman, Joel S., Constantine Gatsonis, and Arnold M. Epstein. 1992. “Rates of Avoidable
       Hospitalization by Insurance Status in Massachusetts and Maryland.” Journal of
       American Medical Association 268(17): 2388-2394.


Williams, R M. 1996. “The Costs of Visits to Emergency Departments.” The New England
       Journal of Medicine 334(10): 642-646.




                                               28
    9. APPENDIX A: ECONOMETRIC THEORY


In this appendix, we present the derivation of the empirical methods that we rely on above.
First, recall that our reduced-form regressions involve the logarithm of counts of hospital
visits on the left-hand side, and a first-order polynomial of age on the right-hand side (with
the sample restricted to individuals within one year of their 19th birthdays). This specification
recovers the population-level change in the probability of visiting the hospital at age 19. In
particular, note that the structural relationship of interest is:




(A1)                                                                     .




The left-hand side of equation (A1) represents the probability of having a hospital visit for
age group a (that is, the total number of visits divided by the total number of individuals in
the population of age a). Since we rely on administrative records, we do not observe the size
of each age group in the underlying population. Instead, we assume that the underlying
population at risk for a hospital visit evolves smoothly with age. Under this assumption, we
can subtract             from each side of the equation and allow the polynomial              to
“absorb” changes in the size of the underlying population. In this way, our primary reduced-
form estimating equation involves only simple counts of hospital visits but still captures the
change in the unconditional probability of a hospital visit at age 19.


The description above justifies our reduced-form approach. But, as described in the main
text, a remaining challenge is to consistently estimate both the first stage and the
instrumental variables relationships using hospital administrative data. To do so, we rely on a
bias correction in the first stage and an additional monotonicity assumption when
interpreting the instrumental variables relationship. We demonstrate that, when applied to
the ED data, the bias-corrected instrumental variables estimator converges to the average
effect of insurance for individuals that lose their insurance coverage at age 19 and visit the
ED shortly before age 19.



                                                 29
     9.1 NOTATION AND ASSUMPTIONS


Define the instrument Zi such that              if individual i is encouraged to be uninsured (i.e., is
older than the age cutoff threshold) and                  if individual i is encouraged to be insured
(i.e., is younger than the age cutoff threshold). Define the insurance indicator Di such that
        if individual i is insured and           if individual i is uninsured. Define the outcome Yi
such that          if individual i visits the ED and            if individual i does not visit the ED.44
Using the potential outcomes notation from Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1996), define
Di(Zi) such that Di(1) represents the insurance status of individual i when encouraged to be
uninsured and Di(0) represents the insurance status of individual i when encouraged to be
insured. Note that the relationship between Di and Zi is negative. Define potential outcomes
Yi(Zi) such that Yi(1) represents the ED visit indicator for individual i when encouraged to
be uninsured and Yi(0) represents the ED visit indicator for individual i when encouraged to
be insured. To represent potential outcomes under different insurance regimes, Yi(Di), let
            represent the ED visit indicator for individual i when insured and
represent the ED visit indicator for individual i when uninsured. Finally, define y0 to be the
total number of ED visits pre-19 (i.e., for individuals with                ), y1 to be the total number
of ED visits post-19 (i.e., for individuals with              ), d0 to be the total number of insured
ED visits pre-19 (i.e., for individuals with             ), and d1 to be the total number of insured
ED visits post-19 (i.e., for individuals with                 ). Let N be the total population of
individuals (both those that visit the ED and those that do not visit the ED).


We impose the standard LATE monotonicity assumption:


LATE Monotonicity: If              , then            .


In other words, if individual i is insured when encouraged to be uninsured, then individual i
would also be insured when encouraged to be insured. We define the four potential types of
individuals under the LATE Monotonicity assumption as:

44For the following derivations, we assume that the RD bandwidth is small enough that the probability of any
individual visiting the ED twice is effectively zero.


                                                    30
LATE Always-takers (LAT):                  and
LATE Never-takers (LNT):                   and
LATE Compliers (LC):                and
LATE Defiers:               and             (ruled out by LATE Monotonicity)


We also impose an Extended Monotonicity assumption that we later relax:


Extended Monotonicity: If         , then           .


In other words, if individual i visits the ED when encouraged to be uninsured, then
individual i would also visit the ED when encouraged to be insured. Given the LATE
Monotonicity assumption, this assumption is equivalent to assuming that if individual i visits
the ED when uninsured, then individual i would also visit the ED when insured. We define
the four potential types of individuals under the Extended Monotonicity assumption as:


Extended Always-takers (EAT):                and
Extended Never-takers (ENT):                 and
Extended Compliers (EC):              and
Extended Defiers (EDF):               and               (ruled out by Extended Monotonicity)


    9.1.1   BIAS-CORRECTED FIRST STAGE


We first derive the bias-corrected first stage. Ideally we would estimate                   , or the
unconditional change in the probability of insurance coverage. However, it is impossible to
estimate this quantity using ED data alone, since individuals only appear in these data if they
visit the ED. We instead estimate                              , or the change in the probability of
insurance coverage for individuals that visit the ED when encouraged to be insured (i.e., pre-
19). Under the LATE Monotonicity assumption,




                                                   31
                                                    ; the decrease in the probability of
insurance coverage is equal to the proportion of LATE compliers. To estimate
                     , we implement the bias-corrected first stage:



(A2)



We show that this estimator converges to                      .




                                           )



By Law of Total Probability and LATE Monotonicity:


(A3)




By the IV exclusion restriction and the definitions of LATE always-takers, LATE never-
takers, and LATE compliers:


i is LAT implies:                and
i is LNT implies:                 and
i is LC implies:        and


Thus equation (A3) equals:




                                               32
(A4)




The bias-corrected first stage therefore estimates the probability that an individual is a LATE
complier conditional on that individual visiting the ED when encouraged to be insured (i.e.,
pre-19). Equivalently, it represents a weighted average effect of the age 19 threshold on
insurance coverage rates, where the weight for individual i is proportional to that individual’s
probability of visiting the ED just before turning 19. Note that the Extended Monotonicity
assumption is not necessary to derive the bias-corrected first stage estimand.


   9.1.2   REDUCED FORM


We estimate the percentage decline in visits induced by the instrument (i.e., crossing the “age
out” threshold). The reduced form is:



(A5)


We show that this estimator converges to
                                                            .




By Law of Total Probability:




                                              33
By LATE Monotonicity (which implies that                    only for LATE compliers):




By Bayes’ Thoerem:




(A6)




By Extended Monotonicity,          implies           , so
                              . Thus equation (A6) equals:




(A7)


By definition of LATE compliers,           implies           , and       implies        . Thus
equation (A7) equals:




Under the Extended Monotonicity assumption, the reduced form thus estimates the average
causal effect of losing insurance on ED visits for LATE compliers that visit the ED pre-19
(i.e., with       ) times the probability of being a LATE complier conditional on visiting



                                             34
the     ED     pre-19.       For   completeness,        note   that                      equals
                         .


      9.1.3   INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATOR


The instrumental variables estimator (of which the fuzzy RD is a special case) equals the
reduced-form estimator shown in equation (A5) divided by the bias-corrected first-stage
estimator shown in equation (A2). It thus converges to:




Thus, under the Extended Monotonicity assumption, the IV coefficient estimates the
average effect of Di on Yi for the subset of LATE compliers that visit the ED when
(i.e., that visit the ED pre-19). This is equivalent to a weighted average effect for the entire
population of compliers, where the weights are proportional to the probability of visiting the
ED pre-19.


      9.2 RELAXING THE EXTENDED MONOTONICITY ASSUMPTION


The Extended Monotonicity assumption implies that losing insurance weakly affects
individuals’ propensity to visit the ED in one direction. This assumption is not guaranteed to
hold in the ED data; it is possible that losing insurance induces some people to stop visiting
the ED but induces others to start. (The Extended Monotonicity assumption more plausibly
holds in the inpatient data used in Section 6; see footnote 35.) We now derive the reduced-
form estimand while relaxing the Extended Monotonicity assumption. We then derive the
modified first stage that is necessary to rescale the reduced-form estimand.


      9.2.1   REDUCED FORM




                                                   35
The reduced form is          , or the percentage decline in visits induced by the instrument.

As shown in equation (A6) above, under LATE Monotonocity                converges to:



(A8)



Note the convergence of the reduced form to equation (A8) does not depend on the
Extended Monotonicity assumption. By the definition of LATE complier, equation (A8)
equals:




(A9)




Under LATE Monotonicity, the reduced form estimates a weighted sum of two average
causal effects of Di on Yi. The first is the average causal effect of losing insurance for LATE
compliers that visit the ED pre-19 (i.e., that have        ). The second is the average causal
effect of losing insurance for LATE compliers that visit the ED post-19 (i.e., that have
          ). Note that these two groups are not mutually exclusive; individuals that are
“extended always-takers” appear in both groups.


    9.2.2    MODIFIED FIRST STAGE


The goal of the modified first stage is to recover the weights in the reduced form above. The
original bias-adjusted first stage converged to                      (which is identical to the



                                              36
first of the two weights above). We modify the first stage so that it now estimates the sum of
the two weights above. The modified first stage is:


(A10)



From the derivation of the original bias-adjusted first stage, the first term of equation (A10)
converges to twice the quantity shown in equation (A4):




The last term of equation (A10) converges to:




(A11)




By the IV exclusion restriction and the definitions of LATE always-takers and LATE never-
takers, “i is LAT” or “i is LNT” imply that             . Thus equation (A11) equals:




The modified first stage shown in equation (A10) thus converges to:




                                              37
(A12)



The modified first stage, equation (A10), therefore estimates the sum of the weights from
the reduced form.


     9.2.3   MODIFIED INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATOR


The modified instrumental variables estimator equals the reduced form estimator shown in
equation (A5) divided by the modified first-stage estimator shown in equation (A10). It thus
converges to:




Thus, when relaxing the Extended Monotonicity assumption, the modified instrumental
variables estimator converges to a weighted average of two average causal effects of Di on Yi.
The first is the average causal effect of losing insurance for LATE compliers that visit the
ED pre-19 (i.e., that have                  ). The second is the average causal effect of losing
insurance for LATE compliers that visit the ED post-19 (i.e., that have                         ). Note that
these two groups are not mutually exclusive. In particular, both groups contain LATE
compliers that would visit the ED regardless of insurance status. Thus the average is skewed
towards this group, but for this group insurance status has no causal effect on ED visits. The
modified instrumental variables estimand is thus attenuated relative to the expected effect of
increasing health insurance coverage for all LATE compliers.


     9.2.4   ESTIMATES FROM EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT DATA


The modified first-stage, equation (A10), is equal to –0.126 in the ED data.45 The modified
first stage thus generates a modified IV estimate of 0.263, as compared to the original IV

45We count privately insured patients, Medicaid patients, and “other insurance” patients as insured. Taking the
estimates from Tables 5 and 6, equation (A10) thus equals 2*(–0.628 – 0.0166 –0.0015) + 0.033 = –0.126.


                                                      38
estimate of 0.404. However, as noted in Section 9.2.3, this estimate is attenuated in the sense
that it places double weight on individuals that visit the ED regardless of insurance status
(“extended always-takers”), because for these individuals            and         . To see that
these individuals receive double weight, note that the reduced form estimand, equation (A9),
can be rewritten as:




The extended always-takers (EAT) appear twice because they visit the ED both when
insured and uninsured. By definition, however,                                   for extended
always-takers, so either of the conditional expectations involving extended always-takers can
be eliminated. Thus the reduced form also converges to:


                                              39
(A13)




The reduced form therefore estimates a weighted average of three average causal effects: the
average causal effect for LATE compliers who are extended always-takers, the average causal
effect for LATE compliers who are “extended compliers” (individuals that visit the ED only
when insured), and the average causal effect for LATE compliers who are “extended
defiers” (individuals that visit the ED only when uninsured). These three mutually exclusive
groups exhaust the population of LATE compliers that visit the ED. Each group’s weight is
proportional to its share of LATE compliers that visit the ED either before or after age 19
(i.e., LATE compliers who are not extended never-takers). With estimates of the weights in
equation (A13), we can recover the average causal effect of insurance for LATE compliers
that visit the ED before or after age 19.


It is impossible, however, to identify exactly what portion of LATE compliers are extended
always-takers versus extended compliers or extended defiers. But note that from equation
(A4), the original bias-corrected first stage (equation (A2)) estimates

                                                                  , or the sum of the first two

weights in equation (A13). As reported in Table 4, this quantity equals 0.081. Likewise,
equations (A12) and (A4) imply that the difference between the modified bias-corrected first
stage (equation (A10)) and the original bias-corrected first stage (equation (A2)) estimates

                                                                     , or the sum of the first

and third weights in equation (A13). This quantity is 0.045 (given by 0.126 – 0.081 = 0.045).
However, equation (A13) has three unknown quantities, and we have only two linearly
independent estimates, equations (A2) and (A10). We must therefore make an additional
assumption to derive a bound on the sum of the weights in equation (A13).


                                               40
To establish an upper bound (in magnitude) on the sum of the three weights in equation
(A13), we make the reasonable assumption that the number of LATE compliers that stop
visiting the ED when becoming uninsured (extended compliers) is no greater than the
number of LATE compliers that either continue to visit the ED when becoming uninsured
or begin visiting the ED when becoming uninsured (extended always-takers plus extended
defiers). In other words, we assume that the number of newly uninsured that stop visiting
the ED is no greater than the number of newly uninsured that continue visiting the ED plus
the number of newly uninsured that begin visiting the ED. Under this assumption,

                   is at most 0.045, and thus                           is at least 0.036 (given by

0.081 – 0.045 = 0.036). We therefore adjust the modified first-stage estimator for double
counting of extended always-takers by subtracting at least 0.036, and find that the modified
first-stage estimator has an upper bound (in magnitude) of 0.090 (given by 0.126 – 0.036 =
0.090). A modified first-stage of –0.090 generates a modified IV estimate of 0.364. We thus
conclude that losing insurance coverage reduces the probability of an ED visit for LATE
compliers that could potentially visit the ED by at least 36 percent.




                                              41
                                                       Figure 1: Age Profile of Proportion Uninsured, ED visits and Hospital Stays


                           0.4

                                                                                                          Uninsured

                                                                                                          Hospital Stay in Past 12 Months

                                                                                                          Emergency Department Visit in Past 12 Months
                           0.3
Proportion of Population




                           0.2




                           0.1




                            0
                                 0              10                20               30           40            50            60              70           80
                                                                                               Age in Years

                                 Notes: These estimates are derived from the NHIS 1997-2007.
                                              Figure 2: Age Profile of Health Insurance Coverage in the United States
                                                           National Health Interview Survey (1997-2007)


                     0.7



                     0.6
                            Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                            Insurance Coverage.
                     0.5                     RD     (SE)                                                                                     Private Insurance
Proportion Covered




                            Private         -2.01 (1.31)
                            Uninsured        4.12 (1.12)
                     0.4    Medicaid        -1.00 (0.75)
                            Other Insur.    -1.15 (0.69)                                                                                   Uninsured

                     0.3



                     0.2
                                                                                                                                           Medicaid

                     0.1


                            Other Insurance
                       0
                       .0




                                                       .5




                                                                                            .0




                                                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                              .0
                     18




                                                     18




                                                                                          19




                                                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                          Approximate Age at Time of Survey
    Notes: Regressions and proportions are weighted to take into account the stratified structure of the NHIS. The regression lines superimposed on the proportions are from a linear
    polynomial in age interacted with a dummy that takes on a value of one for people over 19 and 0 otherwise. This regression is fit on the micro data rather than the means of the bins.
    The age variable is centered on the last day of the month on which the individual's 19th birthday falls. Individuals with unknown month of birth comprise 11.1 percent of the surveyed
    population that are 18 or 19 at the time of the survey and they have been dropped from the analysis. The age profiles above include 24,260 individuals from the NHIS person files.
                                                           Figure 3: Age Profile of Proportion Uninsured by School Attendance
                                                                      National Health Interview Survey (1997-2007)
                       0.5


                                    Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                                    Proportion Uninsured.
                       0.4                           RD     (SE)
                                    Not in School 7.09 (1.38)                                             Not In School
                                    In School       -3.41 (1.63)
Proportion Uninsured




                       0.3




                       0.2




                       0.1

                                                                                                                                                        In School



                         0
                         .0




                                                                 .5




                                                                                                          .0




                                                                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                                            .0
                       18




                                                               18




                                                                                                        19




                                                                                                                                                 19




                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                        Approximate Age at Time of Survey
                              Notes: See notes from Figure 2. As can be inferred from how the proportions vary around the fitted lines the "In School" group is shrinking with age and the "Not in
                              School" group is growing, however there is no discrete change at age 19 in the mix of these groups. There are 17,058 individuals coded as not in school and 7,202
                              coded as in school.
                                                                           Figure 4: Age Profile of Loss of Insurance Due to Age or Leaving School by School Attendance
                                                                                                     National Health Interview Survey (1997-2007)
                                                              0.2
Proportion That Lost Coverage Due to Age or Leaving School




                                                                        Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                                                                        Loss of Insurance Due to Age/School                                       Not in School
                                                                        Enrollment.
                                                             0.15                        RD       (SE)
                                                                        Not in School 5.64       (1.07)
                                                                        In School       0.53      (0.76)




                                                              0.1




                                                             0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                          In School

                                                               0
                                                               .0




                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                             .0




                                                                                                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .0
                                                             18




                                                                                                   18




                                                                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                            Approximate Age at Time of Survey
                                                                    Notes: See notes from Figure 2. In the National Health Interview Survey the respondent is asked the following question regarding all household members that are
                                                                    currently without health insurance. "Which of these are reasons (you/subject name) stopped being covered or do not have health insurance?" One possible answer
                                                                    they can choose from is "Ineligible because of age/left school".
                                                          Figure 5: Age Profile of Insurance Coverage for People Entering the Emergency Department


                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                     Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in Insurance
                                                                                                                                                     Coverage
                                                                                                                                                                          RD       (SE)
                                       0.5                                                                                                           Private          -0.0499 (0.0022)
                                                                                                                                                     Uninsured          0.0572 (0.0017)
Proportion of Patients with Coverage




                                                                                                                                                     Medicaid          -0.0082 (0.0018)
                                                                                                                                                     Other Insurance -0.0009 (0.0009)
                                       0.4          Private Insurance




                                       0.3




                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                  Medicaid
                                                                    Uninsured                                                         Other Insurance
                                       0.1




                                        0
                                             18                                      18.5                                       19                                       19.5                                     20
                                                                                                                   Age at Time of ED Visit
                                             Notes: The Emergency Department datasets used to make the age profiles above are a near census of ED visits in Arizona (2005-2007), California (2005-
                                             2007), Iowa (2004-2007), New Jersey (2004-2007) and Wisconsin (2004-2007). Only hospitals that are not under state oversight do not contribute data. The
                                             sample includes 1,744,394 ED visits by individuals either 18 or 19 years old. The dependant variable in the regressions is the proportion of individuals that lack
                                             health insurance.
                                                                        Figure 6: Age Profile of Emergency Department Visits by Gender




                                 3600



                                                     Female
Visits per 10,000 Person Years




                                 3200

                                                                                                                                  Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in ED Visits
                                                                                                                                  by Gender
                                                                                                                                                          RD        (SE)
                                                                                                                                  Female ln(visits) -0.0360 (0.0053)
                                 2800                                                                                             Male ln(visits)    -0.0328 (0.0056)
                                                                                              Male




                                 2400




                                 2000
                                        18                                   18.5                                   19                                  19.5                                      20
                                                                                                       Age at time of ED Visit
                                             Notes: See notes from Figure 5. The age profiles are in rates per 10,000 person years. The dependant variable for the regression estimates is the
                                             natural log of the admission counts. The female category does not include pregnant women (13.5% of ED visits). Patients that present at the ED and
                                             are admitted to the hospital are drawn from hospital discharge records and included in the analysis.
                                                               Figure 7: Age Profile of Emergency Department Visits By Ownership of Hospital


                                    2500                                                                                                                                                         625
                                                       Non Profit Hospitals


                                    2250




                                                                                                                                                                                                   ED Visits to Public and For Profit Hospitals
ED Visits to Non Profit Hospitals




                                    2000              Public Hospitals




                                    1750                                                                                                                                                         437




                                    1500


                                                                                                                                          Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in ED Visits
                                    1250                                                                                                  by Hospital Ownership
                                                                                                                                                                     RD       (SE)
                                                               For Profit Hospitals                                                       Non Profit ln(visits)   -0.0374 (0.0064)
                                                                                                                                          Public ln(visits)      -0.0057 (0.0102)
                                                                                                                                          For Profit ln(visits)  -0.0438 (0.0101)
                                    1000                                                                                                                                                         250
                                           18                                   18.5                                     19                                    19.5                         20
                                                                                                            Age at Time of ED Visit
                                    Notes: See notes from Figure 6. Approximately 1.4 percent of people are admitted to hospitals of unknown ownership type.
                                                          Figure 8: Age Profile of Insurance Coverage for Hospital Admissions


                                                                                                                                         Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                           0.6                                                                                                           Insurance Coverage
                                                                                                                                                             RD        (SE)
                                                                                                                                         Private          -0.0496 (0.0027)
                                                                                                                                         Medicaid          0.0209 (0.0023)
                           0.5                                                                                                           Uninsured         0.0261 (0.0016)
                                                                                                                                         Other Insurance 0.0038 (0.0012)
Proportion with Coverage




                           0.4
                                                                                                                                          Private


                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                               Medicaid


                           0.2                                                                                       Uninsured



                           0.1


                                                                                                                                                  Other
                             0
                             .0




                                                                   .5




                                                                                                          .0




                                                                                                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                                                         .0
                           18




                                                                 18




                                                                                                        19




                                                                                                                                                19




                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                       Approximate Age at Time of Admission
                            Notes: The hospital discharge datasets used to make the age profiles include a near census of hospital stays in Arizona (2000-2007), California (1990-2006), Iowa
                            (2004-2007), New York (1990-2006), Texas (1999-2003) and Wisconsin (2004-2007). Women that are pregnant have been dropped from the sample. Combining the
                            data from the six states gives a sample of 849,610 18 and 19 year olds. Each of the points plotted above is the proportion of people with a particular type of
                            coverage. The lines are the fitted values from a linear regression fitted to the points on either side of the age 19 cut off.
                                                           Figure 9: Hospital Admissions by Gender and Route into Hospital

                       12000


                                                        Male Through ED
                       11000
                                                                                                                      Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in Admissions
                                                                                                                                                            RD        (SE)
                                                                                                                      Male Via ED                         -0.0195   (0.0075)
                       10000                                                                                          Female Not Pregnant Via ED          -0.0125    (0.0122)
Counts of Admissions




                                                         Female not Pregnant                                          Male not Via ED                     -0.0670   (0.0114)
                                                         Through ED                                                   Female not Pregnant not Via ED -0.0602         (0.0089)


                        9000




                        8000                                                                                                    Male Not Through ED




                        7000

                                                                                                                                                  Female not Pregnant not
                                                                                                                                                  Through ED
                        6000
                           .0




                                                                 .5




                                                                                                         .0




                                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                                                                          .0
                         18




                                                               18




                                                                                                       19




                                                                                                                                               19




                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                     Approximate Age at Time of Admission
                           Notes: See notes from Figure 8. Each of the points plotted above is the number of people admitted to the hospital at a particular month in age. The line laying over the
                           points is the fitted values from a linear regression estimated from the observations on either side of the age 19 cut off. The point estimate in the box is the estimate
                           from a regression with the same specification but the dependant variable is the natural log of the counts.
          Table 1: Differences Between Insured and Uninsured Young Adults
                     (National Health Interview Survey 1997-2007)
                                                                              Regression
                                                        Difference             Estimates
                                                         Between              of Discrete T-statistic
                                                         Insured   T-stat for Jump at 19       for
                                                            and    Difference   (1 year   difference
                                 Insured      Uninsured Uninsured in Means Bandwidth)        in RD

                                    (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
Employed                           52.1           55.0            3.0            3.4           -2.4           -1.7
In School                          33.3           17.9          -15.4          -18.6            1.0            0.7
Percent Days Drinking              5.9            5.9             0.0           -0.1            0.2            0.4
Smoker                             20.5           33.8           13.3            8.7           -0.3           -0.2
Flu Shot Last 12 Months            15.5           10.2           -5.4           -4.7           -2.2           -1.2
Married                            3.5            7.7             4.2            9.1           -0.5           -1.0
White                              70.2           50.0          -20.2          -22.0            3.8            2.7
Black                              13.5           16.1            2.7            3.9           -1.1           -1.0
Hispanic                           10.8           28.7           18.0           25.0           -1.5           -1.7
Male                               49.2           53.7            4.6            5.3           -1.1           -0.7
Notes: All the estimates in the table are based on a dataset created by stacking the NHIS Person Files and Sample Adult
Files for the 1997-2007 survey years. All the estimates are presented in percents. The estimates are weighted and the
standard errors are adjusted to account for the stratified sampling frame. The outcomes Flu Shot, Smoker and Percent
Days Drinking are coded from the NHIS Sample Adult files 1997-2007 which include 8,121 respondents surveyed within
12 months of their 19th birthday. The remaining variables are coded from the NHIS Person file 1997-2007 which includes
24,260 respondents surveyed within 12 months of their 19th birthday. The regression discontinuity estimates in the
column 5 and its t-statistic in column 6 are from a linear polynomial interacted with an indicator variable for over 19
estimated from all respondents surveyed within 12 months of their 19th birthday.
       Table 2: Change in Distribution of Insurance Coverage at Age 19

                          Private
                        Insurance               Uninsured                Medicaid           Other Insurance
                       (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)

All                  -2.01    -2.49           4.12     4.61          -1.00    -1.03          -1.15    -1.13
                     [1.31] [1.23]           [1.12] [1.09]           [0.75] [0.72]           [0.69]    [0.7]
                          64.76                   20.06                   8.87                    6.73

                     -5.33    -5.05           7.09     7.11          -0.06    -0.34          -1.86    -1.89
Not in School         [1.6]   [1.52]         [1.38] [1.37]           [0.91] [0.88]           [0.89] [0.89]
                          62.31                   22.21                   8.53                    7.44

                      6.21     4.13          -3.41    -2.29          -3.04    -2.33           0.48      0.74
In School            [2.12] [2.05]           [1.63] [1.63]           [1.30] [1.25]           [1.20] [1.20]
                          70.99                   14.62                   9.54                     5.16
Covariates             No         Yes          No         Yes          No         Yes          No         Yes
Notes: For each population above the table includes an estimate of the discrete change in the variable that
occurs at age 19 with its standard error in brackets below. The regressions are estimates via a linear probability
model and the point estimates have been multiplied by 100 to put them in percentage points. Underneath the
standard error we include an estimate of the average level of the variable just before people turn 19. The
regressions all include a dummy for over age 19 and a linear term in age interacted with the dummy. The
regressions are weighted to take into account the stratified sampling frame in the NHIS. The second regression
of each pair includes the following covariates Hispanic, black, male, employed, attending school and married.
The regressions estimated using the subpopulation of respondents that are not in school do not include the
indicator variable for attending school. The regression estimated using respondents that are in school do not
include the indicator variable for attending school or the indicator variable for employed. The regressions
include all young adults surveyed within 12 months of their 19th birthday of which there are 24,260 in the NHIS
person files between 1997 and 2007 for whom month of birth is available (11.1% of people in this approximate
age range do not have a recorded month of birth). Respondents were asked if they had a job or were looking
for work. Those that responded they weren't could choose among several explanations one of which was "going
to school". We coded people who responded "Going to School" as in school though it is clear the pattern of
questions makes it likely that some individuals that are in school will be coded as not in school. Of the
individuals with birth months available 17,058 are coded as not in school and 7,202 are coded as in school.
      Table 3: Cause of Insurance Loss and Source of Coverage
                        Lost Insurance Due to Age              Insurance in Own Name
                              (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)

All                          4.30              4.32              -0.67             -0.52
                             [0.8]            [0.79]             [0.67]            [0.68]
                                      5.69                                 5.10

                             5.64              5.51              -1.01             -0.85
Not in School               [1.07]            [1.06]             [0.86]            [0.87]
                                      7.38                                 6.35

                             0.53              0.73               0.27              0.18
In School                   [0.76]            [0.75]             [0.88]            [0.89]
                                      1.67                                 2.23
Covariates                    No               Yes                 No               Yes
Notes: See notes from Table 2. In the National Health Interview Survey the respondent is asked
the following question regarding all household members that are currently without health
insurance. "Which of these are reasons (you/subject name) stopped being covered or do not
have health insurance?" One possible answer they can choose from is "Ineligible because of
age/left school". Respondents that report having health insurance are asked if the insurance is
in their own name or someone else's name.
  Table 4: Change at Age 19 in Insurance Coverage of Emergency Department Visits
                           Private                    Uninsured                     Medicaid                Other Insurance
                              (1)                          (2)                          (3)                          (4)

All                        -0.0628                       0.0810                      -0.0166                     -0.0015
                           [0.0026]                     [0.0046]                     [0.0024]                    [0.0010]
                            0.4471                       0.2154                       0.2644                      0.0731

All (Except                -0.0628                       0.0842                      -0.0200                     -0.0014
Pregnant)                  [0.0027]                     [0.0048]                     [0.0024]                    [0.0011]
                            0.4647                       0.2178                       0.2417                      0.0759

Male                       -0.0657                       0.0831                      -0.0191                      0.0017
                           [0.0035]                     [0.0050]                     [0.0026]                    [0.0015]
                            0.4632                       0.2479                       0.1949                      0.0941

Female                     -0.0605                       0.0791                      -0.0156                     -0.0030
                           [0.0030]                     [0.0056]                     [0.0032]                    [0.0012]
                            0.4336                       0.1942                       0.3159                      0.0563

Female Not                 -0.0597                       0.0844                      -0.0216                     -0.0031
Pregnant                   [0.0033]                     [0.0059]                     [0.0029]                    [0.0014]
                            0.4639                       0.1953                       0.2820                      0.0588
Notes: The Emergency Department visits used to estimate the regressions are a near census of ED visits in Arizona (2005-2007),
California (2005-2007), Iowa (2004-2007), New Jersey (2004-2007) and Wisconsin (2004-2007).The parameter estimates in the
table above are the percentage point change in insurance coverage when people age out of their insurance coverage on the last
day of the month in which they turn 19. The standard errors are in brackets directly below the parameter estimates. Below the SE
we have included the estimated level of the dependant variable immediately before people age out. The parameter estimates are
adjusted for the decline in admissions under the assumption that the decline in admission is due entirely to people losing their
insurance coverage. The adjustment is made by estimating the insurance coverage regression and the log(admissions)
then using the estimated percent drop in admissions to adjust the coverage estimates. The regressions are run on the averages for
one month cells as this is the most refined version of the age variable available. The regressions include all individuals 18 to 20
that appear in the Emergency Department records. There are 1,789,954 admissions in this age range, of these 1,025,554 are for
females, 712,904 are male and the remainder are of unknown gender.
         Table 5: Change at Age 19 in Volume of Emergency Department Visits
                                                                                Non Profit                  For Profit
                           All Visits            Public Hospitals               Hospitals                   Hospitals
                               (1)                        (2)                        (3)                        (4)

All                         -0.0333                   -0.0058                    -0.0375                    -0.0438
                            [0.0060]                  [0.0102]                   [0.0064]                   [0.0102]

All (Except                 -0.0351                   -0.0094                    -0.0385                    -0.0471
Pregnant)                   [0.0061]                  [0.0112]                   [0.0063]                   [0.0112]

Male                        -0.0329                    0.0076                     -0.039                    -0.0505
                            [0.0056]                  [0.0135]                   [0.0054]                   [0.0138]

Female                       -0.033                    -0.017                    -0.0353                    -0.0404
                            [0.0080]                  [0.0143]                   [0.0084]                   [0.0132]

Female Not                   -0.036                   -0.0264                    -0.0366                    -0.0457
Pregnant                    [0.0080]                  [0.0166]                   [0.0085]                   [0.0154]

Notes: See notes from Table 4. The dependent variable in all the regressions above is the log of admissions at each age in
months. Of the 1,789,954 total visits among people age 18 and 19: 263,524 are to public hospitals, 1,310,168 are to non
profits, 193,023 are to for profit hospitals and the remaining admissions are to hospitals of unknown ownership type.
       Table 6: Impact of Losing Insurance Coverage on Emergency Department Visits
                         All Visits              Public Hospitals           Non Profit Hospitals         For Profit Hospitals
                            (1)                          (2)                          (3)                          (4)

All                      -0.4041                      -0.0709                      -0.4539                      -0.5292
                         [0.0776]                     [0.1259]                     [0.0832]                     [0.1296]


All (Except              -0.4094                      -0.1110                      -0.4490                      -0.5468
Pregnant)                [0.0762]                     [0.1332]                     [0.0792]                     [0.1368]

Male                     -0.3889                       0.0915                      -0.4601                      -0.5926
                         [0.0714]                     [0.1625]                     [0.0708]                     [0.1700]

Female                   -0.4099                      -0.2127                      -0.4380                      -0.5009
                         [0.1053]                     [0.1814]                     [0.1108]                     [0.1707]

Female Not               -0.4191                      -0.3088                      -0.4261                      -0.5295
Pregnant                 [0.0994]                     [0.1979]                     [0.1052]                     [0.1864]

Notes: See notes from Table 5. The estimates above are the ratio of the change in admissions to the overall change in insurance
coverage. The standard errors are in brackets below the estimates. The ratios and their standard errors are computed by estimating
the relevant regressions via seemingly unrelated regression.
      Table 7: Change at 19 in Insurance Coverage of People Admitted to the Hospital

                              Private                    Uninsured                    Medicaid                  Other Insurance
                                 (1)                         (2)                          (3)                            (4)

All                          -0.0458                       0.0271                       0.0187                         0.0005
                             [0.0027]                     [0.0052]                     [0.0032]                       [0.0005]
                              0.3392                       0.0762                       0.5396                         0.0420

Male                         -0.0691                       0.0626                       0.0072                         0.0010
                             [0.0043]                     [0.0049]                     [0.0034]                       [0.0013]
                              0.4888                       0.1313                       0.2896                         0.0849

Female not                   -0.0621                       0.0496                       0.0121                         0.0016
Pregnant                     [0.0043]                     [0.0075]                     [0.0044]                       [0.0015]
                              0.5137                       0.0993                       0.3266                         0.0543

Female                       -0.0332                       0.0091                       0.0239                         0.0001
Pregnant                     [0.0029]                     [0.0078]                     [0.0056]                       [0.0005]
                              0.2311                       0.0476                       0.6986                         0.0217
Notes: The estimates above are from a near census of hospital stays in Arizona (2000-2007), California (1990-2006), Iowa (2004-
2007), New York (1990-2006), Texas (1999-2003) and Wisconsin (2004-2007). Combining the data from the six states gives a
sample of 849,610 18 and 19 year olds. This table presents estimates of the change in insurance coverage (among people admitted
to the hospital) that occurs on the first day of the month after people turn 19. Directly below the estimates are the standard errors of
the estimates and below the standard errors are the proportion of the population with this type of coverage immediately before
people age out at 19. The estimates are made using a linear polynomial in age for estimated using admissions among people age
18 to age 20. The estimates of the change in insurance are adjusted for the effect of insurance status on the probability of getting
treated.
              Table 8: Change at Age 19 in Admissions to the Hospital

                                                          Via Emergency                Not Via Emergency
                              All Visits                    Department                    Department
                                  (1)                            (2)                             (3)

All                           -0.0168                         -0.0096                         -0.0202
                              [0.0057]                        [0.0057]                        [0.0082]

Male                          -0.0386                         -0.0195                         -0.0670
                              [0.0057]                        [0.0075]                        [0.0114]

Female not                    -0.0333                         -0.0125                         -0.0602
Pregnant                      [0.0086]                        [0.0123]                        [0.0089]

Female                        -0.0053                          0.0116                         -0.0079
Pregnant                      [0.0086]                        [0.0099]                        [0.0091]

Public                         0.0026                          0.0181                         -0.0122
                              [0.0069]                        [0.0087]                        [0.0117]

Private Non                   -0.0145                         -0.0192                         -0.0127
Profit                        [0.0060]                        [0.0074]                        [0.0087]

Private For                   -0.0394                         -0.0342                         -0.0405
Profit                        [0.0104]                        [0.0189]                        [0.0117]

Notes: See notes from Table 7. The dependant variable is the log of admissions and the results are for overall
admissions and split by route into the hospital
      Table 9: Impact of Losing Insurance on Admissions to the Hospital

                                                      Via Emergency              Not Via Emergency
                            All Visits                  Department                  Department
                                (1)                           (2)                          (3)

All                          -0.6135                      -0.3509                       -0.7376
                             [0.2414]                     [0.2208]                      [0.3343]

Male                         -0.6052                      -0.3087                       -1.0352
                             [0.1030]                     [0.1222]                      [0.2004]

Female not                   -0.6599                      -0.2503                       -1.1791
Pregnant                     [0.2010]                     [0.2510]                      [0.2569]

Female                       -0.5853                       1.2829                       -0.8668
Pregnant                     [1.0731]                     [1.5496]                      [1.2521]

Public                        0.0951                       0.6722                       -0.4464
                             [0.2550]                     [0.3453]                      [0.4399]

Private Non                  -0.5295                      -0.7021                       -0.4650
Profit                       [0.2438]                     [0.3047]                      [0.3331]

Private For                  -1.4241                      -1.2409                       -1.4629
Profit                       [0.4739]                     [0.7376]                      [0.5177]

Notes: See notes from Table 8. The elasticities above are the impact of losing insurance on hospital
admissions. They are computed by dividing the percent change in admissions by the percent change in the
population that is uninsured.
                                                        Appendix 1: Comparing Two Possible Ways of Setting Age Out Threshold

                       0.15



                       0.14



                       0.13
Proportion Uninsured




                                                  Red Squares: Threshold Set on Last Day
                                                  of Month in Which 19th Birthday Falls
                       0.12



                       0.11



                        0.1



                       0.09                                                                                           Black Dots: Threshold Set on
                                                                                                                      day of 19th Birthday


                       0.08
                              -40                 -30                 -20                 -10                     0        10             20         30
                                                                                       Days Relative to Age Out Threshold

                              Notes: Estimates are for non pregnant hospital discharges in the California data.
                                              Appendix 2: Assessing Sensitivity of Estimate of Change in Insurance to Bandwidth Choice

                             0.1

                                                                                                        Lost Insurance Due to Age or
                                                                Lost Insurance Due to
                                                                                                        Leaving School + 1.96 SE
                                                                Age or Leaving School



                            0.05
Discrete Change at age 19




                                                                                                                   Uninsured - 1.96 SE
                               0
                                    0.2            0.3           0.5            0.7            0.8           1.0            1.2            1.3           1.5            1.7           1.8




                                                                  Uninsured
                            -0.05




                             -0.1
                                                                                                       Bandwidth in Years
                                    Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point
                                    estimate and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
                                             Appendix 3: Assessing Sensitivity of Estimate of Change in Insurance to Bandwidth Choice
                                                                           People Not Attending School
                             0.2

                                                                            Lost Insurance Due to Age or
                                                                            Leaving School + 1.96 SE                          Lost Insurance Due to
                                                                                                                              Age or Leaving School
                            0.15
                                                                                                     Uninsured



                             0.1
Discrete Change at age 19




                            0.05




                               0
                                    0.2           0.3            0.5            0.7           0.8            1.0            1.2           1.3            1.5           1.7            1.8


                                                                       Uninsured - 1.96 SE
                            -0.05




                             -0.1
                                                                                                       Bandwidth in Years
                                    Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point
                                    estimate and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
                                             Appendix 4: Assessing Sensitivity of Estimate of Change in Insurance to Bandwidth Choice
                                                                              People Attending School
                             0.2



                            0.15



                             0.1
                                                Lost Insurance Due to
                                                Age or Leaving School                            Lost Insurance Due to Age or
Discrete Change at age 19




                                                                                                 Leaving School + 1.96 SE
                            0.05



                               0
                                    0.2           0.3            0.5            0.7           0.8            1.0            1.2           1.3            1.5           1.7            1.8

                            -0.05



                             -0.1


                                                                                                           Uninsured - 1.96 SE
                            -0.15

                                                                Uninsured

                             -0.2
                                                                                                       Bandwidth in Years
                                    Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point
                                    estimate and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
                                          Appendix 5: Age Profile of Health Insurance Coverage in the United States
                                                                        Not in School

                       1

                                                                                                       Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                     0.9                                                                               Insurance Coverage.
                                                                                                                        RD     (SE)
                     0.8                                                                               Private         -5.33 (1.60)
                                                                           Private Insurance           Uninsured        7.09 (1.38)
                     0.7                                                                               Medicaid        -0.06 (0.91)
                                                                                                       Other Insur.    -1.86 (0.89)
Proportion Covered




                     0.6

                     0.5

                     0.4
                                                            Uninsured
                     0.3

                     0.2                                                                                                                Medicaid


                     0.1
                            Other Insurance
                       0
                       .0




                                                  .5




                                                                                         .0




                                                                                                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                                           .0
                     18




                                                18




                                                                                       19




                                                                                                                                19




                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                      Approximate Age at Time of Survey
Notes: Regressions and proportions are weighted to take into account the stratified structure of the NHIS. The regression lines superimposed on the proportions are from a linear polyno
in age interacted with a dummy that takes on a value of one for people over 19 and 0 otherwise. This regression is fit on the micro data rather than the means of the bins. The age variable is
centered on the last day of the month on which the individual's 19th birthday falls. Individuals with unknown month of birth comprise 11.1 percent of the surveyed population that are 18
at the time of the survey and they have been dropped from the analysis. The age profiles above include 17,058 individuals from the NHIS person files.
                                       Appendix 6: Age Profile of Health Insurance Coverage in the United States
                                                                        In School

                       1

                     0.9

                     0.8

                     0.7
                                                                                                                                         Private Insurance
Proportion Covered




                              Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                     0.6      Insurance Coverage.
                                               RD      (SE)
                     0.5      Private         6.21    (2.12)
                              Uninsured      -3.41 (1.63)
                     0.4      Medicaid       -3.04    (1.30)
                              Other Insur.    -0.48 (1.20)

                     0.3                                                  Medicaid
                                                                                                                                                       Uninsured

                     0.2     Other Insurance


                     0.1

                       0
                        .0




                                                  .5




                                                                                        .0




                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                                                                                                                                          .0
                     18




                                               18




                                                                                     19




                                                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                      Approximate Age at Time of Survey
Notes: Regressions and proportions are weighted to take into account the stratified structure of the NHIS. The regression lines superimposed on the proportions are from a linear
polynomial in age interacted with a dummy that takes on a value of one for people over 19 and 0 otherwise. This regression is fit on the micro data rather than the means of the
bins. The age variable is centered on the last day of the month on which the individual's 19th birthday falls. Individuals with unknown month of birth comprise 11.1 percent of the
surveyed population that are 18 or 19 at the time of the survey and they have been dropped from the analysis. The age profiles above include 7,202 individuals from the NHIS
person files
                                                             Appendix 7: Age Profile of Source of Insurance Coverage by School Attendance

                                     0.2

                                                    Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in Insurance
                                    0.18
                                                    Coverage.
                                                                               RD       (SE)
                                    0.16            Not in School
                                                    -Own Name                 -1.01 (0.86)
Proportion Covered Via This Route




                                    0.14                                                                                 Not in School
                                                    In School
                                                                                                                         Insurance in Own Name
                                                     -Own Name                   0.27   (0.88)
                                    0.12


                                     0.1


                                    0.08

                                                                                                                                         In School
                                    0.06
                                                                                                                                         Insurance in Own Name

                                    0.04


                                    0.02


                                       0
                                       .0




                                                                            .5




                                                                                                           .0




                                                                                                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                    .0
                                    18




                                                                         18




                                                                                                        19




                                                                                                                                     19




                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                             Approximate Age at Time of Survey

                                     Notes: See notes from Appendix 6.
                                                                                                                 Appendix 8: Age Profile of Delay in Care Due to Cost
                                                                                                                    National Health Interview Survey (1997-2007)
                                                                  0.14
Proportion Reporting a Delay in Seeking Health Care Due to Cost




                                                                            Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                                                                            Delay in Care Due to Cost
                                                                  0.12                      RD         (SE)
                                                                            All           0.0154      0.0048


                                                                   0.1



                                                                  0.08



                                                                  0.06



                                                                  0.04



                                                                  0.02



                                                                    0
                                                                    .3




                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                .3




                                                                                                                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                               .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                  17




                                                                                         17




                                                                                                                18




                                                                                                                                       18




                                                                                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                                                                                      19




                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                   Approximate Age at Time of Survey

                                                                         Notes: See notes from Figure 2. The question used to construct the age profiles in this figure reads as follows. "During the past 12 months, has medical care
                                                                         been delayed for {person} because of worry about the cost? (Do not include dental care)."
                                                                                                        Appendix 9: Age Profile of Forging Care Due to Cost
                                                                                                          National Health Interview Survey (1997-2007)
                                                        0.14
                                                                    Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                                                                    Forgo Care Due to Cost
Proportion Reporting Forgoing Health Care Due to Cost




                                                        0.12                    RD          (SE)
                                                                    All      0.0149       0.0040


                                                         0.1



                                                        0.08



                                                        0.06



                                                        0.04



                                                        0.02



                                                          0
                                                          .3




                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                               .8




                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                        17




                                                                               17




                                                                                                      18




                                                                                                                             18




                                                                                                                                                    19




                                                                                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                         Approximate Age at Time of Survey
                                                               Notes: See notes from Figure 2. The question used to construct the age profiles in this figure reads as follows. "During the past 12 months, was there any
                                                               time when {person} needed medical care, but did not get it because {person} couldn't afford it?"
                                                                                                          Appendix 10: Age Profile of See Provider in Last Two Weeks
                                                                                                                National Health Interview Survey (1997-2007)
                                                                0.16
Proportion Reporting Seeing a Provider in the Prior two Weeks




                                                                0.12




                                                                0.08




                                                                                                                    Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in
                                                                                                                    Seeing Provider in Last 2 Weeks
                                                                0.04                                                              RD        (SE)
                                                                                                                    All        -0.0002      0.0059




                                                                  0
                                                                  .3




                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                 .3




                                                                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                                .3




                                                                                                                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                               .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                17




                                                                                        17




                                                                                                               18




                                                                                                                                      18




                                                                                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                                                                                     19




                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                  Approximate Age at Time of Survey
                                                                       Notes: See notes from Figure 2. The question used to construct the age profiles in this figure reads as follows. "During those 2 weeks, did {person} see a doctor
                                                                       or other health care professional at a doctor's office, a clinic, an emergency room, or some other place? (do no include times during an overnight hospital stay)"
                                    Appendix 11: Impact on RD Estimates of Coarsening the Age Variable from Age in Days to 60 Day
                                                                               Cells
                       0.05
                                                                                                                     This is the RD estimate when the running variable is age in months as it
                                                This is the RD estimate when the running                             is in most of the paper as this is what is available on most datasets
                                                variable is age in days



                          0
                               1            6            11              16         21            26            31           36            41            46           51            56
Estimate of RD at 19




                       -0.05




                        -0.1




                                   RD at Age 19 in hospital admissions                                               RD at Age 19 in hospital admissions not
                       -0.15       through the ED for men                                                            through the ED for men




                        -0.2
                                                                                           Number of Days Included in Age Cell

                               Notes: The regressions in the paper all have age cells of approximately 30 because age is typically only available in months. The heavy lines are the estimates
                               of the RD and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
                                        Appendix 12: Assessing Sensitivity to Bandwidth Choice of Estimate of Change in Insurance Among
                                                                 People Treated in the Emergency Department
                              0.1

                                                                                                         RD in Proportion Without
                                                                 RD in Proportion Without
                                                                                                         Insurance + 1.96 SE
                                                                 Insurance



                             0.05


                                                                                                            RD in Proportion Without
RD in ln(visits) at Age 19




                                                                                                            Insurance - 1.96 SE


                                0
                                        0.25             0.33            0.42            0.50            0.58            0.67            0.75            0.83            0.92              1.00
                                                   RD in Proportion With                   RD in Proportion With Private
                                                   Private Coverage                        Coverage + 1.96 SE



                             -0.05



                                                                                RD in Proportion With Private
                                                                                Coverage - 1.96 SE


                              -0.1
                                                                                                        Bandwidth in Years
                                     Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point
                                     estimate and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
   Appendix 13: Change at Age 19 in Insurance Coverage of Emergency Department
                                   Visits by State
                           Private                   Uninsured                    Medicaid                Other Insurance
                             (1)                          (2)                         (3)                          (4)

All States                -0.0628                       0.0810                     -0.0166                      -0.0015
                          [0.0026]                     [0.0046]                    [0.0024]                     [0.0010]
                           0.4471                       0.2154                      0.2644                       0.0731

Arizona                   -0.0437                       0.0537                     -0.0052                      -0.0048
                          [0.0053]                     [0.0108]                    [0.0064]                     [0.0031]
                           0.3462                       0.2144                      0.3519                       0.0874

California                -0.0659                       0.0760                     -0.0059                      -0.0042
                          [0.0036]                     [0.0057]                    [0.0029]                     [0.0017]
                           0.4073                       0.2141                      0.2944                       0.0842

Iowa                      -0.0514                       0.0740                     -0.0209                      -0.0017
                          [0.0072]                     [0.0105]                    [0.0059]                     [0.0027]
                           0.4935                       0.1818                      0.2654                       0.0593

New Jersey                -0.0722                       0.0851                     -0.0144                       0.0015
                          [0.0038]                     [0.0044]                    [0.0029]                     [0.0011]
                           0.5637                       0.2751                      0.1180                       0.0431

Wisconsin                 -0.0613                       0.1331                     -0.0799                       0.0081
                          [0.0068]                     [0.0100]                    [0.0060]                     [0.0027]
                           0.4937                       0.1490                      0.2872                       0.0701
Notes: The Emergency Department visits used to estimate the regressions are a near census of ED visits in Arizona (2005-2007),
California (2005-2007), Iowa (2004-2007), New Jersey (2004-2007) and Wisconsin (2004-2007).The parameter estimates in the
table above are the percentage point change in insurance coverage when people age out of their insurance coverage on the last
day of the month in which they turn 19. The standard errors are in brackets directly below the parameter estimates. Below the SE
we have included the estimated level of the dependant variable immediately before people age out. The parameter estimates are
adjusted for the decline in admissions under the assumption that the decline in admission is due entirely to people losing their
insurance coverage. The adjustment is made by estimating the insurance coverage regression and the log(admissions)
regressions via seemingly unrelated regression.
                                      Appendix 14: Assessing Sensitivity to Bandwidth Choice of Estimate of Change in Number of People
                                                                   Treated in the Emergency Department

                             0.05




                                            RD in ln(male ED visits) + 1.96 SE




                                                           RD in ln(male ED visits)
RD in ln(visits) at Age 19




                                                                                            RD in ln(female visits)                  RD in ln(female admissions) + 1.96 SE

                                0
                                        0.25            0.33            0.42            0.50            0.58            0.67            0.75            0.83            0.92               1.00




                             -0.05
                                                                                                       Bandwidth in Years
                                     Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point
                                     estimate and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
      Appendix 15: Change at Age 19 in Volume of Emergency Department Visits by
                                        State
                                                                                Non Profit                 For Profit
                           All Visits            Public Hospitals               Hospitals                  Hospitals
                               (1)                        (2)                       (3)                        (4)

All                        -0.0333                    -0.0058                    -0.0375                    -0.0438
                           [0.0060]                   [0.0102]                   [0.0064]                   [0.0102]

Arizona                    -0.0287                     0.0006                    -0.0283                    -0.0427
                           [0.0132]                   [0.0325]                   [0.0155]                   [0.0212]

California                 -0.0368                    -0.0012                    -0.0463                    -0.0473
                           [0.0074]                   [0.0107]                   [0.0089]                   [0.0101]

Iowa                       -0.0444                    -0.0295                    -0.0502                      N/A
                           [0.0136]                   [0.0267]                   [0.0148]                     N/A

New Jersey                 -0.0164                    -0.0013                    -0.0177                     0.0729
                           [0.0080]                   [0.0354]                   [0.0087]                   [0.0645]

Wisconsin                  -0.0464                     0.0210                    -0.0493                     0.0823
                           [0.0126]                   [0.0867]                   [0.0126]                   [0.0646]

Notes: See notes from Appendix 13. The dependent variable in all the regressions above is the log of admissions at each age
in months. Of the 1,789,954 total visits among people age 18 and 19: 263,524 are to public hospitals, 1,310,168 are to non
profits, 193,023 are to for profit hospitals and the remaining admissions are to hospitals of unknown ownership type. In the
HCUP data there are no hospitals coded as private in Iowa.
       Appendix 16: Estimates of Impact of Losing Insurance Coverage on Emergency
                                Department Visits by State
                     All Admissions               Public Hospitals          Non Profit Hospitals          For Profit Hospitals
                             (1)                          (2)                          (3)                          (4)

All                      -0.4041                       -0.0709                      -0.4539                      -0.5292
                         [0.0776]                      [0.1259]                     [0.0832]                     [0.1296]


Arizona                  -0.5267                        0.0106                      -0.5197                      -0.7773
                         [0.2681]                      [0.6049]                     [0.3073]                     [0.4257]


California               -0.4755                       -0.0163                      -0.5954                      -0.6074
                         [0.1038]                      [0.1407]                     [0.1256]                     [0.1408]


Iowa                     -0.5862                       -0.3931                      -0.6616                         N/A
                         [0.2024]                      [0.3650]                     [0.2218]                        N/A


New Jersey               -0.1908                       -0.0147                      -0.2065                       0.8880
                         [0.0945]                      [0.4159]                     [0.1027]                     [0.7591]


Wisconsin                -0.3407                        0.1594                      -0.3616                       0.6446
                         [0.0982]                      [0.6516]                     [0.0987]                     [0.4877]

Notes: See notes from Appendix 14. The estimates above are the ratio of the change in admissions to the overall change in insurance
coverage. The standard errors are in brackets below the estimates. The ratios and their standard errors are computed by estimating
the relevant regressions via seemingly unrelated regression. In the HCUP data there are no hospitals coded as private in Iowa.
                                            Appendix 17: Assessing Sensitivity to Bandwidth Choice of Estimate of Change in Insurance Among
                                                                             People Admitted to the Hospital
                                  0.1




                                 0.05                                                                                                                 RD in Proportion Without
                                                                                                                                                      Insurance + 1.96 SE
                                                               RD in Proportion Without
RD in Proportion with Coverage




                                                               Insurance




                                    0
                                            0.25            0.33            0.42            0.50             0.58            0.67            0.75            0.83            0.92              1.00




                                 -0.05
                                                   RD in Proportion With
                                                   Private Coverage

                                                                                   RD in Proportion With Private
                                                                                   Coverage - 1.96 SE


                                  -0.1
                                                                                                           Bandwidth in Years
                                         Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point
                                         estimate and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
 Appendix 18: Change at 19 in Insurance Coverage of People Admitted to the Hospital
                                      by State

                              Private                    Uninsured                    Medicaid                  Other Insurance
                                 (1)                         (2)                          (3)                            (4)

All                          -0.0458                       0.0271                       0.0187                         0.0005
                             [0.0027]                     [0.0052]                     [0.0032]                       [0.0005]
                              0.3392                       0.0762                       0.5396                         0.0420

Arizona                      -0.0409                       0.0294                       0.0091                         0.0031
                             [0.0070]                     [0.0102]                     [0.0081]                       [0.0028]
                              0.3090                       0.0436                       0.5704                         0.0724

California                   -0.0439                       0.0272                       0.0168                         0.0004
                             [0.0029]                     [0.0057]                     [0.0034]                       [0.0007]
                              0.3309                       0.0660                       0.5638                         0.0368

Iowa                         -0.0402                      -0.0192                       0.0651                        -0.0059
                             [0.0231]                     [0.0254]                     [0.0208]                       [0.0048]
                              0.4103                       0.0537                       0.5037                         0.0325

New York                     -0.0599                       0.0256                       0.0353                        -0.0003
                             [0.0038]                     [0.0059]                     [0.0045]                       [0.0012]
                              0.3837                       0.0985                       0.4846                         0.0296

Texas                        -0.0234                       0.0252                      -0.0014                        -0.0003
                             [0.0042]                     [0.0089]                     [0.0071]                       [0.0021]
                              0.2787                       0.0960                       0.5436                         0.0787

Wisconsin                    -0.0856                       0.0830                      -0.0142                         0.0184
                             [0.0087]                     [0.0167]                     [0.0147]                       [0.0061]
                              0.4774                       0.0497                       0.4342                         0.0370
Notes: The estimates above are from a near census of hospital stays in Arizona (2000-2007), California (1990-2006), Iowa (2004-
2007), New York (1990-2006), Texas (1999-2003) and Wisconsin (2004-2007). Combining the data from the six states gives a
sample of 849,610 18 and 19 year olds. This table presents estimates of the change in insurance coverage (among people admitted
to the hospital) that occurs on the first day of the month after people turn 19. Directly below the estimates are the standard errors of
the estimates and below the standard errors are the proportion of the population with this type of coverage immediately before
people age out at 19. The estimates are made using a linear polynomial in age for estimated using admissions among people age
18 to age 20. The estimates of the change in insurance are adjusted for the effect of insurance status on the probability of getting
treated.
                                           Appendix 19: Assessing Sensitivity to Bandwidth Choice of the Estimate of the Change in Number of
                                                                       Men Admitted to the hospital at Age 19


                                 0.2




                                 0.1
RD in ln(Admissions) at Age 19




                                                              RD in ln(Admissions of Men Through ED)




                                   0
                                           0.25            0.33             0.42            0.50            0.58            0.67             0.75            0.83            0.92            1.00




                                 -0.1



                                                                                                 RD in ln(Admissions of Men not Through ED)



                                 -0.2
                                                                                                           Bandwidth in Years
                                        Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point estimate
                                        and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals.
                                          Appendix 20: Assessing Sensitivity to Bandwidth Choice of the Estimate of the Change in Number of
                                                                    Women Admitted to the hospital at Age 19

                                 0.2




                                 0.1
RD in ln(Admissions) at Age 19




                                                                                          RD in ln(Admissions of Women Through ED)




                                   0
                                            0.25             0.33            0.42            0.50            0.58            0.67            0.75            0.83            0.92             1.00




                                 -0.1

                                                                                            RD in ln(Admissions of Women not Through ED)




                                 -0.2
                                                                                                            Bandwidth in Years
                                        Notes: The estimates above are the discrete change at age 19 from a local linear regression with a symmetric bandwidth. The heavy line is the point
                                        estimate and the lighter lines are the confidence intervals. Pregnant women are not included in the analysis.
          Appendix 21: Change at Age 19 in Admissions to the Hospital

                                                          Via Emergency                Not Via Emergency
                              All Visits                    Department                    Department
                                  (1)                            (2)                             (3)

All                           -0.0168                         -0.0096                         -0.0202
                              [0.0057]                        [0.0057]                        [0.0082]

Arizona                       -0.0250                         -0.0140                         -0.0293
                              [0.0115]                        [0.0168]                        [0.0158]

California                    -0.0201                         -0.0019                         -0.0263
                              [0.0061]                        [0.0102]                        [0.0084]

Iowa                           0.0366                         -0.0179                          0.0537
                              [0.0317]                        [0.0764]                        [0.0362]

New York                      -0.0123                         -0.0161                         -0.0092
                              [0.0066]                        [0.0072]                        [0.0111]

Texas                         -0.0079                         -0.0096                         -0.0071
                              [0.0112]                        [0.0166]                        [0.0113]

Wisconsin                     -0.0462                         -0.0565                         -0.0424
                              [0.0202]                        [0.0312]                        [0.0309]

Notes: See notes from Table 8. The dependant variable is the log of admissions and the results are for overall
admissions and split by route into the hospital
 Appendix 22: Impact of Losing Insurance on Admissions to the Hospital
                                                       Via Emergency              Not Via Emergency
                             All Visits                  Department                  Department
                                (1)                           (2)                            (3)

All                          -0.6135                       -0.3509                       -0.7376
                             [0.2414]                      [0.2208]                      [0.3343]

Arizona                      -0.8390                       -0.4747                       -0.9815
                             [0.4905]                      [0.5953]                      [0.6397]

California                   -0.7313                       -0.0681                       -0.9536
                             [0.2719]                      [0.3746]                      [0.3685]

Iowa                         -1.9372                        0.9228                       -2.8675
                             [3.0015]                      [4.1546]                      [4.1342]

New York                     -0.4788                       -0.6263                       -0.3597
                             [0.2808]                      [0.3167]                      [0.4418]

Texas                        -0.3108                       -0.3793                       -0.2822
                             [0.4578]                      [0.6721]                      [0.4591]

Wisconsin                    -0.5437                       -0.6624                       -0.5001
                             [0.2679]                      [0.4000]                      [0.3862]

Notes: See notes from Table 9. The elasticities above are the impact of insurance on hospital admissions.
They are computed by dividing the percent change in admissions by the percent change in the population that
is uninsured.
  Appendix 23: Change at Age 23 in Insurance Coverage and Emergency Department
                                       Visits
                                                                                                            Instrumental
                           Private                   Uninsured                     ln(Visits)
                                                                                                         Variables Estimate

                             (1)                          (2)                         (3)                          (4)

All                       -0.0154                       0.0170                     -0.0142                      -0.8267
                          [0.0018]                     [0.0028]                    [0.0036]                     [0.2517]
                           0.3555                       0.3111

All (Except               -0.0170                       0.0193                     -0.0165                      -0.8477
Pregnant)                 [0.0020]                     [0.0028]                    [0.0037]                     [0.2281]
                           0.3651                       0.3218

Male                      -0.0195                       0.0230                     -0.0212                      -0.9107
                          [0.0031]                     [0.0041]                    [0.0056]                     [0.2930]
                           0.3406                       0.3995

Female                    -0.0117                       0.0117                     -0.0083                      -0.7013
                          [0.0018]                     [0.0034]                    [0.0055]                     [0.5119]
                           0.3640                       0.2503

Female Not                -0.0140                       0.0150                     -0.0115                      -0.7627
Pregnant                  [0.0020]                     [0.0031]                    [0.0053]                     [0.3864]
                           0.3833                       0.2593

Notes: The Emergency Department visits used to estimate the regressions are a near census of ED visits in Arizona (2005-2007),
California (2005-2007), Iowa (2004-2007), New Jersey (2004-2007) and Wisconsin (2004-2007).The parameter estimates in the
table above are the percentage point change in insurance coverage when people age out of their insurance coverage on the last
day of the month in which they turn 23. The standard errors are in brackets directly below the parameter estimates. Below the SE
we have included the estimated level of the dependant variable immediately before people age out. The parameter estimates are
adjusted for the decline in admissions under the assumption that the decline in admission is due entirely to people losing their
insurance coverage. The adjustment is made by estimating the insurance coverage regression and the ln(admissions) regressions
via seemingly unrelated regression.
                           Appendix 24: Age Profile of Emergency Department Visits at Age 20


            50000                                                                                                  0.4




                                     Uninsured


                                                                                                                   0.3

            40000
ED Visits




                           Counts of ED Visits                                                                     0.2




            30000                                                Estimates of Size of Discontinuity in ED Visits
                                                                 and Proportion Uninsured at Age 20
                                                                                           RD        (SE)
                                                                                                                   0.1
                                                                 ln(ED visits)          -0.004     (0.004)
                                                                 Uninsured               0.003     (0.002)




            20000                                                                                                  0
                    19.0              19.5                    20.0                          20.5
                                                   Age at Time of ED Visit
