NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE NATURAL RESOURCE CURSE:
A SURVEY
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Working Paper 15836
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15836

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

The author would like to thank the Azerbaijan Diplomatic Academy in Baku and the Weatherhead
Center for International Affairs at Harvard University for support, and to thank Sebastian Bustos, Oyebola
Olabisi, and Lant Pritchett for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Natural Resource Curse: A Survey
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 15836
March 2010
JEL No. O1,Q0
ABSTRACT
It is striking how often countries with oil or other natural resource wealth have failed to grow more
rapidly than those without. This is the phenomenon known as the Natural Resource Curse. The principle
has been borne out in some econometric tests of the determinants of economic performance across
a comprehensive sample of countries. This paper considers six aspects of commodity wealth, each
of interest in its own right, but each also a channel that some have suggested could lead to sub-standard
economic performance. They are: long-term trends in world commodity prices, volatility, crowding
out of manufacturing, civil war, poor institutions, and the Dutch Disease. Skeptics have questioned
the Natural Resource Curse, pointing to examples of commodity-exporting countries that have done
well and arguing that resource endowments and booms are not exogenous. The paper concludes with
a consideration of institutions and policies that some commodity-producers have tried, in efforts to
overcome the pitfalls of the Curse. Ideas include indexation of oil contracts, hedging of export proceeds,
denomination of debt in terms of oil, Chile-style fiscal rules, a monetary target that emphasizes product
prices, transparent commodity funds, and lump-sum distribution.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Outline
Resource Curse: Introduction
I. Long-term trends in world commodity prices
a. The determination of the export price on world markets
b. The hypothesis of a declining trend: the old “structuralist school” (Prebisch-Singer)
c. Hypotheses of rising trends in non-renewable resource prices
i. Hotelling and the interest rate
ii. Malthusianism and the “peak oil” hypothesis

d. Evidence
i. Statistical time series studies
ii. Paul Ehrlich versus Julian Simon

II. Volatility of commodity prices
a. Low short-run elasticities
b. Costs of volatility
III. The Natural Resource Curse and possible channels
a. The statistical evidence on natural resources and economic performance
b. Do mineral riches lead to wars?
c. Institutions
i. Institutions and development
ii. Oil, institutions, and governance

d. Oil and democracy
IV. The Dutch Disease and procyclicality
a. The Macroeconomics of the Dutch Disease
b. Procyclicality in developing countries
c. The procyclicality of capital flows
d. The procyclicality of fiscal policy
V. Institutions and policies that have been tried, to avoid the curse

a. Institutions that were supposed to stabilize but have not worked.
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.

Marketing boards
Taxation of commodity production
Producer subsidies
Other government stockpiles
Price controls for consumers
OPEC and other International cartels

b. Devices to share risks
i. Price-setting in contracts with foreign companies
ii. Hedging in commodity futures markets
iii. Denomination of debt in terms of commodity prices

c. Monetary policy
i. Managed floating
ii. Alternative nominal anchors

d. Institutions to make national saving procyclical
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.

Reserve accumulation by central banks
Rules for the budget deficit. Example: Chile
Sovereign Wealth Funds. Example: Sao Tome and Principe
Lump sum distribution in booms. Example: Alaska
Reducing net private capital inflows during booms

e. Efforts to impose external checks
VI. Summary

2

The Resource Curse: Introduction
It has been observed for some decades that the possession of oil, natural gas, or
other valuable mineral deposits or natural resources does not necessarily confer economic
success. Many African countries such as Angola, Nigeria, Sudan, and the Congo are
rich in oil, diamonds, or other minerals, and yet their peoples continue to experience low
per capita income and low quality of life. Meanwhile, the East Asian economies Japan,
Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong have achieved western-level standards of
living despite being rocky islands (or peninsulas) with virtually no exportable natural
resources. Auty (1993, 2001) is apparently the one who coined the phrase “natural
resource curse” to describe this puzzling phenomenon. Its use spread rapidly.1
Figure 1, reproduced from Manzano and Rigobon (2008), illustrates for a cross
section of countries. Exports of primary products as a fraction of GDP appear on the
horizontal axis and economic growth on the vertical axis. The relationship on average is
slightly negative. The negative correlation is not very strong, masking almost as many
resource successes as failures. But it certainly suggests no positive correlation between
natural resource wealth and economic growth.

Source: Manzano and Rigobon (2008)

1

Prominent books include Collier (2007) and Humphreys, Sachs and Stiglitz (2007).
3

How could abundance of hydrocarbon deposits, or other mineral and agricultural
products, be a curse? What would be the mechanism for this counter-intuitive
relationship? Broadly speaking, there are at least six lines of argument. First, prices of
such commodities could be subject to secular decline on world markets. Second, natural
resources could be dead-end sectors in another sense: they may crowd out
manufacturing, and the latter sector might be the one to offer dynamic benefits and
spillovers that are good for growth. (It does not sound implausible that
“industrialization” could be the essence of economic development.) Third, the volatility
of world prices of energy and other mineral and agricultural commodities, which is
known to be especially high, could be problematic. Fourth, countries where physical
command of oil deposits or other resources by the government or a hereditary elite
automatically confers wealth on the holders may be less likely to develop the institutions,
such as rule of law and decentralization of decision-making, that are conducive to
economic development than in countries where moderate taxation of a thriving market
economy is the only way to finance the government. Fifth – such countries could have a
proclivity for armed conflict, which is inimical to economic growth. Sixth – swings in
commodity prices could engender excessive macroeconomic instability, via the real
exchange rate and government spending, imposing unnecessary costs. We consider each
of these topics.
The conclusion will not be that oil wealth need necessarily lead to inferior
economic or political development, through any of these channels. Rather, it is best to
view oil abundance as a double-edged sword, with both benefits and dangers. The
outcome can be ill as easily as good.2 That mineral wealth does not in itself confer good
economic performance is a striking enough phenomenon, without exaggerating the
negative effects. The last section of the paper explores some of the institutional
innovations that commodity producers have tried, in efforts to avoid the pitfalls and
achieve success.

I.

Long-term trends in world commodity prices
a. The determination of the export price on world markets

Developing countries tend to be smaller economically than major industrialized
countries, and more likely to specialize in the exports of basic commodities like oil. As a
result, they are more likely to fit the small open economy model: they can be regarded as
price-takers, not just for their import goods, but for their export goods as well. That is,
the prices of their tradable goods are generally taken as given on world markets. The
price-taking assumption requires three conditions: low monopoly power, low trade
barriers, and intrinsic perfect substitutability in the commodity as between domestic and
foreign producers – a condition usually met by primary products (and usually not met by
manufactured goods and services). To be literal, not every barrel of oil is the same as
every other and not all are traded in competitive markets. Furthermore, Saudi Arabia
2

Mikesell (1997), Stevens (2003); Lederman and Maloney (2008), Wright and Czelusta
(2003, 2004, 2006).
4

does not satisfy the third condition, due to its large size in world oil markets.3 But the
assumption that most oil producers are price-takers holds relatively well.
To a first approximation, then, the local price of oil is equal to the dollar price on
world markets times the exchange rate. It follows, for example, that a devaluation should
push up the price of oil quickly and in proportion (leaving aside pre-existing contracts or
export restrictions). An upward revaluation of the currency should push down the price
of oil in proportion.
Throughout this paper we assume that the domestic country must take the price of
the export commodity as given, in terms of foreign currency. We begin by considering
the hypothesis that the given world price entails a long-term secular decline. The
subsequent section of the paper considers the volatility in the given world price.
b. The hypothesis of a declining trend in commodity prices (PrebischSinger)
The hypothesis that the prices of mineral and agricultural products follow a
downward trajectory in the long run, relative to the prices of manufactures and other
products, is associated with Raul Prebisch (1950) and Hans Singer (1950), and what used
to be called the “structuralist school.” The theoretical reasoning was that world demand
for primary products is inelastic with respect to world income. That is, for every one
percent increase in income, the demand for raw materials increases by less than one
percent. Engel’s Law is the (older) proposition that households spend a lower fraction of
their income on food and other basic necessities as they get richer.
This hypothesis, if true, would readily support the conclusion that specializing in
natural resources was a “bad deal.” Mere “hewers of wood and drawers of water” would
remain forever poor if they did not industrialize. The implication that was drawn by
Prebisch, Singer, and the structuralists was that developing countries should discourage
international trade with tariff and non-tariff barriers, to allow their domestic
manufacturing sector to develop behind protective walls, rather than exploiting their
traditional comparative advantage in natural resources as the classic theories of free trade
would have it. This “import substitution industrialization” policy was adopted in most of
Latin America and much of the rest of the developing world in the 1950s, 60s and 70s.
The fashion reverted in subsequent decades, however.
c. Hypotheses of rising trends in non-renewable resource prices
(Malthus and Hotelling)
There also exist persuasive theoretical arguments that we should expect prices of
oil and other minerals to experience upward trends in the long run. The arguments begin
with the assumption that we are talking about non-perishable non-renewable resources,
3

If OPEC functioned effectively as a true cartel, then it would possess even more
monopoly power in the aggregate. We assume here, however, that OPEC does not
currently exercise much monopoly power beyond that of Saudi Arabia, because so many
non-members now produce oil and because even OPEC members usually do not feel
constrained to stay within assigned quotas.
5

i.e., deposits in the earth’s crust that are fixed in total supply and are gradually being
depleted. (The argument does not apply as well to agricultural products.)
Let us add one more assumption: whoever currently has claim to the resource – an
oil company – can be confident that it will retain possession, unless it sells to someone
else, who then has equally safe property rights. This assumption excludes cases where
warlords compete over physical possession of the resource. It also excludes cases where
private oil companies fear that their contracts might be abrogated or their possessions
nationalized.4 Under such exceptions, the current owner has a strong incentive to pump
the oil or extract the minerals quickly, because it might never benefit from whatever is
left in the ground. One explanation for the sharp rise in oil prices between 1973 and
1979, for example, is that private Western oil companies over the preceding two decades
had anticipated the possibility that newly assertive developing countries would eventually
nationalize the oil reserves within their borders, and thus had kept prices low by pumping
oil more quickly than they would have done had they been confident that their claims
would remain valid indefinitely.
i. Hotelling and the interest rate
Let us begin, at the risk of some oversimplification, by assuming also that the
fixed deposits of oil in the earth’s crust are all sufficiently accessible that the costs of
exploration, development, and pumping are small compared to the value of the oil.
Hotelling (1931) deduced from these assumptions the important theoretical principle that
the price of oil in the long run should rise at a rate equal to the interest rate.
The logic is as follows. At every point in time the owner of the oil – whether a
private oil company or state-owned -- chooses how much to pump and how much to
leave in the ground. Whatever is pumped can be sold at today’s price (this is the pricetaker assumption) and the proceeds invested in bank deposits or US Treasury bills which
earn the current interest rate. If the value of the oil in the ground is not expected to
increase in the future, or not expected to increase at a sufficiently rapid rate, then the
owner has an incentive to extract more of it today, so that he earns interest on the
proceeds. As oil companies worldwide react in this way, they drive down the price of oil
today, below its perceived long-run level. When the current price is below its perceived
long-run level, companies will expect that the price must rise in the future. Only when
the expectation of future appreciation is sufficient to offset the interest rate will the oil
market be in equilibrium. That is, only then will oil companies be close to indifferent
between pumping at a faster rate and a slower rate.
To say that the oil prices are expected to increase at the interest rate means that it
should do so on average; it does not mean that there won’t be price fluctuations above
and below the trend. But the theory does imply that, averaging out short-term unexpected
fluctuations, oil prices in the long term should rise at the interest rate.
If there are constant costs of extraction and storage, then the trend in prices will
be lower than the interest rate, by that amount; if there is a constant convenience yield

4

Bohn and Deacon (2000) show how insecure ownership rights inhibit investment in
natural resources.
6

from holding inventories, then the trend in prices will be higher than the interest rate, by
that amount. 5
ii. Malthusianism and the “peak oil” hypothesis
The idea that natural resources are in fixed supply, and that as a result their prices
must rise in the long run as reserves begin to run low, is much older than Hotelling. It
goes back to Thomas Malthus (1798) and the genesis of fears of environmental scarcity
(albeit without the role of the interest rate). Demand grows with population, supply is
fixed; what could be clearer in economics than the prediction that price will rise? 6
The complication is that supply is not fixed. True, at any point in time there is a
certain stock of oil reserves that have been discovered. But the historical pattern has long
been that, as that stock is depleted, new reserves are found. When the price goes up, it
makes exploration and development profitable for deposits that are farther under the
surface or are underwater or in other hard-to-reach locations. This is especially true as
new technologies are developed for exploration and extraction.
Over the two centuries since Malthus, or the 70 years since Hotelling, new
discoveries and new technologies have increased the supply of oil and other natural
resources at a pace that has roughly counteracted the increase in demand from growth in
population and incomes.7
Just because supply has always increased in the past does not necessarily mean
that it will always do so in the future. In 1956 Marion King Hubbert, an oil engineer,
5

The same arbitrage condition that implies a positive long-run price trend also can
explain a major source of shorter-run price swings. The real price of oil should be
unusually high during periods when real interest rates are low (e.g., due to easy monetary
policy), so that an poor expected future return to leaving the oil in the ground offsets the
low interest rate. By contrast, when real interest rates are high (e.g,. due to tight
monetary policy), current oil prices should lie below their long-run equilibrium, because
an expected future rate of price increase is needed in order to offset the high interest rate.
Very low US real interest rates boosted commodity prices toward the end of the 1970s,
especially in dollar terms, and high US real interest rates drove them down in the 1980s,
again especially in dollar terms. In the years 2003-2009, low interest rates may again
have been a source of high commodity prices. (References by the author include
Frankel, 1986, 2008a,b; Frankel and Hardouvelis, 1985; Frankel and Rose, 2009; and
"Real Interest Rates Cast a Shadow Over Oil," Financial Times, April 15, 2005. Also
Barsky and Summers, 1988, Part III.) Barsky and Killian (2002) and Killian (2009)
believe that many of the big oil price “shocks” have in reality been endogenous with
respect to western monetary policy. Some, of course, believe that destabilizing
speculators are to blame for price swings.
6
Even though Malthusianism predicts rising prices for commodities and structuralism
predicts falling prices, both Malthus and Prebisch supported protection against imports.
The resolution of the paradox is that Malthus had in mind England, where the import
would be grain, while Prebisch had in mind Argentina, where grain would be the export
and manufactures would be the import.
7
Krautkraemer (1998) and Wright and Czelusta (2003, 2004, 2006).
7

predicted that the flow supply of oil within the United States would peak in the late 1960s
and then start to decline permanently. The prediction was based on a model in which
the fraction of the country’s reserves that has been discovered rises through time, and
data on the rates of discovery versus consumption are used to estimate the parameters in
the model. Unlike myriad other pessimistic forecasts, this one came true on schedule,
earning subsequent fame for its author. The planet Earth is a much larger place than the
United States, but it too is finite. A number of analysts have extrapolated Hubbert’s
words and modeling approach to claim that the same pattern would follow for extraction
of the world’s oil reserves. Specifically, some of them claim that the 2000-2008 run-up
in oil prices confirmed a predicted global “Hubbert’s Peak.”8 It remains to be seen
whether we are currently witnessing a peak in world oil production, notwithstanding that
forecasts of such peaks have proven erroneous in the past.
d. Evidence
i. Statistical time series studies
With strong theoretical arguments on both sides, either for an upward trend or for a
downward trend, one must say that it is an empirical question. Although specifics will
vary depending on individual measures, it is possible to generalize somewhat across
commodity prices.9 Terms of trade for commodity producers had a slight upward trend
from 1870 to World War I, a downward trend in the inter-war period, upward in the
1970s, downward in the 1980s and 1990s, and upward in the first decade of the 21st
century.
What is the overall statistical trend in the long run? Some authors find a slight
upward trend, some a slight downward trend.10 The answer seems to depend, more than
anything else, on the date of the end of the sample. Studies written after the commodity
price increases of the 1970s found an upward trend, but those written after the 1980s
found a downward trend, even when both kinds of studies went back to the early 20th
century. No doubt, when studies using data through 2008 are completed some will again
find a positive long run trend. This phenomenon is less surprising than it sounds.
When a real price undergoes large ten-year cycles around a trend, estimates of the trend
are very sensitive to the precise time period studied.11
ii. The wager of Paul Ehrlich against Julian Simon

8

E.g., Deffeyes (2005).
Although prices do not always move together for oil, other minerals, and agricultural
products, there is a high correlation.
10
Cuddington (1992), Cuddington, Ludema and Jayasuriya (2007), Cuddington and
Urzua (1989), Grilli and Yang (1988), Hadass and Williamson (2003), Reinhart and
Wickham (1994), Kellard and Wohar (2005) and Balagtas and Holt (2009).
11
The same phenomenon is evident in real exchange rates, stock prices, and housing
prices.
9

8

Paul Ehrlich is a biologist, highly respected among scientists but with a history of
sensationalist doomsday predictions regarding population, the environment, and resource
scarcity. Julian Simon was a libertarian economist, frustrated by the failure of the public
to hold Malthusians like Ehrlich accountable for the terrible track record of their
predictions. In 1980, Simon publicly bet Ehrlich $1000 that the prices of five minerals
would decline between then and 1990. (Simon let Ehrlich choose the 10-year span and
the list of minerals: copper, tin, nickel, chromium and tungsten.) Ehrlich’s logic was
Malthusian: because supplies were fixed while growth of populations and economies
would raise demand, the resulting scarcity would continue to drive up prices. He, like
most observers, was undoubtedly mentally extrapolating into the indefinite future what
had been a strong upward movement in commodity prices over the preceding decade.
Simon’s logic, on the other hand, is called cornucopian. Yes, the future would repeat the
past. The relevant pattern from the past was not the ten-year trend, however, but rather a
century of cycles: resource scarcity does indeed drive up prices, whereupon, supply,
demand and, especially, technology respond with a lag, driving the prices back down.
Simon was precisely right. He won the bet handily: not only did the real price of the
basket of five minerals decline over the subsequent ten years, but every one of the five
real prices also declined. He was also, almost certainly, right about the reasons: in
response to the high prices of 1980, new technologies came into use, buyers economized,
and new producers entered the market.
The Ehrlic-versus-Simon bet carries fascinating implications, not just for
Malthusians versus Cornucopians, environmentalists versus economists, extrapolationists
versus contrarians, and futurologists versus historians. For present purposes, the main
important point is slightly more limited. Simple extrapolation of medium-term trends
gives misleading answers. One must take a longer-term perspective. The review of the
statistical literature in the preceding sub-section illustrated the importance of examining
as long a statistical time series as possible.
However, one should seek to avoid falling prey to either of two reductionist
arguments at the philosophical poles of Mathusianism and cornucopianism. On the one
hand, the fact that the supply of minerals in the earth’s crust is a finite number, does not
in itself justify the apocalyptic conclusion that we must necessarily run out. As Sheik
Ahmed Zaki Yamani, the former Saudi oil minister, famously said, "The Stone Age came
to an end not for a lack of stones and the oil age will end, but not for a lack of oil."
Malthusians do not pay enough attention to the tendency for technological progress to
ride to the rescue. On the other hand, the fact that the Malthusian forecast has repeatedly
been proven false in the past does not in itself imply the Panglossian forecast that this
will always happen in the future.12 One must seek, rather, a broad perspective in which
all relevant reasoning and evidence are brought to bear in the balance.

12

In the last decade alone, black swan thinking of this sort (”because I have never
personally observed this happen in the past, it won’t happen in the future“) led Americans
to both the national security tragedy that began on September 11, 2001, and the economic
crisis that began in the summer of 2007. Only small minorities of experts, those who
had a truly broad perspective, were able to recognize ahead of time the possibilities of a
9

II.

Medium-term Volatility of Commodity Prices

Of course the price of oil does not follow a smooth path, whether upward or
downward. Rather it experiences large short- and medium-term swings around a longerterm average. The world market prices for oil and natural gas are more volatile than
those for any other mineral and agricultural commodities. (Copper and coffee are two
runner-ups.) Even prices of other mineral and agricultural commodity prices are far more
volatile than prices of most manufactured products or services.
Some have suggested that it is precisely the volatility of natural resource prices, rather
than the trend, that is bad for economic growth.13
a. Low short-run elasticities
It is not hard to understand why the market price of oil is volatile in the short run,
or even the medium run. Because elasticities of supply and demand with respect to price
are low, relatively small fluctuations in demand (due, for example, to weather) or in
supply (due, for example, to disruptions) require a large change in price to re-equilibrate
supply and demand. Demand elasticities are low in the short run largely because the
capital stock at any point in time is designed physically to operate with a particular ratio
of energy to output. Supply elasticities are also often low in the short run because it takes
time to adjust output, especially if production is already at capacity so that expansion
requires new drilling and new pipelines. Inventories can cushion the short run impact of
fluctuations, but they are limited in size. There is a bit of scope to substitute across
different fuels, even in the short run. But this just means that the prices of oil, natural
gas, and other fuels tend to experience their big medium-term swings together.
In the longer run, elasticities are far higher, both on the demand side and the
supply side. This dynamic was clearly at work in the oil price shocks of the 1970s – the
quadrupling after the Arab oil embargo of 1973 and the doubling after the Iranian
revolution of 1979, which elicited relatively little consumer conservation or new supply
sources in the short run, but a lot of both after a few years had passed. People started
insulating their houses and driving more fuel-efficient cars, and oil deposits were
discovered and developed in new countries. This is a major reason why the real price of
oil came back down in the 1980s and 1990s.
In the medium term, oil may be subject to a cob-web cycle, due to the lags in
response: The initial market equilibrium is a high price; the high price cuts demand
after a few years, which in turn leads to a new low price, which raises demand with a lag,
and so on. In theory, if people have rational expectations, they should look ahead to the
next price cycle before making long-term investments in housing or drilling. But the
mass terrorist attack and a plunge in housing prices even though neither had happened in
living memory.
13
Blattman, Hwang, and Williamson (2007), Hausmann and Rigobon (2003) and
Poelhekke and van der Ploeg (2007).
10

complete sequence of boom-bust-boom over the last 35 years looks suspiciously like a
cobweb cycle nonetheless.
b. Is volatility per se detrimental to economic performance?
Gamblers aside, most people would rather have less economic volatility than
more. But is variability necessarily harmful for long run growth? Some studies and
historical examples suggest that high volatility can accompany the rapid growth phase of
a country’s development.
Cyclical shifts of movable resources (labor and land) back and forth across sectors
– mineral, agricultural, manufacturing, services – may incur needless transaction costs.
Frictional unemployment of labor, incomplete utilization of the capital stock, and
incomplete occupancy of housing are true deadweight costs, even if they are temporary.
Government policy-makers may not be better than individual economic agents at
discerning whether a boom in the price for the export commodity is temporary or
permanent. But the government cannot completely ignore the issue of volatility, under
the logic that the private market can deal with it. When it comes to exchange rate policy
or fiscal policy, governments must necessarily make judgments about the likely
permanence of shocks. Moreover, since commodities are inherently risky, a diversified
country may indeed be better off than one specialized in oil or a few other commodities,
other things equal. On the other hand, the private sector dislikes risk as much as the
government does, and will take steps to mitigate it; thus one must think where the market
failure lies before assuming that deliberate diversification necessarily raises economic
welfare.
In the latter part of the paper we will consider the implications of the mediumterm boom-bust cycle further, under the heading of the Dutch Disease, and then methods
that countries have adopted to try to deal with short-term volatility.

III. Possible Channels of the Natural Resource Curse
The Natural Resource Curse is not confined to individual anecdotes or case
studies, but has been borne out in some statistical tests of the determinants of economic
performance across a comprehensive sample of countries. Sachs and Warner (1995)
kicked off the econometric literature, finding that economic dependence on oil and
mineral is correlated with slow economic growth, controlling for other structural
attributes of the country. Sachs and Warner (2001) summarized and extended previous
research showing evidence that countries with great natural resource wealth tend to grow
more slowly than resource-poor countries. They say their result is not easily explained by
other variables, or by alternative ways to measure resource abundance. Their paper
claims that there is little direct evidence that omitted geographical or climate variables
explain the curse, or that there is a bias in their estimates resulting from some other
unobserved growth deterrent. Other studies that find a negative effect of oil, in
particular, on economic performance, include Kaldor, Karl and Said (2007); Ross (2001);
Sala-i-Martin and Subramanian (2003); and Smith (2004).

11

The result is by no means universal, especially when one generalizes beyond oil.
Norway is conspicuous as an oil-producer that is at the top of the international league
tables for governance and economic performance.14 As many have pointed out,
Botswana and the Congo are both abundant in diamonds; yet Botswana is the best
performer in continental Africa in terms of democracy, stability, and rapid growth of
income, while the Congo is among the very worst.15
Among the statistical studies, Delacroix (1977), Davis (1995), Herb (2005) and
Maloney (2002) all find no evidence of the natural resource curse. Most recently,
Alexeev and Conrad (2009) find that oil wealth and mineral wealth have positive effects
on income per capita, when controlling for a number of variables, particularly dummies
for East Asia and Latin America. In some cases, especially if the data do not go back to
a time before oil was discovered, the reason different studies come to different results is
that oil wealth may raise the level of per capita income, while reducing or failing to raise
the growth rate of income (or the end-of-sample level of income, if the equation
conditions on initial income).16
In some cases the crucial difference is whether “natural resource wealth” is
measured by true endowments, or rather by exports. The skeptics argue that natural
resource exports are highly endogenous, in several ways.17 On the one hand, basic trade
theory readily predicts that a country may show a high mineral share in exports, not
necessarily because it has a higher endowment of minerals than other countries (absolute
advantage) but because it does not have the ability to export manufactures (comparative
advantage.). This is important because it offers an explanation for negative statistical
correlations between mineral exports and economic development, an explanation that
would invalidate the common inference that minerals are bad for growth.
On the other hand, the skeptics also have plenty of examples where successful
institutions and industrialization went hand in hand with rapid development of mineral
resources. Cases of countries that were able to develop efficiently their resource
endowments as part of strong economy-wide growth include: the United States during its

14

Røed Larsen (2003, 2004).

Norway is literally ranked number one out of 182 countries
in the Human Development Index. Kuwait, Qatar, and the UAE are also in the top fifth.
In terms of real income, Norway is ranked number 5, just behind Qatar and the UAE.
For comparison, the US is number 9 in real income, and 13 on the HDI.
15
Engelbert (2000), Sarraf and Jimanji (2001), and Iimi (2006) are among those noting
Botswana’s conspicuous escape from the Resource Curse of its neighbors. Most African
countries grew more strongly in the years 2000-08 than previously, in part due to rising
mineral prices (Beny and Cook, 2009). But countries like the Congo, Chad and Sierra
Leone remain in the bottom 5 per cent of countries in the Human Development Index.
Oil-rich Nigeria ranks 159th out of 182. (Human Development Report, 2009. The figures
pertain to 2007.)
16
See Rodriguez and Sachs (1999) and Alexeev and Conrad (2009). .
17
Maloney (2002) and Wright and Czelusta (2003, 2004, 2006). Even recorded
reserves, the most common measure of endowments, are somewhat endogenous as well,
since they reflect discoveries, which in turn reflect both world prices and the productivity
of the exploration industry, global and local.
12

pre-war industrialization period18, Venezuela from the 1920s to the 1970s, Australia since
the 1960s, Norway since its oil discoveries of 1969, Chile since adoption of a new mining
code in 1983, Peru since a privatization program in 1992, and Brazil since the lifting of
restrictions on foreign mining participation in 1995.19 Examples of countries that were
equally well-endowed geologically but that failed to develop their natural resources
efficiently include Chile and Australia before World War I and Venezuela since the
1980s.20
In short, it is not that countries with oil wealth will necessarily achieve worse
performance than those without. Few would think that a country with oil or other natural
resources would be better off destroying them or refraining from developing them.
Resource-rich countries can succeed. The question is why does oil lead to success in
some cases and failure in others. What leads to the achievements of Norway and the
disappointments of Nigeria? The same question applies to other precious minerals:
what makes a Botswana rather than a Bolivia, a Chile rather than a Congo?
Let us return to a consideration of various channels whereby oil wealth could lead
to poor performance. Based on the statistical evidence, we have already largely
rejected the hypothesis of a long-term negative trend in world prices, while accepting the
hypothesis of high volatility. But we have yet to spell out exactly how high price
volatility might lead to slower economic growth. In addition we have yet to consider in
detail the hypotheses according to which oil wealth leads to poor institutions – including
military conflict and authoritarianism – which in turn might lead to poor economic
performance.
a. Is commodity specialization per se detrimental to growth?
What are the possible negative externalities to specialization in natural resources,
beyond volatility? What are the positive externalities to diversification into
manufacturing?
Outside of classical economics, diversification out of primary commodities into
manufacturing in most circles is considered self-evidently desirable. Several false
arguments have been made for it. One is the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis of secularly
declining commodity prices, which we judged to lack merit in Part I of this paper.
Another is the mistaken “cargo cult” inference, based on the observation that advanced
countries have heavy industries like steel mills and auto plants, that these visible
monuments are necessarily the route to economic development. But one should not
dismiss more valid considerations, just because less valid arguments for diversification
into manufacturing are sometimes made.
18

David and Wright (1997).
Wright and Czelusta (2003, pp. 4-7, 12-13, 18-22).
20
Hausmann (2003, p.246): “Venezuela’s growth collapse took place after 60 years of
expansion, fueled by oil. If oil explains slow growth, what explains the previous fast
growth?”
19

13

Is industrialization the sine qua non of economic development? Is encouragement
of manufacturing necessary to achieve high income? Classical economic theory says
“no:” countries are best off producing whatever is their comparative advantage, whether
that is natural resources or manufacturing. In this 19th century view, attempts by Brazil
to industrialize were as foolish as it would have been for Great Britain to try to grow
coffee and oranges in hothouses. But the “structuralists” mentioned early in this chapter
were never alone in their feeling that countries only get sustainably rich if they
industrialize, oil-rich sheikdoms notwithstanding. Nor were they ever alone in feeling
that industrialization in turn requires an extra push from the government (at least for
latecomers), often known as industrial policy. Matsuyama (1992) provided an influential
model formalizing this intuition: the manufacturing sector is characterized by learning
by doing, while the primary sector (agriculture, in his paper) is not. The implication
would be that deliberate policy-induced diversification out of primary products into
manufacturing could help bring about economic development, and that a permanent
commodity boom that crowds out manufacturing could indeed retard it.
On the other side, it must be pointed out that there is no reason why learning by
doing should be the exclusive preserve of manufacturing tradables. Nontradables can
enjoy learning by doing.21 Mineral and agricultural sectors can as well. Some
countries have experienced tremendous productivity growth in the oil, mineral, and
agricultural sectors. American productivity gains have been aided, since the late 19th
century, by public investment in such knowledge infrastructure institutions as the U.S.
Geological Survey, the Columbia School of Mines, the Agricultural Extension program,
and Land-Grant Colleges. Although well-functioning governments have played a role in
supplying these public goods for the natural resource sector, this is different than
mandating government ownership of the resources themselves. In Latin America, for
example, public monopoly ownership and prohibition on importing foreign expertise or
capital has often stunted development of the mineral sector, whereas privatization has set
it free.22 Moreover, attempts by governments to force linkages between the mineral
sector and processing industries have not always worked.23
b. Do mineral riches lead to wars?
Domestic conflict is certainly bad for economic development, especially when
violent. Where a valuable resource such as oil or diamonds is there for the taking, rather
than requiring substantial inputs of labor and capital investment, factions are more likely
to fight over it. Fearon and Laitin (2003), Collier and Hoeffler (2004), Humphreys
(2005) and Collier (2007, Chapter 2) all find that economic dependence on oil and
21

Torvik (2001).

22

Wright and Czelusta (2003 , p.6, 25; 18-21).
Hausmann, Klinger and Lawrence (2008) warn of the pitfalls of assuming that South
Africa, for example, can move from diamond mining to diamond cutting. They are not
opposed to industrial policy per se, but rather believe that linkages are more likely where
factor intensities and technological requirements are similar across sectors, rather than to
upstream or downstream industries.

23

14

mineral wealth is correlated with civil war. Chronic conflict in such oil-rich countries as
Angola and Sudan comes to mind.
The conclusion is not unanimous: Brunnschweiler and Bulte (2009) argue that the
conventional measure of resource dependence is endogenous with respect to conflict, and
that instrumenting for dependence eliminates its significance in conflict regressions. They
find conflict increases dependence on resource extraction, rather than the other way
around.
c. Institutions
i. Institutions and Development
A prominent trend in thinking regarding economic development is that the quality
of institutions is the deep fundamental factor that determines which countries experience
good performance and which do not, 24 and that it is futile to recommend good
macroeconomic or microeconomic policies if the institutional structure is not there to
support them. Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002) use as their measure of
institutional quality an indicator of the rule of law and protection of property rights (taken
from Kaufmann, Kraay and Zoido-Lobaton, 2002). Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
(2001) use a measure of expropriation risk to investors. Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson,
and Thaicharoen (2003) measure the quality of a country’s “cluster of institutions” by the
extent of constraints on the executive. The theory is that weak institutions lead to
inequality, intermittent dictatorship, and lack of any constraints to prevent elites and
politicians from plundering the country.
Institutions can be endogenous: the result of economic growth rather than the
cause. (The same problem is encountered with other proposed fundamental determinants
of growth, such as openness to trade and freedom from malaria.) Many institutions -such as the structure of financial markets, mechanisms of income redistribution and
social safety nets, tax systems, and intellectual property rules -- tend to evolve
endogenously, in response to the level of income.
Econometricians address the problem of endogeneity by means of the technique
of instrumental variables. What is a good instrumental variable for institutions, an
exogenous determinant? Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Thaicharoen (2002) and
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) introduce the mortality rates of colonial
settlers. The theory is that, out of all the lands that Europeans colonized, only those where
Europeans actually settled were given good European institutions. Acemoglu et al chose
their instrument on the reasoning that initial settler mortality rates determined whether
Europeans subsequently settled in large numbers.25 One can help justify this otherwise
idiosyncratic-sounding instrumental variable by pointing out that there need not be a
strong correlation between the diseases that killed settlers and the diseases that afflict
natives, and that both are independent of the countries’ geographical suitability for trade.
24

Barro (1991) and North (1994).
Glaeser, et al, (2004) argue against the settler variable. Hall and Jones (1999) use
latitude as a proxy for European institutions, and don’t distinguish the independent effect
of tropical conditions.

25

15

The conclusion of Rodrik et al is that institutions trump everything else -- the effects of
both tropical geography and trade pale in the blinding light of institutions. Nobody denies
the important role of macroeconomic stability; but the claim is that macroeconomic
policies are merely the outcome of institutions.
This is essentially the same result as found by Acemoglu et al (2002), Easterly
and Levine (2002) and Hall and Jones (1999): institutions drives out the effect of
policies, and geography matters primarily as a determinant of institutions. But it does not
matter much whether the effect of institutions is merely one of several important deep
factors or if, as these papers seem claim, it is the only important deep factor. Clearly,
institutions are important.26
ii. Oil, Institutions and Governance
Of the various possible channels through which natural resources could be a curse
to long-run development, the quality of institutions and governance is perhaps the most
widely hypothesized. Hodler (2006) and Caselli (2006) are among those finding a
natural resource curse via internal struggle for ownership. Leite and Weidmann (1999)
find that natural resource dependence has a substantial statistical effect on measures of
corruption in particular. Gylfason and Zoega (2002) and Nankani (1979) find a negative
effect via inequality. Gylfason (2001b) reviews a number of possible channels that
could explain natural resource dependence, as measured by labor allocation, leading to
worse average performance.27
It is not necessarily obvious, a priori, that endowments of oil should lead to
inequality or authoritarianism or bad institutions generally. Humphreys, Sachs and
Stiglitz (2007, p.2) point out that a government wishing to reduce inequality should in
theory have an easier time of it in a country where much wealth comes from a nonrenewable resource in fixed supply, because taxing it runs less risk of eliciting a fall in
output. This is in comparison to the more elastic supplies of manufactures and other
goods or services, including agricultural goods, which are produced with a higher labor
component. But the usual interpretation is that most governments in resource-rich
countries have historically not been interested in promoting equality.
The “rent cycling theory” as enunciated by Auty (1990, 2001, 2007, 2009) holds
that economic growth requires recycling rents via markets rather than via patronage. In
high-rent countries the natural resource elicits a political contest to capture ownership,
whereas in low-rent countries the government must motivate people to create wealth, for
example by pursuing comparative advantage, promoting equality, and fostering civil
26

The imprecision of the word “institutions” can be frustrating (Frankel, 2003b). Good
institutions are not necessarily equated with democracy. Central bank independence is an
example where the two conflict. In the last section of this paper we consider examples
of specific institutions that might lessen the Natural Resource Curse.
27
Gylfason (2000) finds a resource curse at work in Eastern Europe and Central Asia,
through rent-seeking and policy failures. Gylfason (2001a) finds a negative effect on
growth via education and Gylfason and Zoega (2006) via crowding out investment.
16

society. This theory is related to the explanation of economic historians Engerman and
Sokoloff (1997, 2000, 2002) as to why industrialization first took place in North America
and not Latin America (and why in the Northeastern United States rather than the South).
Lands endowed with extractive industries and plantation crops (mining, sugar, cotton)
developed institutions of slavery, inequality, dictatorship, and state control, whereas those
climates suited to fishing and small farms (fruits and vegetables, grain and livestock)
developed institutions based on individualism, democracy, egalitarianism, and capitalism.
When the industrial revolution came along, the latter areas were well-suited to make the
most of it. Those that had specialized in extractive industries were not, because society
had come to depend on class structure and authoritarianism, rather than on individual
incentive and decentralized decision-making. The theory is thought to fit Middle
Eastern oil exporters especially well.28
Isham, et al, (2005) find that the commodities that are damaging to institutional
development, which they call “point source” resources, are, in addition to oil: other
minerals, plantation crops, and coffee and cocoa (versus the same small-scale farm
products identified by Engerman and Sokoloff). Sala-I-Martin and Subramanian (2003)
and Bulte, Damania, and Deacon (2005) also find that point-source resources such as oil
and some particular minerals undermine institutional quality and thereby growth, but not
agricultural resources. Mehlum, Moene, and Torvik (2006) observe the distinction by
designating them “lootable” resources. Arezki and Brückner (2009) find that oil rents
worsen corruption (but, unusually, that they also improve civil liberties).
Some have questioned the assumption that oil discoveries are exogenous and
institutions endogenous. In other words oil wealth is not necessarily the cause and
institutions the effect, rather than the other way around. Norman (2009) points out that
the discovery and development of oil is not purely exogenous, but rather is endogenous
with respect to, among other things, the efficiency of the economy. Mehlum, Moene,
and Torvik (2006), Robinson, Torvik and Verdier (2006), McSherry (2006) and Smith
(2007) suggest that the important question is whether the country already has good
institutions at the time that oil is discovered, in which case it is more likely to be put to
use for the national welfare instead of the welfare of an elite. But Alexeev and Conrad
(2009) find no evidence that oil or mineral wealth interacts positively with institutional
quality.29
d. Oil and Democracy
Mahdavy (1970) was apparently the first to suggest—followed by Luciani (1987),
Vandewalle (1998) and many others -- that Middle Eastern governments’ access to rents,
in the form of oil revenue, may have freed them from the need for taxation of their
28

E.g., Iran. Mahdavi (1970), Skocpol (1982, p. 269), and Smith (2007).
Before the interactive effects, they report significant negative effects of oil or mineral
wealth on institutional quality when conditioning on actual initial income, but these
effects disappear in their preferred equation, which does not condition on initial income.
Institutional quality is measured by a standard rule of law index from the World Bank
(and is instrumented by such variables as absolute latitude and fraction of the population
speaking English or other major Western European languages).
29

17

peoples, and that this in turn freed them from the need for democracy. The need for tax
revenue is believed to require democracy under the theory “no taxation without
representation.” Huntington (1991) generalized the principle beyond Middle Eastern oil
producers to states with natural resources in other parts of the developing world.
Statistical studies across large cross-sections of countries followed. Ross (2001)
finds that economic dependence on oil and mineral is correlated with authoritarian
government. So do Barro (2000), Wantchekon (2002), Jenson and Wantchekon (2004),
and Ross (2006). Smith (2004, 2007), Ulfelder (2007) and others generally find that
authoritarian regimes have lasted longer in countries with oil wealth.
But Karl (1997) points out that Venezuela had already been authoritarian when oil
was developed, and in fact transitioned to democracy at the height of its oil wealth.
None of the Central Asian states are democracies, even though Kazakhstan is the only
one of them with major oil production. Thus inspired, Haber and Menaldo (2009) look at
historical time series data for a link to democracy from the share of oil or minerals in the
economy and fail to find the statistically significant evidence that is typical of crosssection and panel studies.30 Similarly, when Dunning (2008) introduces fixed effects to
take into account country-specific differences within Latin America, he finds that the
correlation between oil profits and democracy turns positive.
The question whether oil dependence tends to retard democracy should probably
not be regarded as a component of the causal relation between oil and economic
performance. Some correlates of democracy – rule of law, political stability, openness
to international trade, initial equality of economic endowments and opportunities – do
tend to be good for economic growth. But each of these other variables can also exist
without democracy. Examples include pre-democratic Asian economies such as Korea or
Taiwan. Some believe that Lee Kwan Yew in Singapore and Augusto Pinochet in Chile
could not have achieved their economic reforms without authoritarian powers (the one
certainly more moderate and benevolent than the other). On a bigger scale, it is said that
China has grown so much faster than Russia since 1990 because Deng Xiao Peng chose
to pursue economic reform before political reform while Michel Gorbachev did it the
other way around.
The statistical evidence is at best mixed as to whether democracy per se is good
for economic performance. Barro (1996) finds that it is the rule of law, free markets,
education, and small government consumption that are good for growth, not democracy
per se. Tavares and Wacziarg (2001) find that it is education, not democracy per se.
Alesina, et al, (1996) find that it is political stability.31 Some even find that, after
controlling for important factors such as the rule of law and political stability, democracy
has if anything a weak negative effect on growth.

30

Loss of statistical power in pure cointegration time series tests might account for this.
Bhattacharyya and Hodler (2009) find that natural resource rents lead to corruption, but
only in the absence of high-quality democratic institutions. Collier and Hoeffler (2009)
find that when developing countries have democracies, as opposed to advanced countries,
they tend to feature weak checks and balances; as a result, when developing countries
also have high natural resource rents the result is bad for economic growth.
31

18

One can claim good evidence for the reverse causation, that economic growth
leads to democracy, often assisted by the creation of a middle class, much more reliably
than the other way around.32 Examples include Korea and Taiwan. Of course
democracy is normally regarded as an end in itself, aside from whether it promotes
economic growth.

IV. The Dutch Disease and Procyclicality
The Dutch Disease refers to some possibly unpleasant side effects of a boom in
oil or other mineral and agricultural commodities.33
a. The Macroeconomics of the Dutch Disease
The phenomenon arises when a strong, but perhaps temporary, upward swing in the
world price of the export commodity causes:
 a large real appreciation in the currency (taking the form of nominal currency
appreciation if the country has a floating exchange rate or the form of money inflows
and inflation if the country has a fixed exchange rate34);
 an increase in spending (especially by the government, which increases spending in
response to the increased availability of tax receipts or royalties –discussed below);
 an increase in the price of nontraded goods (goods and services such as housing that
are not internationally traded), relative to traded goods (manufactures and other
internationally traded goods other than the export commodity),
 a resultant shift of labor and land out of non-export-commodity traded goods (pulled
by the more attractive returns in the export commodity and in non-traded goods and
services), and
 a current account deficit (thereby incurring international debt that may be difficult to
service when the commodity boom ends35).
32

Helliwell (1994), Huber, Rueschemeyer and Stephens (1993), Lipset (1994) and
Minier (1998).
33
Gregory (1976), Corden (1984) and Neary and van Wijnbergen (1986) gave us three of
the first models. The name Dutch Disease [due to the Economist magazine] was
originally inspired by side-effects of natural gas discoveries by the Netherlands in the
late 1950s; Kremers (1986).
34
E.g., Edwards (1986). During the boom of 2001-2008, examples of fixed-rate oilproducing countries where the real appreciation came via money inflows and inflation
include Saudi Arabia and the Gulf emirates. Examples of floating-rate natural resource
countries where the real appreciation took the form of nominal currency appreciation
include Australia, Chile, Kazakhstan, Mexico, Norway, Russia, or South Africa. (Chen
and Rogoff, 2003, document the sensitivity of exchange rates to commodity prices in the
cases of Australia and New Zealand. Frankel, 2005b, documents Kazakhstan, and
Frankel, 2007, South Africa.)
19

When crowded-out non-commodity tradable goods are in the manufacturing sector,
the feared effect is deindustrialization.36 In a real trade model, the reallocation of
resources across tradable sectors, e.g., from manufactures to oil, may be inevitable
regardless of macroeconomics. But the movement into non-traded goods is
macroeconomic in origin.
What makes the Dutch Disease a “disease?” One interpretation, particularly relevant
if the complete cycle is not adequately foreseen, is that the process is all painfully
reversed when the world price of the export commodity goes back down. A second
interpretation is that, even if the perceived longevity of the increase in world price turns
out to be accurate, the crowding out of non-commodity exports is undesirable, perhaps
because the manufacturing sector has greater externalities for long-run growth (as in
Matsuyama, 1992). But the latter view is really just another name for the Natural
Resource Curse, discussed in the preceding section; it has nothing to do with cyclical
fluctuations per se.
The Dutch Disease can arise from sources other than a rise in the commodity price.
Other examples arise from commodity booms due to the discovery of new deposits or
some other expansion in supply, leading to a trade surplus via exports or a capital account
surplus via inward investment to develop the new resource. In addition, the term is also
used by analogy for other sorts of inflows such as the receipt of transfers (foreign aid or
remittances) or a stabilization-induced capital inflow. In all cases, the result is real
appreciation and a shift into nontradables, and away from (non-booming) tradables.
Again, the real appreciation takes the form of a nominal appreciation if the exchange rate
is flexible, and inflation if the exchange rate is fixed.
b. Procyclicality
Volatility in developing countries arises both from foreign shocks, such as the
fluctuations in the price of the export commodity discussed above, and also from
domestic macroeconomic and political instability. Although most developing countries in
the 1990s brought under control the chronic runaway budget deficits, money creation,
and inflation, that they experienced in the preceding two decades, most are still subject to
monetary and fiscal policy that is procyclical rather than countercyclical: they tend to be
expansionary in booms and contractionary in recessions, thereby exacerbating the
magnitudes of the swings. The aim should be to moderate them -- the countercyclical
pattern that the models and textbooks of the decades following the Great Depression
originally hoped discretionary policy would take. Often income inequality and populist
political economy are deep fundamental forces underlying the observed procyclicality.
35

Manzano and Rigobon ( 2008) show that the negative Sachs-Warner effect of resource
dependence on growth rates during 1970-1990 was mediated through international debt
incurred when commodity prices were high.
36
In Gylfason, Herbertsson and Zoega (1999), the real appreciation lowers long-term
growth because the primary sector does not experience learning by doing as the
secondary sector does.
20

That developing countries tend to experience larger cyclical fluctuations than
industrialized countries is only partly attributable to commodities. It is also in part due
to the role of factors that “should” moderate the cycle, but in practice seldom operate that
way: procyclical capital flows, procyclical monetary and fiscal policy, and the related
Dutch Disease. If anything, they tend to exacerbate booms and busts instead of
moderating them. The hope that improved policies or institutions might reduce this
procyclicality makes this one of the most potentially fruitful avenues of research in
emerging market macroeconomics.

c. The procyclicality of capital flows to developing countries
According to the theory of intertemporal optimization, countries should borrow
during temporary downturns, to sustain consumption and investment, and should repay or
accumulate net foreign assets during temporary upturns. In practice, it does not always
work this way. Capital flows are more often procyclical than countercyclical.37 Most
theories to explain this involve imperfections in capital markets, such as asymmetric
information or the need for collateral.
As developing countries evolve more market-oriented financial systems, the
capital inflows during the boom phase show up increasingly in prices for land and
buildings, and also in prices of financial assets. Prices of equities and bonds (or the
reciprocal, the interest rate) are summary measures of the extent of speculative
enthusiasm, often useful for predicting which countries are vulnerable to crises in the
future.
In the commodity and emerging market boom of 2003-2008, net capital flows
typically went to countries with current account surpluses, especially Asians and
commodity producers in the Middle East and Latin America, where they showed up in
record accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. This was in contrast to the two
previous cycles, 1975-1981 and 1990-97, when the capital flows to developing countries
largely went to finance current account deficits.
One interpretation of procyclical capital flows is that they result from procyclical
fiscal policy: when governments increase spending in booms, some of the deficit is
financed by borrowing from abroad. When they are forced to cut spending in
downturns, it is to repay some of the excessive debt that they incurred during the upturn.
Another interpretation of procyclical capital flows to developing countries is that they
pertain especially to exporters of agricultural and mineral commodities, particularly oil.
We consider procyclical fiscal policy in the next sub-section, and return to the
commodity cycle (Dutch disease) in the one after.

37

Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2005); Reinhart and Reinhart (2009); Gavin,
Hausmann, Perotti and Talvi (1996); and Mendoza and Terrones (2008).
21

d. The procyclicality of fiscal policy in developing countries
Many authors have documented that fiscal policy tends to be procyclical in
developing countries, especially in comparison with industrialized countries. 38 Most
studies look at the procyclicality of government spending, because tax receipts are
particularly endogenous with respect to the business cycle. An important reason for
procyclical spending is precisely that government receipts from taxes or royalties rise in
booms, and the government cannot resist the temptation or political pressure to increase
spending proportionately, or more than proportionately.
Procyclicality is especially pronounced in countries that possess natural resources
and where income from those resources tends to dominate the business cycle. Among
those focusing on the correlation between commodity booms and spending booms is
Cuddington (1989). Sinnott (2009) finds that Latin American countries are sufficiently
commodity-dependent that government revenue responds significantly to commodity
prices. Spending also responds positively in the case of hydrocarbon producers.39
Figure 2: Iran’s Government Wage Bill Is Influenced by Oil Prices of the Preceding 3 Years (1974, 19771997.)

IRN
Wage Expenditure as % of GDP

16.52

7.4
59.88

11.46
Real Oil Prices lagged by 3 year, in Today's Dollars

38

Cuddington (1989), Lane and Tornell (1999), Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2004),
Talvi and Végh (2005), Alesina, Campante and Tabellini (2008), Mendoza and Oviedo
(2006), Ilzetski and Vegh (2008) and Medas and Zakharova (2009). For Latin America
in particular: Gavin and Perotti (1997).
39
Especially Argentina, Ecuador and Venezuela (Figure 4). She does not find that the
spending relationshiop is statistically significant, but this may be due to insufficient data.
22

Fig. 3: Indonesia’s Government Wage Bill Is Influenced by Oil Prices Of the Preceding 3 Years (1974, 1977-97)

IND
Wage Expenditure as % of GDP

3.52

1.77
11.46

59.88
Real Oil Prices lagged by 3 year, in Today's Dollars

Two large budget items that account for much of the increased spending from oil
booms are investment projects and the government wage bill. Regarding the first
budget item, investment in infrastructure can have large long-term pay-off if it is well
designed; too often in practice, however, it takes the form of white elephant projects,
which are stranded without funds for completion or maintenance, when the oil price goes
back down (Gelb, 1986). Regarding the second budget item, Medas and Zakharova
(2009) point out that oil windfalls have often been spent on higher public sector wages.
They can also go to increasing the number of workers employed by the government.
Either way, they raise the total public sector wage bill, which is hard to reverse when oil
prices go back down. Figures 2 and 3 plot the public sector wage bill for two oil
producers against primary product prices over the preceding three years: Iran and
Indonesia. There is a clear positive relationship. That the relationship is strong with a
three-year lag illustrates the problem: oil prices may have fallen over three years, but
public sector wages cannot easily be cut nor workers laid off.40

V.

Institutions and Policies to Address the Natural
Resource Curse

A wide variety of measures have been tried to cope with the commodity cycle.41
Some work better than others.
40

Source for graphs: Frankel (2005b). Rosser (2007) and Smith (2007) consider the
natural resource curse in Indonesia and Iran.
41
E.g., Davis, et al (2003) and Sachs (2007).
23

a.

Institutions That Were Supposed to Stabilize But Have Not Worked

A number of institutions have been implemented in the name of reducing the
impact on producer countries of volatility in world commodity markets. Most have failed
to do so, and many have had detrimental effects.
i. Marketing boards
Examples of marketing boards are the systems implemented around the time of
independence in some East and West African countries, requiring that all sales of cocoa
and coffee pass through the government agency. The original justification was to
stabilize the price to domestic producers, symmetrically setting a price above world
prices when the latter were low and setting a domestic price below world prices when the
latter were high. That in turn would have required symmetrically adding to government
stockpiles when world prices were low, and running them down when world prices were
high.
In practice, the price paid to cocoa and coffee farmers, who were politically weak,
was always below the world price. The rationale eventually shifted from stabilization to
taxation of the agricultural sector (which was thought to be inelastic in its supply
behavior), and subsidization of the industrial sector. But industrialization did not
happen. Rather, the coffee and cocoa sectors shrank. Commodity marketing boards did
not work.

ii. Taxation of commodity production
Some developing countries subject their mineral sectors to high levels of taxation
and regulation, particularly where foreign companies are involved, which can discourage
output. Of course some taxation and regulation may be appropriate on environmental
grounds. But when Bolivia, Mexico, and Venezuela explicitly prohibit or discourage
foreign involvment in the development of their mineral resources, they are motivated by
populist nationalism. The danger is that they end up “killing the goose that lays the
golden egg.”

iii. Producer subsidies
More often in rich countries, the primary producing sector has political power on
its side. Then stockpiles act as a subsidy, to keep the domestic price above the world
market price, rather than a tax. An example is the Common Agricultural Policy in
Europe. Subsidies also go to coal miners in Germany, oil companies with cheap leases
on federal lands in the United States, and agricultural and energy sectors in many other
countries.

24

iv. Other government stockpiles
Some governments maintain stockpiles under national security rationales, such as
American’s Strategic Petroleum Reserve. One drawback is that decisions regarding the
management of government stockpiles are often made subject to political pressure, rather
than to maximize the objective of insulating against the biggest shocks. Another
drawback is undermining of the incentive for private citizens to hold stockpiles.
In some countries where prices of fuel to consumers are a politically sensitive
issue, the incentive for the private sector to maintain inventories is undercut in any case,
by the knowledge that in the event of a big increase in the price of the commodity the
inventory-holder will probably not be allowed to reap the benefits. A government that
took this political economy structure as a given might want to do the stockpiling itself.

v. Price controls for consumers
In developing countries, the political forces often seek to shield consumers against
increases in prices of basic food and energy through price controls. If the country is a
producer of the crop or mineral in question, then the policy tool to insulate domestic
consumers against increases in the world price may be export controls. (Examples
include Argentina’s wheat and India’s rice in 2008.) If the country is an importer of the
crop or mineral in question, then either the commodity is rationed to domestic households
or else the excess demand at the below-market domestic price is made up by imports.
Capped exports from the exporting countries and price controls in the importing countries
both work to exacerbate the magnitude of the upswing of the price for the (artificially
reduced) quantity that is still internationally traded. If the producing and consuming
countries in the rice market could cooperatively agree to refrain from government
intervention, volatility could well be lower, rather than higher, even though the
intervention is justified in the name of reducing price volatility.
vi. OPEC and other International cartels
In a world of multiple producers for a given commodity , efforts by producing
countries to raise the price or reduce the volatility would logically require the cooperation
of all or most of the producers. Each has a strong temptation to defect – raising output to
ake advantage of the higher price. Most attempts at forming international cartels have
failed within a few years.
The institution that endures decade after decade is OPEC. It is not clear whether
its attempts to raise the average or reduce the variability of the price have succeeded.
Some of the most abrupt decreases as well as increases in the world price over the last
half century have arguably been attributable to changes in OPEC’s internal dynamics
(increased collusion after the Arab Oil Embargo of 1973, followed by a breakdown in the
1980s when members stopped obeying their agreed quotas). Meanwhile, many new oil
producers have cropped up outside of OPEC, suggesting a diminution in its collective
monopoly power even when it is acting in unison.

25

b. Devices to share risks
It is probably best to accept that commodity prices will be volatile, and to seek to
establish institutions that will limit adverse economic effects that result from the
volatility. In this section we consider microeconomic policies to minimize exposure to
risk, the sort of short–term volatility discussed in part II of the paper. (We will
subsequently consider macroeconomic policies to minimize the costs of big medium-term
swings of the sort associated with the Dutch Disease.)
Three devices for avoiding exposure to short-term volatility are promising. One
is relevant for energy exporters who sign contracts with foreign companies, another for
producers that do their own selling, and a third for governments dependent on energy
revenues.
i. Price setting in contracts with foreign companies
Price setting in contracts between energy producers and foreign companies is
often plagued by a problem that is known to theorists as dynamic inconsistency.42 The
pattern has been repeated in many countries. A price is set by contract. Later the world
price goes up, and then the government wants to renege. It doesn't want to give the
company all the profits and, in a sense, why should it? Certainly the political pressures
are typically strong.
But this is a “repeated game.” The risk that the locals will renege makes foreign
companies reluctant to do business in the first place. It limits the amount of capital
available to the country, and probably raises the price of that capital. The process of
renegotiation can have large transactions costs, such as interruptions in the export flow.
It has become such a familiar pattern that it is surprising more contracts have not
been designed to be robust with respect to this inconsistency, by making the terms
explicitly dependent on future market conditions.43 The simplest device would be
indexed contracts, where the two parties agree ahead of time, “if the world price goes up
ten per cent, then the gains are split between the company and the government” in some
particular proportion. Indexation shares the risks of gains and losses, without the costs
of renegotiation or the damage to a country’s reputation from reneging on a contract.

ii. Hedging in commodity futures markets
Producers, whether private or public, often sell their commodities on international
spot markets. They are thus exposed to the risk that the dollar price of a given export
quantity will rise or fall. In many cases, the producer can hedge the risk by selling that

42
43

Helm (2010).
Humphreys, Sachs, and Stiglitz (2007, p. 323).
26

quantity on the forward or futures market.44 As with indexation of the contract price,
hedging means that there is no need for costly renegotiation in the event of large changes
in the world price. The adjustment happens automatically. Mexico has hedged its oil
revenues in this way.45 One possible drawback, especially if it is a government ministry
doing the hedging, is that the minister may receive little credit for having saved the
country from disaster when the world price plummets, but will be excoriated for having
sold out the national patrimony when the world price rises.

iii. Denomination of debt in terms of commodity prices
Another idea, which has never managed to catch on, is for a mineral-producing
company or government to index its debt to the price of the commodity. Debt service
obligations automatically rise and fall with the commodity price. This would save
developing countries from the kinds of crises that Latin Americans faced in 1982 and
Asians in 1997, when the dollar prices of their exports fell at the same time that the dollar
interest rate on their debts went up. The result for many countries was an abrupt
deterioration of their debt service ratios and a balance of payments crisis. This would not
have happened if their debts had been indexed to their commodity prices – oil for such
borrowers as Ecuador, Indonesia, Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, and Russia. As with contract
indexation and hedging, the adjustment in the event of fluctuations in the world price is
automatic.
When officials in commodity producing countries are asked why they have not
tried indexing their bonds (or loans) to the price of their export commodity, the usual
answer is that they believe there would not be enough demand from the market (or
enough interest from banks). It is true that a market needs a certain level of liquidity in
order to thrive, and that it can be hard for a new financial innovation to get over the
volume threshold. But it used to be said that foreigners would not buy bonds
denominated in the currencies of emerging market countries.46 Yet in recent years, more
and more developing countries have found that they could borrow in their own currency
if they tried. Investor receptivity to oil-denominated bonds is potentially larger. There
are obvious natural ultimate customers for oil-linked bonds: electric utilities and the
many other companies in industrialized countries who are as adversely affected by an
increase in the world price of oil as the oil exporters are by a decrease. This is a market
waiting to be born.
c. Monetary policy

44

Alquist and Killian (forthcoming).
E.g., “Mexico Buys $1bn Insurance Policy Against Falling Oil Prices,” Financial
Times, Dec. 9, 2009.
46
Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) said that the “original sin” plaguing emerging
markets was the reluctance of foreign investors to expose themselves in local currency.
45

27

We now move from ideas for institutions to address the risk created by high shortterm price volatility to ideas for macroeconomic management of medium-term swings.
We begin with monetary and exchange rate policy to manage the Dutch Disease.
i. Fixed vs. floating exchange rates
Fixed and floating exchange rates each have their advantages. The main
advantages of a fixed exchange rate are, first, that it reduces the costs of international
trade, and second that it is a nominal anchor for monetary policy, helping the central bank
achieve low-inflation credibility. The main advantage of floating, for a commodity
producer, is that it often provides automatic accommodation of terms of trade shocks:
during a commodity boom, the currency tends to appreciate, thereby moderating what
would otherwise be a danger of excessive capital inflows and overheating of the
economy, and the reverse during a commodity bust.
A balancing of these pros and cons leads many middle-size middle-income
countries to an intermediate exchange rate regime such as managed floating or a target
zone (a band). The mid-point of the band can be defined as a basket of major currencies,
rather than a simple bilateral parity against the dollar or euro, if neither the United States
nor euroland is the dominant trading partner currency. In the booming decade that began
in 2001, many followed the intermediate regime, positioned in between a few commodity
producers in the floating corner (Chile and Mexico) and a few in the firmly fixed corner
(Gulf oil producers, Ecuador). While they officially declared themselves as floating
(often as part of Inflation Targeting), in practice these intermediate countries intervened
heavily, taking perhaps half the increase in demand for their currency in the form of
appreciation but half in the form of increased foreign exchange reserves. Examples
among commodity-producers include Kazakhstan, South Africa, Russia, and many
others.47 Particularly at the early stages of a commodity boom, when one has little idea
whether it is permanent or not, there is a strong inclination to intervene in the foreign
exchange market, adding to reserves (especially if the alternative is abandoning an
established successful exchange rate target), and perhaps for awhile attempting to
sterilize the inflow to prevent rapid expansion in the money supply. In subsequent years,
if the increase in world commodity prices looks to be long-lived, there is more pressure to
accommodate it through nominal and real appreciation of the currency.
It is especially important in developing countries, where institutions tend to have
lower credibility than in advanced countries, that the public’s expectations of inflation be
anchored by some nominal target by which the central bank asks to be judged. If the
exchange rate is not to be that nominal target, then some other anchor variable should be
chosen.
ii. Alternative nominal anchors
Three candidates for nominal anchor have had ardent supporters in the past, but
are no longer prominently in the running. They are: the price of gold, as under the 19th
47

The tendency for official floaters to intervene heavily in practice, to dampen exchange
rate fluctuations, was named “fear of floating,” by Calvo and Reinhart (2002).
28

century gold standard; the money supply, the choice of monetarists; and National Income,
the choice of many mainstream economists in the 1980s.
Many central bankers and monetary economists alike have, in recent years,
considered Inflation Targeting to be the preferred approach -- or at least the preferred
alternative to fixed exchange rates, which may be appropriate for very small very open
countries. Although there are different interpretations of Inflation Targeting, some more
flexible than others, they all tend to take the CPI as the index to be targeted, and to
explicitly disavow the exchange rate as a target (or domestic commodity prices, or asset
prices).48
Inflation Targeting (IT) has a particular disadvantage for commodity producing
countries: it is not robust with respect to changes in the terms of trade. Consider a fall in
world market conditions for the export commodity, a decrease in the dollar price. It has
a negative impact on both the balance of payments and the level of economic activity. It
would be desirable for monetary policy to loosen and the currency to depreciate, to boost
net foreign demand and thereby restore external balance and internal balance. But CPI
targeting tells the central bank to keep monetary policy sufficiently tight that the currency
does not depreciate, because otherwise import prices will rise and push the CPI above its
target. Conversely if the world price for the export commodity goes up, a CPI target
prevents a needed appreciation of the currency because it would lower import prices and
push the CPI below its target.
I have in the past proposed for commodity producers a regime called Peg the
Export Price (PEP). The idea is that monetary policy be guided by the rule to keep the
local-currency price of the export commodity stable from day to day. For an oilproducer, every day that the dollar price of oil goes up 1%, monetary policy would allow
the dollar price of the local currency to go up 1%, thereby keeping the local price of oil
unchanged. PEP may combine two advantages: it automatically accommodates terms of
trade changes, as floating is supposed to do, while simultaneously abiding by a preannounced nominal anchor, as IT is supposed to do. Simulations show, for example, that
if Indonesia and Russia had been on a PEP regime, they would have automatically
experienced necessary depreciation in the late 1990s, when oil prices fell, without having
to go through the painful currency crises that these two countries in fact experienced in
1998.49 An additional consideration is that because PEP moderates swings in the real
value of export revenue, expressed in terms of purchasing power over domestic goods

48

Two qualifications to the apotheosis of the CPI. First, some versions phrase targets in
terms of “headline CPI” and some in terms of “core CPI,” typically excluding food and
energy. Second, proponents often say that it is alright for the central bank to pay
attention to the exchange rate (or commodity prices or asset prices), but only to the extent
that it helps achieve its longer run objective of price stability. Neither of these two
qualifications matters for present purposes.
49
Frankel (2003a). A more practical variation, for a country already contemplating a
basket peg, is to include the commodity in the basket. Middle Eastern oil exporters, for
example, could have a basket peg with 1/3 weight on the dollar, 1/3 on the euro, and 1/3
on a barrel of oil. (Frankel, “A Crude Proposal to Peg the Dinar,” Financial Times, June
13, 2003.)
29

and services, it might reduce the tendency for governments to increase spending
excessively in boom times and symmetrically cut it in busts.
PEP in its pure form is a rather extreme proposal, which may account for the lack
of guinea pigs willing to try it. If the non-commodity export sector is not small, or if
national leaders want it to become larger, then PEP has the disadvantage of fully
transferring the burden of exogenous fluctuations in world commodity prices to
variability in domestic prices of non-commodity exports. It is not clear that this is an
improvement over continuing to let the fluctuations show up as variability in domestic
prices of the commodity export. A more practical version of the idea would be to target
a more comprehensive index of export prices rather than a single export price (Peg the
Export Price Index).50 A still more moderate version would target an even more
comprehensive index of domestic production prices, including nontraded goods, such as
the Producer Price Index, GDP deflator, or a specially constructed index.51 The
important point is to include export commodities in the index and exclude import
commodities, whereas the CPI does it the other way around.
d. Institutions to make national saving procyclical
Some of the most important ways to cope with the commodity cycle are
institutions to insure that export earnings are put aside during the boom time, into a
commodity saving fund, perhaps with the aid of rules governing the cyclically adjusted
budget surplus.52
i. Rules for the budget deficit: The example of Chile.

As of June 2008, the President of Chile, Michele Bachelet, and her Finance
Minister, Andres Velasco, had the lowest approval ratings of any President or Finance
Minister, respectively, since the return of democracy. There were undoubtedly multiple
reasons for this, but one was popular resentment that the two had resisted intense pressure
to spend the soaring receipts from copper exports. One year later, in the summer of 2009,
the pair had the highest approval ratings of any President and Finance Minister. Why the
change? Not an improvement in overall economic circumstances: in the meantime the
global recession had hit. Copper prices had fallen abruptly. But the government had
increased spending sharply, using the assets that it had acquired during the copper boom,
and thereby moderating the downturn. Saving for a rainy day made the officials heroes,
now that the rainy day had come. Chile has achieved what few commodity-producing
developing countries have achieved: a truly countercyclical fiscal policy. Some credit
should go to previous governments, who initiated an innovative fiscal institution.53 But

50

Frankel (2005a, 2008c).
Frankel (2009).
52
Davis et al (2001a,b, 2003).
53
Page 11 of International Monetary Fund, Chile 2005 Article IV Consultation, IMF
Country Report 05/013 (September 2005).
51

30

much credit should go to the Bachelet government, which enshrined the general
framework in law and abided by it when it was most difficult to do so politically.54
Chile’s fiscal policy is governed by a set of rules. The first one is a target for the
overall budget surplus -- originally set at 1 % of GDP, then lowered to ½ % of GDP, and
again to 0 in 2009. This may sound like the budget deficit ceilings that supposedly
constrain members of euroland (deficits of 3 % of GDP under the Stability and Growth
Pact) or like the occasional U.S. proposals for a Balanced Budget Amendment (zero
deficit). But those attempts have failed, because they are too rigid to allow the need for
deficits in recessions, counterbalanced by surpluses in good times. The alternative of
letting politicians explain away any deficits by declaring them the result of slower growth
than expected also does not work, because it imposes no discipline.
Under the Chilean rules, the government can run a deficit larger than the target to
the extent that:
(1) output falls short of potential, in a recession, or
(2) the price of copper is below its medium-term (10-year) equilibrium,
with the key institutional innovation that there are two panels of experts whose job it is
each mid-year to make the judgments, respectively, what is the output gap and what is the
medium term equilibrium price of copper (also the same for molybdenum). Thus in the
copper boom of 2003-2008 when, as usual, the political pressure was to declare the
increase in the price of copper permanent thereby justifying spending on a par with
export earnings, the expert panel ruled that most of the price increase was temporary so
that most of the earnings had to be saved. This turned out to be right, as the 2008 spike
was indeed temporary. As a result, the fiscal surplus reached almost 9 % when copper
prices were high. The country paid down its debt to a mere 4 % of GDP and it saved
about 12 % of GDP in the sovereign wealth fund. This allowed a substantial fiscal
easing in the recession of 2008-09, when the stimulus was most sorely needed.
Any country, but especially commodity-producers, could usefully apply variants
of the Chilean fiscal device. Given that many developing countries are more prone to
weak institutions, a reinforcement of the Chilean idea would be to formalize the details of
the procedure into law and give the members of the panels legal independence. There
could be a requirement regarding the professional qualifications of the members and laws
protecting them from being fired, as there are for governors of independent central banks.
The separation of decision-making powers would be retained: the rules as interpreted by
the panels determine the total amount of spending or budget deficits, while the elected
political leaders determine how that total is allocated.
ii. Commodity funds or Sovereign Wealth Funds
Many natural resource producers have commodity funds, to invest savings for
future welfare, often in global portfolios. The oldest and biggest commodity funds are in
the Persian Gulf, belonging to Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates. Some highly
54

It introduced a Fiscal Responsibility Bill in 2006, which gave legal force to the role of
the structural budget. The bill also created a Pension Reserve Fund and a Social and
Economic Stabilization Fund, the latter a replacement for the existing Copper
Stabilization Funds.
31

successful non-commodity exporters in Asia have established such funds too. When
China joined the club in 2007, they received a new name, Sovereign Wealth Funds, and a
lot of new scrutiny.
It has been pointed out that the mere creation of a commodity fund, in itself, does
not necessarily do anything to insure that politicians will not raid the fund when it is
flush.55 Two standard recommendations are that the funds be transparently and
professionally run, and that they be given clear instructions that politics should not
interfere with their objective of maximizing the financial wellbeing of the country. The
Norwegian State Petroleum Fund (now called the Norwegian Pension Fund) is often held
up as a model.56 In fact Norway’s legal system puts few restrictions on what policymakers can do, and the fund is managed with political objectives that go unnoticed when
held up as an example for developing countries to emulate.57
For most countries it would be more appropriate to have rules dictating the cap on
spending out of the fund. The commodity fund of Sao Tome and Principe, newly
established in 2004, includes extensive restrictions guiding how the oil revenues are to be
saved, invested, or spent. (Outflows legally cannot exceed the highest amount that could
be sustained in perpetuity.)
Humphreys and Sandhu (2007) recommend that spending go through the regular
budget, so that they do not become any politicians’ private “slush funds.” There can be
advantages in earmarking the commodity funds for specific good causes such as
education, health, or retirement support for a future generation. If the political
constituents know how the money is to be spent, they may be both more tolerant of the
initiative to save it in the first place and more vigilant with respect to transgressions by
politicians wishing to raid the kitty to spend on armies or palaces.
iii. Reserve accumulation by central banks
One way that countries save in the aggregate during booms, in order to be able to
dissave in busts, is for central banks to accumulate international reserves via foreign
exchange intervention. Economists have regarded this as a sub-optimal mechanism: if
the goal is smoothing spending over time, as opposed to stabilization of the exchange
rate, holding the assets in the form of foreign exchange reserves has disadvantages. First,
the reserves (typically US treasury bills) do not earn a high return. Second, increases in
reserves can lead to rapid monetary expansion (if not sterilized) and thereby to inflation.
Thus a central bank that already has enough reserves, judged by precautionary and
monetary criteria, should consider selling some of the foreign exchange to the country’s
55

Davis et al (2001b) and Humphreys and Sandhu (2007). In countries with few checks
and balances, large yearly changes in oil revenues tend to lead to large yearly changes in
government consumption.
56
Holmøy (2010).
57
The political objectives are thought of as social responsibility. “Norway Proposes to
Do Well in Its Investments by Doing Good,” New York Times, May 4, 2007, p. C4;
“Norway Finds Virtue (and Value) in Transparency,” New York Times, Sept. 27, 2008.,
p.B2. But social responsibility includes, for example, boycotting stock in Wal-Mart (a
company that most American economists consider beneficial to people of lower income).
32

Natural Resource Fund. But if the Central Bank has political independence and the
NRF does not, that may be a reason to leave the reserves where they cannot be raided.
iv. Reducing net private capital inflows during booms
If foreign exchange reserves are piling up to excessive levels, there are other ways
to reduce the balance of payments surplus and facilitate national saving. One is for the
government deliberately to pay down debt, especially short-term debt. Another is to
remove any remaining controls on the ability of domestic citizens to invest abroad. A
third is to place controls on capital inflows, especially short-term inflows.
v. Lump sum distribution
The Alaska Permanent Fund saves earnings from the state’s oil sector. Alaska
state law says that the Fund must distribute half of the investment earnings on an equal
per capita basis. The theory is that the citizens know how to spend their money better
than does their government. Certainly the system gives Alaskans a good reason to feel
that they are full stakeholders in the Fund. Sala-I-Martin and Subramanian (2003)
suggest that Nigeria should similarly distribute its oil earnings on a equal per capita basis;
Birdsall and Subramanian (2004) make the same proposal for Iraq.58
e. Efforts to impose external checks
All these institutions can fail if, as in some countries, the executive simply ignores
the law and spends what he wants. In 2000 the World Bank agreed to help Chad, a new
oil producer, to finance a new pipeline. The agreement stipulated that Chad would spend
72 per cent of its oil export earnings on poverty reduction (particularly health, education
and road-building) and put aside 10 percent in a “future generations fund.” ExxonMobil
was to deposit the oil revenues in an escrow account at Citibank and the government was
to spend them subject to oversight by an independent committee. But once the money
started rolling in, the government (ranked by Transparency International as one of the
two most corrupt in the world) reneged on the agreement.59
Evidently International Financial Institutions would have to go beyond the Chad
model if local rulers are to be prevented from abuse. The Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, launched in 2002, includes the principle “Publish What You
Pay,” under which international oil companies commit to make known how much they
pay governments for oil, so that the public at least has a way of knowing when large sums
58

Ross (2007).
“Chad Backs Out of Pledge to use Oil Wealth to Reduce Poverty,” New York Times,
Dec. 13, 2005, p. A15; “World Bank Suspends Loans to Chad Over Use of Oil Money,”
NYT, Jan. 7, 2006; “The ‘Resource Curse’ Anew: Way a Grand World Bank Oil Project
Has Fast Run Into the Sand,” Financial Times, Jan. 23, 2006, p. 13; “World Bank Ends
Effort to Help Chad Ease Poverty,” New York Times, September 11, 2008; “Breaking the
Bank: A Vaunted Model Development Project Goes Awry,” The Economist, Sept. 26,
2008, p. 63.
59

33

disappear. Legal mechanisms adopted by Sao Tome and Principe void contracts if
information relating to oil revenues is not made public. Further proposals would give
extra powers to a global clearing house or foreign bank where the Natural Resource Fund
is located, such as freezing accounts in the event of a coup.60 Perhaps that principle
could be generalized: it may be that well-intentioned politicians spend oil wealth quickly
out of fear that their successors will misspend whatever is left, in which case the adoption
of an external mechanism that constrains spending both in the present in the future might
not be an unacceptable violation of sovereignty.

VII. Summary
Much theoretical reasoning and statistical evidence suggests that possession of
natural resources such as hydrocarbons, minerals, and perhaps agricultural endowments,
can confer negative effects on a country, along with the benefits. This paper has
considered six channels whereby natural resources might possibly have negative effects
on economic performance. The first, the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis of a negative longterm trend in commodity prices is counteracted by theoretical arguments for a positive
trend, and empirical findings that there is no consistent trend either way. But the other
five channels each have at least some truth to them.
(1) Commodity price volatility is high, which imposes risk and transactions costs.
(2) Specialization in natural resources can be detrimental to growth if it crowds
out the manufacturing sector and the latter is the locus of positive externalities.
(3) Mineral riches can lead to civil war, which is an obstacle to development.
(4) Endowments of “point source” commodities (oil and minerals and some
crops) can lead to poor institutions, such as corruption, inequality, class structure, chronic
power struggles, and absence of rule of law and property rights. Natural resource
wealth can also inhibit the development of democracy, though there is not good evidence
that democracy per se (as opposed to openness, economic freedom, decentralization of
decision-making, and political stability) leads to economic growth.
(5) The Dutch Disease, resulting from a commodity boom, entails real
appreciation of the currency and increased government spending, both of which expand
nontraded goods and service sectors such as housing and render uncompetitive noncommodity export sectors such as manufactures. If and when world commodity prices go
back down, adjustment is difficult due to the legacy of bloated government spending and
debt and a shrunken manufacturing sector.
In recent years, a host of revisionists have questioned each of these five channels,
as well as the bottom line that natural resource wealth is detrimental for economic
growth. Some differences in econometric findings are attributable to whether economic
performance is measured as the level of income or the rate of growth of income during
60

Humphreys and Sandhu (2007, p. 224-227). During the period when Kuwait was
occupied by an Iraqi invasion, access to Kuwaiti bank accounts in London stayed with
the Kuwaitis.
34

the sample period. Others are due to whether the equation conditions on related
variables when it tests the influence of the channel in question. The revisionists often
emphasize that resource extraction is endogenous, and that it is wrong to treat data on
mineral exports as if they represent geographic endowments.
These questions could be viewed as purely academic. It is clear that some
resource-rich countries do surprisingly poorly economically, while others do well. We
have noted examples of both sorts: countries such as Norway, Botswana and Chile that
have done very well with their endowments (oil, diamonds and copper, respectively)
versus others such as Sudan, Bolivia and Congo that have done less well. The Natural
Resource Curse should not be interpreted as a rule that resource-rich countries are
doomed to failure.
The interesting question is the track record of various institutions
and policies that have been adopted with the aim of increasing the chances of prospering.
It is safe to say that destruction or renunciation of resource endowments, to avoid dangers
such as the corruption of leaders, will not be one of these policies. Even if such a drastic
action would on average leave the country better off, which seems unlikely, who would
be the government leader to whom one would deliver such advice?
The paper concludes by considering a list of institutions and policies that have
been tried in some places with the intention of addressing aspects of the resource curse.
Some of the most important ideas are as follows.
1. Inclusion, in contracts with foreign purchasers, of clauses for automatic
adjustment of the price if world market conditions change.
2. Hedging of export proceeds in commodity futures markets.
3. Denomination of debt in terms of commodity prices.
4. Allowing some nominal currency appreciation in response to an increase
in world prices of the commodity, but also adding to foreign exchange
reserves, especially at the early stages of the boom when it may prove to
be transitory.
5. Where the monetary regime is to be Inflation Targeting, exploration of a
price measure that puts greater weight on the export commodity, such as
an index of export prices or producer prices, as the target, in place of the
standard CPI.
6. Emulation of Chile, which, to avoid excessive spending in boom times,
allows deviations from a target surplus only in response to output gaps and
long-lasting commodity price increases, as judged by independent panels
of experts rather than politicians.
7. Transparent and professionally management of Commodity Funds, with
rules to govern the payout rate and with insulation of the managers from
political pressure in their pursuit of the financial wellbeing of the country.
8. When spending oil wealth, lump-sum distribution on an equal per capita
basis.
9. Mandating an external agent, for example a financial institution that
houses the Commodity Fund, to provide transparency and to freeze
accounts in the event of a coup.

35

Needless to say, policies and institutions are influended by local circumstances, country
by country. But with innovative thinking, there is no reason why resource-rich countries
need fall prey to the curse.

36

REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, 2001, “Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91, no. 5, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, 2002, “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and
Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117(4), 1231-1294.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen, 2003,
“Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, (Elsevier), vol. 50(1), pages 49-123, January.
Alesina, Alberto, Filipe Campante, and Guido Tabellini, 2008, “Why is Fiscal Policy Often
Procyclical?” Journal of the Ecuropean Economic Association, 6, no. 5, September, 1006-1036.
Alesina, Alberto, Sule Özler, Nouriel Roubini, and Phillip Swagel, 1996, “Political Instability and
Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, Volume 1, Number 2, June.
Alexeev, Michael, and Robert Conrad, 2009, “The Elusive Curse of Oil,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 91, no. 3, 586-98.
Alquist, Ron, and Lutz Killian, forthcoming, “What Do We Learn from the Price of Crude Oil
Futures?” Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Arezki, Rabah, and Markus Brückner, 2009. "Oil Rents, Corruption, and State Stability:
Evidence From Panel Data Regressions," IMF Working Papers 09/267, International Monetary
Fund.
Auty, Richard, 1990, Resource-Based Industrialization: Sowing the Oil in Eight Developing
Countries (Clarendon Press: Oxford).
Auty, Richard, 1993, Sustaining Development in Mineral Economies: The Resource Curse Thesis
(Oxford University Press, New York).
Auty, Richard, 2001, Resource Abundance and Economic Development, World Institute for
Development Economics Research (Oxford University Press).
Auty, Richard, 2007, “Patterns of Rent-Extraction and Deployment in Developing Countries:
Implications for Governance, Economic Policy and Performance,” in G. Mavrotas and A.
Shorrocks, editors, Advancing Development: Core Themes in Global Economics (Palgrave:
London), 555-577.
Auty, Richard, 2009, “The Political Economy of Hydrocarbon Revenue Cycling in Trinidad and
Tobago,” May, paper prepared for workshop on Myths and Realities of Commodity Dependence:
Policy Challenges and Opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean, World Bank, Sept.
17-18, 2009.
Balagtas, Joseph, and Matthew Holt, 2009, “The Commodity Terms of Trade, Unit Roots and
Nonlinear Alternatives: A Smooth Transition Approach,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, Volume 91 Issue 1, Pages 87 –105.

37

Barro, Robert, 1991, “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CVI, May, 407-444.
Barro, Robert, 1996, “Democracy and Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, Volume 1,
Number 1 / March, 1-27.
Barro, Robert, 2000, “Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries.” Journal of Economic
Growth, 5: 5-28.
Barsky, Robert, and Lutz Killian, 2002, “Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great
Stagflation?” A Monetary Alternative,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, vol. 16, edited by
Ben Bernanke and Ken Rogoff 137-83 (MIT Press: Cambridge).
Barsky, Robert, and Lawrence Summers, 1988, “Gibson’s paradox and the Gold Standard,”
Journal of Political Economy, 96, no. 3, 528-550.
Beny, Laura, and Lisa Cook, 2009, “Metals or Management? Explaining Africa’s Recent
Economic Growth Performance,” American Economic Review, 99, no. 2, May, 268-274.
Bhattacharyya, Sambit, and Roland Hodler, 2009, “Natural Resources, Democracy and
Corruption,” European Economic Review .
Birdsall, Nancy and Arvind Subramanian, 2004, “Saving Iraq From Its Oil.” Foreign Affairs
(July/August): 77-89.
Blattman, Christopher, Jason Hwang, and Jeffrey Williamson, 2007, "Winners and losers in the
commodity lottery: The impact of terms of trade growth and volatility in the Periphery 18701939," Journal of Development Economics (Elsevier), vol. 82(1), pages 156-179, January. NBER
WP 10600.
Bohn, Henning, and Robert Deacon, 2000, “Ownership Risk, Investment, and the Use of Natural
Resources,” American Economic Review 90, 526-549.
Brunnschweiler, Christa, and Erwin Bulte, 2009, “Natural resources and violent conflict: resource
abundance, dependence, and the onset of civil wars,” Oxford Economic Papers, October 1; 61(4):
651 - 674.
Bulte, Erwin, Richard Damania, and Robert Deacon, 2005, “Resource Intensity, Institutions and
Development,” World Development 33, no. 7, 1029-1044.
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117, no. 2, May, 379-408.
Caselli, Francesco, 2006, “Power Struggles and the Natural Resource Curse,” LSE Research,
London School of Economics.
Chen, Yu-Chin, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2003, “Commodity Currencies,“ Journal of International
Economics, Volume 60, Issue 1, May, Pages 133-160

38

Collier, Paul, 2007, The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Falling Behind and What
Can Be Done About It (Oxford University Press: Oxford).
Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler, 2004, “Greed and grievance in civil war,” Oxford Economic
Papers, Vol. 56 (4), pp.563-595.
Collier, Paul, and A. Hoeffler, 2009, “Testing the Neo-con Agenda: Democracy in Resource-Rich
Societies,” European Economic Review 53, 293-308.
Corden, W. Max, 1984, “Booming Sector and Dutch Disease Economics: Survey and
Consolidation,” Oxford Economic Papers (Oxford Univ Press) 359-380.
Cuddington, John, 1989, “Commodity Export Booms in Developing Countries,” World Bank
Research Observer 4, 143-165.
Cuddington, John, 1992, “Long-Run Trends in 26 Primary Commodity Prices,” Journal of
Development Economics, 39, 207-27.
Cuddington, John, Rodney Ludema and Shamila Jayasuriya, 2007, “Prebisch-Singer Redux,” in
Natural Resources: Neither Curse Nor Destiny (Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, and World
Bank, Washington DC) :103-140
Cuddington, John, and C. M. Urzua, 1989, “Trends and Cycles in the Net Barter Terms of Trade:
A New Approach,” Economic Journal 99. 426-42
Davis, Graham. 1995. “Learning to Love the Dutch Disease: Evidence from the Mineral
Economies,” World Development 23: 1765-79.
Davis, Jeffrey, Rolando Ossowski, James Daniel, and Steven Barnett, 2001a, “Oil Funds:
Problems Posing as Solutions?” Finance and Development 38, no. 4 (IMF, Washington DC).
Davis , Jeffrey, Rolando Ossowski, James Daniel, and Steven Barnett, 2001b, “Stabilization and
savings funds for nonrenewable resources: Experience and fiscal policy implications,”
Occasional Paper 205 (International Monetary Fund: Washington DC). And in Davis, et al,
2003.
Davis, Jeffrey, Rolando Ossowski, and Annalisa Fedelino, editors, 2003, Fiscal Policy
Formulation and Implementation in Oil-Producing Countries (IMF: Washington DC).
Deffeyes, Kenneth, 2005, Beyond Oil: The View from Hubbert’s Peak (Hill and Wang).
Delacroix, Jacques. 1977. “The Export of Raw Materials and Economic Growth: A CrossNational Study.” American Sociological Review 42: 795-808.
Dunning, Thad, 2008, Crude Democracy: Natural Resource Wealth and Political Regimes
(Cambridge University Press: New York).
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 2002, “Tropics, Germs, and Endowments,” NBER WP No.
9106; Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.

39

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 2003, “Tropics, Germans and Crops: How Endowments
Influence Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, no. 1, 3-39.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1986, “A Commoidty Export Boom and the Real Exchange Rate: The
Money-Inflation Link,” in Neary and van Wijnbergen, eds., Natural Resources and the
Macroeconomy (MIT Press: Cambridge).
Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann, 1999, “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in
New Challenges for Monetary Policy (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp.
329-368.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff, 1997, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies: A View From Economic Historians
of the United States,” in How Latin America Fell Behind, edited by Stephen Haber, 260-304,
Stanford University Press.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff, 2000, “Institutions, Factor Endowments, and Paths of
Development in the New World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives XIV: 217-32.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff, 2002, “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of
Development Among New World Economies,” Working Paper 9259, October.
Englebert, Pierre, 2000, State Legitimacy and Development in Africa (Lynne Rienner Publishers:
Boulder).
Fearon, James, and David Laitin, 2003, “Ethnicity, Insurgence and Civil War,” American
Political Science Review, 97, no. 2, 75-90.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1986, "Expectations and Commodity Price Dynamics:
Model," American Journal of Agricultural Economics 68, 2, May, 344-48.

The Overshooting

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2003a, “A Proposed Monetary Regime for Small Commodity-Exporters: Peg the
Export Price (‘PEP’),” International Finance, vol. 6, no. 1, Spring, 61-88.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2003b, “Promoting Better National Institutions: The Role of the IMF,” IMF
Staff Papers 50, pp. 21-30.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2005a, “Peg the Export Price Index: A Proposed Monetary Regime for Small
Countries,” Journal of Policy Modeling, vol. 27, issue 4, June, pp. 495-508.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2005b, “On the Tenge: Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for Kazakhstan,”
Short-term Consultancy, Republic of Kazakhstan, April.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2007, “On the Rand: Determinants of the South African Exchange Rate,” South
African Journal of Economics, vol.75, no.3, September, 425-441.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2008a, “The Effect of Monetary Policy on Real Commodity Prices,” in Asset
Prices and Monetary Policy, University of Chicago Press, edited by John Campbell, 291-327.

40

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2008b, “An Explanation for Soaring Commodity Prices,” Vox, March.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2009, “A Comparison of Monetary Anchor Options for Commodity-Exporters in
Latin America and the Caribbean,”workshop on Myths and Realities of Commodity Dependence:
Policy Challenges and Opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean, World Bank, Sept.
17-18.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Gikas Hardouvelis, 1985, "Commodity Prices, Money Surprises, and Fed
Credibility," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 17, 4, Nov., Part I, 427-38.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, 2009, "Determination of Agricultural and Mineral
Commodity Prices," conference on Inflation in an Era of Relative Price Shocks, Reserve Bank
of Australia, August.
Gavin, Michael and Roberto Perotti, 1997, “Fiscal Policy in Latin America,”NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 12, pp. 11-61.
Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann, Roberto Perotti and Ernesto Talvi, 1996, “Managing Fiscal
Policy in Latin America and the Caribbean: Volatility, Procyclicality, and Limited
Creditworthiness,” Inter-American Development Bank, RES Working Papers 4032.
Gelb, Alan, 1986, “Adjustment to Windfall Gains: A Comparative Analysis of Oil-Exporting
Countries,” in “Natural Resources and the Macroeconomy: A Theoretical Framework,” in
J.Peter Neary and van Sweder Wijnbergen, eds., Natural Resources and the Macroeconomy
(MIT Press: Cambridge), 54-93.
Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2004, “Do
Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 9, no. 3, 271-303.
Gregory, R.G., 1976, “Some Aspects of Growth in the Mineral Sector,” Australian Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 20, 71-91.
Grilli, Enzo, and Maw Cheng Yang, 1988, “Primary Commodity Prices, Manufactured Goods
Prices, and the Terms of Trade of Developing Countries: What the Long Run Shows,” World
Bank Economic Review 2, no. 1, 1-47.
Gylfason, Thorvaldur, 2000, “Resources, Agriculture and Economic Growth in Economies in
Transition,” Kyklos 53, Issue 4, pp.545-79.
Gylfason, Thorvaldur, 2001a, “Natural Resources, Education, and Economic Development,”
European Economic Review 45, no. 4-6, 847-59.
Gylfason, Thorvaldur, 2001b, “Nature, Power, and Growth,” Scottish Journal of Political
Economy, Volume 48, Number 5, November, pp. 558-588.
Gylfason, Thorvaldur, Tryggvi Thor Herbertsson, and Gylfi Zoega, 1999, “A Mixed Blessing,”
Macroeconomic Dynamics, 3: 204-225 (Cambridge University Press).
Gylfason, Thorvaldur, and Gylfi Zoega, 2006, “Natural Resources and Economic Growth: The
Role of Investment,” The World Economy Vol. 29, No. 8, August, pp. 1091-1115.

41

Gylfason, Thorvaldur, and Gylfi Zoega, 2002, “Inequality and Economic Growth: Do Natural
Resources Matter?” CESinfo working paper number 712, April.
Haber, Stephen, and Victor Menaldo, 2009, “Do Natural Resources Fuel Authoritarianism? A
Reappraisal of the Resource Curse” May. Presented at workshop on Myths and Realities of
Commodity Dependence: Policy Challenges and Opportunities for Latin America and the
Caribbean, World Bank, Sept. 17-18, 2009.
Hadass, Yael, and Jeffrey Williamson, 2003, “Terms of Trade Shocks and Economic
Performance 1870-1940: Prebisch and Singer Revisited,” Economic Development and Cultural
Change (University of Chicago Press), vol. 51(3), pages 629-56, April. NBER WP 8188, 2001.
Hall, Robert, and Chad Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
per Worker than Others?” Quarterly J. of Econ. 114, 1, Feb., 83-116.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Bailey Klinger and Robert Lawrence, 2008, “Examining Beneficiation,”
CID Working Paper No. 162, Harvard University, May.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Roberto Rigobon, 2003, “An Alternative Interpretation of the ‘Resource
Curse’: theory and Policy Implications,” in Fiscal Policy Formulation and Implementation in OilProducing Countries, edited by Jeffrey Davis (International Monetary Fund: Washington, DC),
p 12-44.
Helliwell, John, 1994, Empirical Linkages Between Democracy and Economic Growth. British
Journal of Political Science 24, 225–248.
Helm, Dieter, “Credibility, Commitment and Regulation,” In The Natural Resources Trap, edited
by Bill Hogan and Federico Sturzenegger, forthcoming (MIT Press: Cambridge MA) 2010.
Herb, Michael, 2005, “No Representation without Taxation? Rents, Development and
Democracy,” Comparative Politics 37, no. 3, 297-317.
Hodler, Roland, 2006, “The Curse of Natural Resources in Fractionalized Countries,” European
Economic Review 50, no. 6, 1367-86.
Holmøy, Erling, 2010, “Mineral Rents and Social Policy: The Case of the Norwegian
Government Oil Fund,” in Katja Hujo and Shea McClanahan , editors, Financing Social Policy:
Mobilizing Resources for Social Development (UNRISD/Palgrave MacMillan: London), January.
Hotelling, Harold, 1931, “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources,” Journal of Political
Economy, 39, no. 2, 137-75.
Hubbert, Marion King, 1956, "Nuclear Energy and the Fossil Fuels” (paper presented at The
Spring Meeting of the Southern District, Division of Production, American Petroleum Institute,
Plaza Hotel, San Antonio, Texas, March 7-9, 1956). Publication No. 95 of Shell Development
Company, Exploration and Production Research Division, Houston Texas, June 1956. Available
online at: http://www.hubbertpeak.com/hubbert/1956/1956.pdf. S
Huber, Evelyne, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and John Stephens. 1993, The Impact of Economic
Development on Democracy. Journal of Economic Perspectives 7, 71–85.

42

Humphreys, Macartan, 2005, “Natural Resources, Conflicts, and Conflict Resolution: Uncovering
the Mechanisms,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 49, 508-37.
Humphreys, Macartan, Jeffrey Sachs, and Joseph Stiglitz, 2007, Escaping the Resource Curse
(Columbia University Press: New York).
Humphreys, Macartan, Jeffrey Sachs, and Joseph Stiglitz, 2007, “Future Directions for the
Management of Natural Resources,” Chapter 12 in Humphreys, Sachs, and Stiglitz, eds., 2007,
Escaping the Resource Curse (Columbia University Press: New York), 322-336.
Humphreys, Macartan, and Martin Sandhu, 2007, “The Political Economy of Natural Resource
Funds” in Humphreys, Macartan, Jeffrey Sachs, and Joseph Stiglitz, eds., Escaping the Resource
Curse (Columbia University Press: New York).
Huntington, Samuel, 1991, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century
(University of Oklahoma Press: Norman, Oklahoma).
Iimi, Atsushi, 2006, “Did Botswana Escape from the Resource Curse?” IMF Working Paper No.
06/138, June.
Ilzetski, Ethan, and Carlos Vegh, 2008, “Procyclical Fiscal Policy in Developing Countries: Truth
or Fiction?” NBER WP no. 14191.
International Monetary Fund, 2005, Chile 2005 Article IV Consultation, IMF country Report
05/013, September.
Isham, Jonathan, Michael Woolcock, Lant Pritchett, and Gwen Busby, 2005, “The Varieties of
Resource Experience: Natural Resource Export Structures and the Political Economy of
Economic Growth,” The World Bank Economic Review (Oxford University Press on behalf of
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development).
Jensen, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon, 2004, “Resource Wealth and Political Regimes in
Africa,” Comparative Political Studies 37, 816-41.
Kaldor, M., Karl, T.L. and Y. Said, 2007, Oil Wars (Pluto Press), edited by M. Kaldor,
T.L. Karl and Y. Said.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart, and Carlos Vegh, 2005, "When It Rains, It Pours:
Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004,
Vol. 19, pages 11-82.
Karl, Terry Lynn, 1997, The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-States (University of
California Press: Berkeley CA).
Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay and P. Zoido-Lobaton, 2002, “Governance Matters II -- Updated
Indicators for 2000/01,” World Bank Research Dept. WP No. 2772.
Kellard, Neil, and Mark Wohar, 2006, “On the prevalence of trends in primary commodity prices
,” Journal of Development Economics, 79, no.1, February, 146-167 .

43

Killian, Lutz, 2009, “Not All Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks
in the Crude Oil Market,” American Economic Review 99, no. 3, 1053-1069
Krautkraemer, Jeffrey, 1998, “Nonrewnable Resource Scarcity,” Journal of Economic Literature
36, December, 2065-2107.
Kremers, Jeroen, 1986, “The Dutch Disease in the Netherlands,” in Peter Neary and Sweder van
Wijnbergen, eds., Natural Resources and the Macroeconomy (MIT Press: Cambridge), 96-136.

Lederman, Daniel, and William Maloney, 2008, “In Search of the Missing Resource
Curse," Economia 9, no. 1, Fall.
Leite, Carlos and Jens Weidman, 1999, “Does Mother Nature Corrupt?” IMF Working
Paper 99/85, July.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, 1994, The Social Requisites of Democracy Revisited.
American Sociological Review 59, 1–22.
Luciani, Giacomo, 1997, Allocation versus Production States: A Theoretical
Framework,” in Hazem Beblawi and Giacomo Luciani, eds., The Rentier State (Croom
Helm: New York).
Mahdavy, Hussein, 1970, “The Patterns and Problems of Economic Development in
Rentier States: The Case of Iran,” in M.A. Cook, editor, Studies in the Economic History
of the Middle East (Oxford University Press: London).
Malthus, Thomas, 1798, An essay on the principle of population (J.Johnson: London).
Manzano, Osmel, and Roberto Rigobon, 2008, “Resource Curse or Debt Overhang,”
Economia 9, no. 1, Fall. NBER WP 8390.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, 1992, “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic
Growth," Journal of Economic Theory 58, December, 317-334.
McSherry, Brendan, 2006, “The Political Economy of Oil in Equatorial Guinea,” African Studies
Quarterly 8, 23-45.
Medas, Paolo, and Daria Zakharova , 2009, “Primer on Fiscal Analysis in Oil-Producing
Countries,” IMF working paper 56, March.
Mehlum, Halvor, Karl Moene, and Ragnar Torvik, 2006, “Institutions and the Resource Curse,”
Economic Journal 116, 508, 1-20.
Mendoza, Enrique G. and P. Marcelo Oviedo, “Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Uncertainty in
Developing Countries: The Tale of the Tormented Insurer,” NBER Working Paper No. 12586,
October 2006.
Mendoza, Enrique, and Marco Terrones, “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro
Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 14049, May 2008.

44

Mikesell, Raymond, 1997, “Explaining the Resource Curse, with Special Reference to MineralExporting Countries,” Resources Policy Vol.23, Issue 4, December, pp: 191-199.
Minier, Jenny A., 1998, “Democracy and Growth: Alternative Approaches,” Journal of
Economic Growth 3, 241-266.
Nankani, Gobind T., 1979, Development Problems of Mineral Exporting Countries. (World
Bank, Washington, DC).
Neary, J. Peter, and Sweder van Wijnbergen, 1986, “Natural Resources and the Macroeconomy:
A Theoretical Framework,” in Neary and van Wijnbergen, eds., Natural Resources and the
Macroeconomy (MIT Press: Cambridge, 1986), 13- 45.
Norman, Catherine, 2009, “Rule of Law and the Resource Curse: Abundance Versus Intensity,”
Environmental Resource Economics 43:2 (June), 183-207.
North, Douglass, 1994, “Economic Performance Through Time,” American Economic Review,
84, no. 3, June, 359-368.
Okruhlik, Gwenn, 1999, “Rentier Wealth, Unruly Law and the Rise of Opposition: The Political
Economy of Oil States,” Comparative Politics 31,3: 295-315.
Poelhekke, Steven, and, Frederick van der Ploeg, 2007, Volatility, Financial Development and the
Natural Resource Curse,” CEPR DP6513, October.
Prebisch, Raul, 1950, The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principal Problems
(New York).
Reinhart, Carmen, and Peter Wickham, 1994, “Commodity Prices: Cyclical Weakness or Secular
Decline?” IMF Staff Papers 41, June.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Vincent Reinhart, 2009, “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View
of the Past and Present,” in J.Frankel and C.Pissarides, eds., NBER International Seminar in
Macroeconomics 2008, University of Chicago Press.
Robinson, James, Ragnar Torvik, and Thierry Verdier, 2006, “Political Foundations of the
Resource Curse,” Journal of Development Economics 79, no. 2, 446-68.
Rodriguez, Francisco, and Jeffrey Sachs, 1999, “Why Do Resource-Abundant Economies Grow
More Slowly?” Journal of Economic Growth 4, no. 3, 277-303.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, 2003, “Institutions Rule: The Primacy
of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of Economic
Growth 9, no. 2, 131-165. CID Working Paper No. 97, 2002.
Røed Larsen, Erling, 2003, Are Rich Countries Immune to the resource Curse? Evidence from
Norway’s Management of its Oil Riches, Discussion paper 362, Statistics Norway, Oslo.
Røed Larsen, Erling, 2004, Escaping the Resource Curse and the Dutch Disease? When and Why
Norway Caught up with and Forged ahead of Its Neighbors,” Discussion Papers No. 377, May,
Statistics Norway, Research Department.

45

Ross, Michael, 1999, “The Political Economy of the Resource Curse,” World Politics 51, 297322.
Ross, Michael, 2001, “Does Oil Hinder Democracy?” World Politics 53, no.3, 325-61.
Ross, Michael, 2006, “A Closer Look at Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War,” Annual Review of
Political Science 9, 265-300.
Ross, Michael, 2007, “How Mineral-Rich States Can Reduce Inequality,” Chapter 9 in Escaping
the Resource Curse, edited by M.Humphreys, J.Sachs and J.Stiglitz (Columbia University Press:
NY), pp.236-255.
Rosser, Andrew. 2007, “Escaping the Resource Curse: The Case of Indonesia.” Journal of
Contemporary Asia, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 38-58.
Sachs, Jeffrey, 2007, “How to Handle the Macroeconomics of Oil Wealth,” Ch. 7 in Escaping the
Resource Curse, edited by M.Humphreys, J.Sachs and J.Stiglitz (Columbia University Press:
NY), pp.173-193.
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner, 1995, “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic
Growth,” in G. Meier and J. Rauch, eds., Leading Issues in Economic Development, New York:
Oxford University Press. NBER WP 5398.
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner, 2001, “The Curse of Natural Resources,” European
Economic Review (Elsevier), vol. 45(4-6), pages 827-838, May.
Sala-I-Martin, Xavier, and Arvind Subramanian, 2003. “Addressing the Natural Resource Curse:
An Illustration from Nigeria.” IMF Working Paper WP/03/139.
Sarraf, Maria, and Moortaza Jiwanji. October 2001. “Beating the Resource Curse: The Case of
Botswana.” Environmental Economics Series Paper No. 83.
Shaw, Timothy M. , 1984, “The State of Nigeria: Oil Crises, Power Bases and Foreign Policy”
Canadian Journal of African Studies 18, 2: 393-405.
Singer, Hans W, 1950, “US Foreign Investment in Underdeveloped Areas: The Distribution of
Gains between Investing and Borrowing Countries,” American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, 40, May: 473-85.
Sinnott, Emily, 2009, “Commodity Prices and Fiscal Policy in Latin America and the Caribbean,”
presented at workshop on Myths and Realities of Commodity Dependence: Policy Challenges and
Opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean, World Bank, Sept. 17-18, 2009.
Skocpol, Theda, 1982, “Rentier State and Shi’a Islam in the Iranian Revolution” Theory and
Society 11,3: 265-283.
Smith, Benjamin, 2004, “Oil Wealth and Regime Survival in the Developing World, 1960-1999,”
American Journal of Political Science 48(2), 232-246.

46

Smith, Benjamin, 2007, Hard Times in the Land of Plenty: Oil Politics in Iran and Indonesia
(Cornell University Press: Ithaca NY).
Stevens, Paul, 2003, “Resource Impact: Curse or Blessing? A Literature Survey” Journal of
Energy Literature 9, no.1, 1-42.
Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos Vegh, 2005, “Tax Base Variability and Procyclicality of Fiscal
Policy,” Journal of Development Economics 78, no. 1, 156-190.
Tavares, José, and Romain Wacziarg, 2001, “How Democracy Affects Growth,”
European Economic Review, 45, Issue 8: 1341-1378.
Tornell, Aaron, and Philip Lane, 1999, “The Voracity Effect,” American Economic Review 89,
no. 1, March: 22-46.
Torvik, Ragnar, 2001, “Learning by Doing and the Dutch Disease,” European Economic Review
(Elsevier) 45, 285-306.
Ulfelder, Jamy, 2007, “Natural Resource Wealth and the Survival of Autocracies,” Comparative
Political Studies 40, 8, 995-1018.
Vandewalle, Dirk, 1998, Libya since Independence: Oil and State-Building (Cornell University
Press: Ithaca NY).
Wantchekon, Leonard 2002, “Why do Resource Dependent Countries Have Authoritarian
Governments?” Journal of African Finance and Economic Development 2, 57-77.
Wright, Gavin, and Jesse Czelusta, 2003, “Mineral Resources and Economic Development,”
Conference on Sector Reform in Latin America, Stanford Center for International Development
Nov. 13-15.
Wright, Gavin, and Jesse Czelusta, 2004, “The Myth of the Resource Curse” Challenge 47,
March-April.
Wright, Gavin, and Jesse Czelusta, 2006, “Resource-Based Growth Past and Present,” in Daniel
Lederman and William Maloney, editors, Neither Curse nor Destiny: Natural Resources and
Development (Stanford University Press and World Bank Publication).

47

