                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INFORMATION, ANALYSTS, AND STOCK RETURN COMOVEMENT

                                         Allaudeen Hameed
                                          Randall Morck
                                           Jianfeng Shen
                                          Bernard Yeung

                                        Working Paper 15833
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15833


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




We are grateful for very helpful comments from Mark Chen, Anzhela Knyazeva, Diana Knyazeva,
Laura Veldkamp, participants at the 2009 Financial Intermediation Research Society meeting and
the 2009 Financial Integrity Research Network Research Day in Finance, and finance seminar participants
at the National University of Singapore, Rotterdam School of Management, University of New South
Wales and University of Melbourne. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Allaudeen Hameed, Randall Morck, Jianfeng Shen, and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Information, analysts, and stock return comovement
Allaudeen Hameed, Randall Morck, Jianfeng Shen, and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 15833
March 2010
JEL No. D82,G0,G14,M41

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine information spillover as a source of stock return synchronicity, where information about
highly-followed “prominent” stocks is used to price other “neglected” stocks sharing a common fundamental
component. We find that stocks followed by few analysts co-move significantly with firm-specific
fluctuations in the prices of highly followed stocks in the same industry, but do not observe the converse.
This effect is more prominent in industries where analysts follow fewer stocks. Earnings forecast revisions
for highly followed stocks cause price changes in little followed stocks, but the converse is again not
observed. This is consistent with information spillover being primarily unidirectional – flowing from
prominent to neglect stocks, but not vice versa. These findings also validate models of specialized
information intermediaries in stock markets assisting the information capitalization process.


Allaudeen Hameed                                     Jianfeng Shen
Department of Finance                                School of Banking and Finance
National University of Singapore                     University of New South Wales
Singapore 117592                                     Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
allaudeen@nus.edu.sg                                 jianfeng.shen@unsw.edu.au

Randall Morck                                        Bernard Yeung
Faculty of Business                                  National University of Singapore
University of Alberta                                Mochtar Riady Building
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6                             15 Kent Ridge Drive
and NBER                                             BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
randall.morck@ualberta.ca                            Singapore 119245
                                                     bizdean@nus.edu.sg
1.     Introduction

In his American Finance Association presidential address, Merton (1987, p. 486) points

out that “recognition of the different speeds of information diffusion is particularly

important in empirical research, where the growth in sophisticated and sensitive

techniques to test ever more refined financial behavior patterns severely strains the

simple information structure of our asset pricing models.” Merton goes on to develop a

model of investors confining their attention, and money, to a subset of “high profile”

stocks about which they have readily accessible information, potentially leaving other

“neglected” stocks mispriced. Using analyst following to identify high profile firms, we

show that investors use the information about these firms to help value related

“neglected” stocks.

       It is well established that informed risk arbitrage generates stock price movements

and profit-maximizing arbitrageurs presumably pay for additional information until their

expected revenue from a marginal bit no longer covers its costs (Diamond and Verrecchia

(1981); Grossman and Stiglitz (1980); Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). Different kinds of

information have different costs, yield different likely arbitrage revenues, and therefore

provide   different   opportunities   for   private   sector   information   intermediaries.

Governments provide much macroeconomic information, though financial analysts

provide economy-level forecasts for fees.        Governments also provide some industry

information, but leave analysts more substantial roles here. Securities regulations make

firms disclose standardized firm-specific information, but distilling this into fundamental

valuation estimates requires resources and expertise. Thus, financial analysts’ firm-

specific forecasts are their most important contribution to asset pricing (Brown et. al



                                             3
(1987); Bhushan (1989)) by privately informed arbitrageurs (Roll (1988)).

       Veldkamp (2006a) insightfully models intermediaries specializing in the

provision of information to arbitrageurs in the context of a market for information. All

else equal, arbitrageurs pay more for information about a mispriced stock with a larger

market capitalization or higher turnover, which allows the accumulation of a larger

position without attracting notice and moving the price. Consistent with this, we find

more analysts following stocks that have larger market cap and are more heavily traded

(Bhushan (1989); Alford and Berger (1999)).

       Stocks that intermediaries find cost-ineffective to analyze have prices nonetheless.

Such a neglected stock must be priced using such information as is available: market and

industry trends plus information about prominent firms with correlated fundamentals.

For instance, Foster (1981), Han and Wild (1990), and Ramnath (2002) show that

announcements of earnings information about some firms move the prices of other firms

in the same industry. All else equal, information useful for valuing more stocks should

fetch a higher price and attract greater analysts coverage (Veldkamp (2006a)). We find

more analysts following firms whose fundamentals correlate more with those of other

firms. We also find high profile stocks, identified by large analyst followings, commove

more extensively with other stocks in the same industry. This information spillover effect

is greater in industries where analysts focus on fewer stocks, and where their forecasts for

heavily followed stocks are more convergent.

       Additionally, we show that revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts for heavily

followed firms cause changes in the prices of less followed firms’ shares; but revisions in

sparsely followed firms’ earnings forecasts do not affect the prices of heavily followed




                                             4
stocks. This is consistent with investors using information about prominent stocks to

value neglected stocks, but not vice versa. That is, information spillover appears to be

unidirectional – from heavily followed to sparsely follows stocks.

        Our results validate modeling information intermediaries as important players in

information generation and capitalization, as in Veldkamp (2005, 2006a, 2006b). In

addition, our findings justify the industry practice of using “bellwether” stocks as

barometers of sector trends – as when analysts use, for example, Wal-Mart’s latest

quarterly results to infer the fate of retailing in general.

        Finally, our findings reconcile a seeming discord between recent work linking

elevated firm-specific returns variation to more accurate pricing (Morck et al. (2000);

Campbell et al. (2001); Durnev et al. (2004); Jin and Myers (2006); and others), showing

stocks followed by many analysts to be priced more accurately (Brennan et al. (1993);

Walther (1997)) and to commove more with the market (Piotroski and Roulstone (2004);

Chan and Hameed (2006)). These findings are reconciled in that more widely followed

stocks exhibit more comovement because they are priced more accurately, and are

therefore used to infer values for more opaque stocks. Thus, a generally higher firm-

specific variation across all or most stocks in a market or sector can signify more accurate

pricing, but the individual stocks that exhibit the most comovement need not be those that

are priced least accurately. This reasoning suggests that Merton’s (1987) model might be

usefully supplemented by considering information spillovers, where investors use

information about one stock to price another that is likely affected by similar

fundamentals.

        The next section describes our data and variables, and section 3 reports our main




                                                5
empirical results on the relation between analysts following and return comovement,

while section 4 provides specific tests on the causal relation between the two. Finally,

section 5 concludes.



2.     Data, construction of variables, and sample

Examination of the empirical propositions in our paper involves explaining a firm’s

analyst following and also its contribution to stock return comovement using firm

characteristics. In this section, we describe our data sources, variables, and sample.



2.1    Data sources

Daily stock price and return data for all common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX and

NASDAQ are obtained from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). The

sample stocks are restricted to ordinary common stocks with share code 10 and 11 for the

period January 1984 to December 2007. ADRs, shares of beneficial interest, companies

incorporated outside U.S., Americus Trust components, close-ended funds, preferred

stocks, and REITs are excluded.

       The stock return data from CRSP is merged with data from two additional

sources. The first data source is COMPUSTAT, which is used to collect quarterly

earnings data. For each firm in our sample, we compute the return on asset (ROA) for

each quarter as the ratio of earnings before extraordinary item (data item 8) to total assets

(data item 44). The second database is I/B/E/S which provides information on analyst

coverage for each firm and the analysts’ earnings forecasts and revisions in forecasts. The

number of analysts making one-year ahead earnings forecasts for each firm k during the



                                             6
year t is used to measure analyst coverage (ANALYSTk,t).



2.2    Variables

Marginal contribution to returns comovement (LPCORR)

The central variable in our empirical investigation measures the contribution of an

individual firm’s return to stock return comovement. We do this by estimating partial

correlations for every stock with every other stock in its industry, and then averaging

these to gauge each stock’s contribution to the overall comovement of stocks in its

industry. The construction of this variable has three steps:

       The first step in assessing firm k’s contribution to comovement in its industry I is

to run two-factor OLS market model regressions for all other stocks in the industry

pretending firm k did not exist. That is, we run



[1]     riw =ai + bi rMw
                      k
                         + ci rIwk + eiw ,



each year for every other firm i in industry I, with riw firm i‘s total stock return in week w

          k
and with rMw and rIwk contemporaneous weekly value-weighted total market and industry

returns, respectively, both recalculated to exclude both i and k. Our market return is a

modified value-weighted CRSP market index, and our industry return is a value-weighted

index of all industry I stocks, save i and k. We assign each firm to its primary five-digit

Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) code.           Our sample spans 69 such

industries.

       The R2 of [1], denoted Ri2,excl.k , is the fraction of variation in firm i’s returns


                                              7
explained by market and industry factors, excluding firm k. Defining NI as the number of

firms in industry I in the year in question, this first step thus generates an Ri2,excl.k , from

each of NI – 1 regressions of the form [1], one for every other firm i ≠ k in industry I.

        Our second step is to rerun [1], but with the previously excluded firm k’s total

return, rkw, as a third factor. That is, for every firm i ≠ k in industry I, we run



[2]     riw = ai + bi rMw
                       k
                          + ci rIwk + d i rkw + eiw .




This procedure generates a second set of NI – 1 regression R2s, which we denote Ri2,incl .k .

The extent to which the R2 of [2] exceeds the R2 of [1] for a given pair of stocks (k, i)

gauges the extent to which firm k makes a marginal contribution to firm i’s returns

variation.

        For each pair of firms (k, i) in the same industry I, we thus calculate a partial

correlation coefficient equal to the difference between the two R2s normalized by the

unexplained fraction of variation in [1]:



                          Ri2,incl .k − Ri2,excl .k
[3]     PCORRk ,i = (                                 ).
                              1 − Ri2,excl .k



For each firm k in industry I, the regressions in equation [1] and [2] produce NI minus one

partial correlation coefficients, defined in [3]. Intuitively, a larger PCORRk,i means firm

k’s returns have larger correlation with firm i‘s returns, after purging market and

industry-related comovement.


                                                           8
        Our third step takes us to an estimate of each firm k’s overall contribution to the

comovement of other stocks in its industry each year. We average PCORRk,i across all

                                                                    NI
                                                            1
other firms i ≠ k in industry I and denote this PCORRk =            ∑ PCORRk ,i . Since
                                                         N I − 1 i =1,i ≠ k

PCORRk is bounded between zero and one, we apply a logistic transformation to obtain

our operational measure of each firm k’s marginal contribution to comovement in its

industry,



                       PCORRk        
[4]     LPCORRk = log                .
                       1 − PCORRk     



        Repeating these three steps for every stock k every year generates a panel of

LPCORRk based on weekly returns that year. Intuitively, a higher value of LPCORRk

means that firm k’s returns add more to the common variation in returns across firms in

its industry.

        In addition to explaining the role of financial analysts on return comovement, we

are also interested in the factors that may influence a firm’s attractiveness to analysts,

such as the degree of fundamental correlations in asset returns, firm size, the amount of

trading activity and the level of concentration of the firm’s business within the industry.

These variables are described next.



Contribution to fundamental comovement (LPCORR_ROA)

Stock returns intrinsically co-move because of commonalities in the variation of

fundamentals. At the same time, more analysts are expected to follow firms whose


                                             9
fundamentals are more correlated with other firms’ fundamentals (Veldkamp (2006a)).

Hence, in tracking the impact of analyst following on stock return comovement, we need

to control for the correlations in fundamentals returns. Changes in firm-specific

fundamental values are typically inferred from accounting measures such as return on

assets (ROA) or return on sales (ROS) (Morck et al. (2000); Piotroski and Roulstone

(2004); Durnev et al. (2004); Wei and Zhang (2006); Chun et al. (2008)). While ROA is

based on historical data, stock returns also incorporate changes in expected future cash

flows and shifts in investors’ risk preferences. Nevertheless, we expect a firm’s level of

analyst coverage and its contribution to return comovement to be related to the

correlation in its ROA to that of other firms.

       As with our construction of PCORR based on stock returns, we construct the

partial correlation of the return on assets (ROA) of firm k with the ROA of other firms in

the industry for each year. We begin by estimating the linear regression equations similar

to equations [1] and [2] based on a five year moving window of quarterly data:



[5]     ROAiq = ai + bi ROAMq
                           k
                              + ci ROAIqk + eiq ,




[6]     ROAiq = ai + bi ROAMq
                           k
                              + ci ROAIqk + d i ROAkq + eiq ,



where ROAiq and ROAkq are the return on assets in quarter q for firms i and k, and both

                                              k
firms i and k belong to the same industry. ROAMq and ROAIqk are the value-weighted

return on assets in quarter q for the market and industry portfolios respectively, where

both firms k and i are excluded from these portfolios. Denoting the R-square from


                                               10
                          2                    2
equations [5] and [6] as RROA ,i ,excl .k and RROA,,i ,incl .k respectively, the partial correlation



coefficient between ROAkt and ROAit is computed as follow




                                    ,i ,incl .k − RROA,i ,excl .k
                                2                  2
                               RROA
[7]     PCORR _ ROAk ,i = (                                         ).
                                     1 − RROA
                                          2
                                              ,i ,excl .k




Averaging the partial correlation estimates for firm k with all other firms in the same

industry and taking a logistic transformation gives us LPCORR_ROAk. A high value of

LPCORR_ROAk suggests that firm k’s ROA contributes much in explaining the

fundamental variation in asset returns of all other firms in the industry, after controlling

for market and industry effects.



Other firm-level variables

In empirically investigating the informational role of analysts, we must incorporate

various firm characteristics shown to be important in prior work on information markets

(e.g. Veldkamp (2006a)) and analyst followings (e.g. Bhushan 1989; Piotroski and

Roulstone (2004); Chan and Hameed (2006); Frankel et al. (2006)).

        All else equal, more analysts should follow larger firms. This might be because

larger feasible arbitrage plays on such firms make information about their mispricing

more valuable (Veldkamp (2006a)), or because more media coverage stimulates demand

for analyst services (Lang and Lundholm (1996); Frankel et al. (2006)).               We use the

beginning of year t market value of each firm k to measure the size of firm k, denoted

SIZEk,t. We expect the variable to explain both a firm’s analyst following and its impact



                                                      11
on return comovement.

       More analysts should follow more heavily traded stocks, all else equal. This could

be because higher turnover permits less conspicuous, and therefore more profitable

arbitrage plays; or because higher turnover generates more commissions for brokerage

firms, and thus more demand for forecasts (Brennan and Hughes (1991); Alford and

Berger (1999)). We define TURNOVERk,t as the average daily share turnover of stock k in

the previous year t-1.

       More analysts might also follow less diversified firms, all else equal. This might

be because a more focused firm has a higher partial correlation in fundamentals with

other firms in its primary industry, and is thus a better potential bellwether stock; or

because a more focused firm is simpler to value (Bhushan (1989)). For each firm k, we

use the Herfindahl index of sales for the fiscal year ending in year t across business

segments indicated by 2-digit SIC code to measure the level of concentration of its

business and denote this as HERF_SALESk,t.

       Finally, information about more volatile stocks might fetch higher prices

(Bhushan (1989)), perhaps because more volatility corresponds to more “eventful” stocks

whose fundamentals are changing faster (Morck et al. (2000)). Hence, demand for

analyst services might be higher for stocks whose returns have higher standard

deviations. We measure STDRETk ,t as the standard deviation of stock k’s weekly returns

over the prior year t-1.



2.3    Final sample

We combine the securities from CRSP and COMPUSTAT that meet the following



                                           12
selection criteria. For CRSP NYSE/AMEX and NASDAQ securities, we apply two

filters: (a) there are at least 40 weekly non-missing observations, the minimum number of

observations to estimate the market model regressions in equations [1] and [2]; and (b)

the average daily stock price in the December of previous year is above $5 to minimize

market frictions associated with low price stocks, such as price discreteness and bid-ask

effects. Since we perform yearly analysis of data, we require that each firm has valid

market capitalization value at the beginning of each year. Common stocks from

COMPUSTAT are required to have at least 12 valid quarterly data during the past five-

year moving window to estimate LPCORR_ROAk each year. We merge the stock

information in CRSP-COMPUSTAT with analyst coverage information in I/B/E/S.

       The number of securities in each database and the merged sample is reported in

Table 1. There is an increasing trend in the number of firms each year. We start with

2220 firms in the CRSP, COMPUSTAT and I/B/E/S merged sample in 1984, which

grows steadily to the peak at 3998 firms in 1997. The difference between number of firms

in our final merged sample and the CRSP and COMPUSTAT combined sample reflects

the number of firms without corresponding analyst coverage information in I/B/E/S. We

perform our tests on both samples, treating firms that appear in CRSP-COMPUSTAT but

not in I/B/E/S as firms with zero analyst coverage during the year. On average, there are

725 firms per year (or about 20 percent of the firms in our CRSP-COMPUSTAT merged

sample) with zero analyst following during the sample period.




                                           13
3.        Empirical results

3.1      Summary statistics and preliminary results

Panel A in Table 2 reports simple descriptive statistics of key variables. The pooled

average value of the marginal contribution of a single stock to comovement in returns,

PCORRk, is 2.6 percent, and its median is 2.4 percent. 1 The partial correlation measure

for fundamental returns, PCORR_ROAk, shows larger cross-sectional variation and a

higher mean value of 10.9 percent, indicating a higher marginal value of ROA of a given

firm in explaining the comovement in ROA among firms in the industry. Substantial

variation in firm size and turnover variables is also evident. The sales concentration

variable shows at least half of all firms operating in a single segment, consistent with

previous findings by Piotroski and Roulstone (2004) and others.

         Next, we sort stocks with analyst coverage into three groups based on the number

of analysts covering the stock each year. Firms with no analyst coverage form a separate

group. The averages of the variables in each sub-group are presented in Panel B. The

lowest coverage tertile has an average of 2.6 analysts following each firm, and the

coverage increases to 18.5 analysts for the highest coverage tertile. Most interestingly,

the partial correlations of stock returns, PCORR, are monotonically increasing in analyst

coverage. The PCORR of 2.7 percent for firms with high analyst coverage is significantly

higher than the 2.5 (2.4) percent for firms with low (zero) coverage.

         Panels B of Table 2 show more analysts following larger cap and more heavily

traded stocks, and the stocks of less focused firms. Panel C shows that larger firms are

1
 Roll (1988), Morck et al. (2000) and others use [1] to estimate mean R2s for groups of firms. Consistent
with these earlier results, our firm-level regressions of weekly returns on market and industry indexes
excluding the firm itself yield a mean R2 of 20 percent. Adding the excluded firm as in [2] raises the R-
square to 22 percent. Since the current exercise does not use these variables, they are not in the tables.


                                                    14
more diversified, so the effects in Panel B are clearly not independent.

          Finally, Table 2 presents rather mixed evidence linking analyst coverage with the

partial correlations in fundamentals, PCORR_ROA. Firms with low or medium analyst

coverage have ROAs with higher partial correlations to other firms’ ROAs than do firms

with zero coverage. However, this is not true of firms with high analyst coverage.

However, Panel C again shows significant correlations of PCORR_ROA with other firm

characteristics. We therefore turn to multivariate analyses.



3.2       Multivariate regressions of analyst coverage

Given the work cited above, we specify the determinants of analyst following for each

firm k in year t as follows:



      ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t ) =
                           a0 + a1 LPCORR _ ROAk ,t + a2 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + a3 TURNOVERk ,t
[8]                                               68                     2006                          .
      + a4 HERF _ SALEk ,t + a5 ln( STDRETk ,t ) + ∑ d I INDDUM I ,t +   ∑      c yYEARDUM y + ek ,t
                               =I 1 =y 1984




Supplementing the firm specific variables, we include industry and year fixed effects,

INDDUM and YEARDUM. We estimate equation [8] as a pooled regression over the full

sample period of 1984 to 2007 and four six-year sub-periods, 1984 to 1989, 1990 to1995,

1996 to 2001 and 2002 to 2007. All t-statistics reported henceforth are therefore based on

heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors with clustering by industry (Petersen

(2007)).

          Table 3 shows significantly more analysts following firms that are larger (SIZE),

more heavily traded (TURNOVER), more eventful (STDRET) and more focused on their


                                                  15
core businesses (HERF_SALES). But LPCORR_ROAk,t also attracts a positive coefficient

in all sub-periods, and attains statistical significance in three of the four sub-periods.

       These findings are highly robust, in that various alternative approaches yield

qualitatively similar results. By this we mean identical patterns of signs and significance,

as well as roughly concordant point estimate magnitudes. Winsorizing the key variables

(LPCORR_ROA, TURNOVER, and STDRET ) at the 1 and 99 percentile within each year

generates similar results, suggesting that our results are not due to extreme observations.

The results also hold if we control for other firm-specific variables that may be correlated

with the analyst coverage, such as the fraction of institutional ownership (Bhushan

(1989); Rock et al. (2000)), or book-to-market ratio and the past one-year stock return

which may proxy for glamour stocks (Jegadeesh et al. (2004)). Using Tobit regression

model to deal with truncation of the dependent variable (ANALYST) at zero does not

change the results qualitatively.

       Using alternative measures of fundamental correlations yields qualitatively

similar results. Measuring the partial correlation in ROA as the R2 of [2] minus that of [1]

without normalizing as in [3] yields qualitatively similar results. Qualitatively similar

results are obtained if we use quarterly returns on sales to construct LPCORR_ROSk,t to

replace LPCORR_ROAk,t as an alternative gauge of each firm’s contribution to other

firms’ fundamentals. Including both LPCORR_ROSk,t and LPCORR_ROAk,t throughout

also yields qualitatively similar results. We estimate LPCORR_ROAk,t by defining

industries differently throughout according to the 17-industry classification in Fama and

French (1997), and obtain similar results except that the coefficient on LPCORR_ROAk,t

is insignificant in the first two sub-periods, 1984 to 1989, and 1990 to 1995. Finally, the




                                              16
 number of analysts also attracts a positive coefficient in year-by-year cross-sectional

 regressions for every year from 1984 to 2007 except 1991 and 1993, and attains

 significance in 12 out of the 24 years with standard errors clustered by industry. The

 mean of these coefficients is also significant using the Newy-West HAC standard error to

 account for the autocorrelation in estimated yearly coefficients.

        These findings are consistent with significantly more analysts following firms

 whose fundamentals are more useful in predicting the fundamentals of other firms in their

 industries.



 3.3    Stock return comovement and analyst following

 If information about more prominent stocks is used to price less prominent stocks, stock

 price fluctuations in the former should correlate more strongly with other stocks’ price

 fluctuations, all else equal. To explore this, we run panel regressions of the form:



         LPCORRk ,t =
                    a0 + a1 ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t ) + a2 LPCORR _ ROAk ,t + a3 ln( SIZEk ,t )
 [9]     + a4 TURNOVERk ,t + a5 HERF _ SALES k ,t + a6 ln( STDRETk ,t )                      .
           68                    2006
         + ∑ d I INDDUM I ,t +   ∑      c yYEARDUM y + ek ,t
=I 1 =y 1984




        As explained above, the dependent variable LPCORRk,t is the marginal

 contribution of stock k’s return to the returns of other stocks in its industry. Table 4

 reveals a significantly larger such contribution by stocks whose fundamentals contribute

 more to those of other stocks (LPCORR_ROA); as well as for stocks that are larger

 (SIZE), more eventful (STDRET), more heavily-traded (TURNOVER), and more focused



                                                   17
(HERF_SALES). These variables attract statistically significant coefficients over the full

sample period and all sub-periods except the late 1980s and early 2000s, when

eventfulness is insignificant, and the early 1990s, when the fundamentals correlation and

trading activity variables are insignificant.

       Of primary interest to the issue at hand, a stock whose returns have larger

marginal contributions to the returns of other stocks in its industry attracts a significantly

larger following of analysts, all else equal. This holds across the whole sample period

and all sub-periods, after multiple controls are included.

       These findings are highly robust, and survive the same battery of robustness

checks as above. The sole exception is when we define industries using the 17 industry

classification of Fama and French (1997), and estimate LPCORRk,t and LPCORR_ROAk,t

accordingly. The coefficient on Ln(1+ANALYSTk,t) is marginally significant (at 10%

level) for the whole sample period, and is significant in all sub-periods except 1984 to

1989. Finally, year-by-year cross-sectional regressions yield positive coefficients on the

number of analysts every year except 1988, and these coefficients are significant in 17 of

the 24 years (using tests for significance which are clustered by industry). The mean of

these coefficients is also significant using the Newey-West HAC standard error to

account for the autocorrelation in estimated yearly coefficients.

       These results are consistent with price fluctuations in more prominent stocks,

identified as those followed by more analysts, having disproportionate echoes in the price

fluctuations of other stocks.




                                                18
3.4.    Return comovement and analyst concentration

More analysts cover more firms in some industries than others. An industry where

analysts follow a larger set of prominent stocks is more likely to generate mixed

messages to investors trying to price neglected stocks, and thus should exhibit less

information spillover from prominent to neglected stocks (Veldkamp (2006a)).           To

explore this, we turn to our measure of the concentration of analyst coverage within an

industry: a Herfindhal index constructed each year t for each industry I:



                                 NI
                                          ANALYSTk ,t
[10]    HERF _ ANALYSTI ,t = ∑ (        NI
                                                             )2 ,
                                 k =1
                                        ∑ ANALYST
                                        k =1
                                                      k ,t




where ANALYSTk,t is the number of analysts following firm k in year t and NI is the

number of firms in industry I.

        In one extreme industry, where all analysts follow one and the same firm,

HERF_ANALYSTI equals one. At the other extreme, where an equal number of analysts

follow every firm in the industry, HERF_ANALYSTI equals 1/NI. The variable thus falls

within the semi-open interval (0, 1], with higher values indicating analysts focusing more

intensely on fewer stocks.

        To explore this, we include an interaction of HERF_ANALYSTI,t with the number

of analysts as an additional variable, and rerun the regressions [9]. These now have the

form:




                                                 19
          LPCORRk ,t =+
                     a0 a1 ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t )
          +b1 ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t )* HERF _ ANALYSTI ,t + a2 LPCORR _ ROAk ,t
  [11]    + a3 SIZEk ,t + a4 TURNOVERk ,t + a5 HERF _ SALEk ,t + a5 ln( STDRETk ,t )
            68                    2006
          + ∑ d I INDDUM I ,t +   ∑      c yYEARDUM y + ek ,t
=I 1 =y 1984




         Table 5 shows that analysts concentrating on fewer stocks significantly magnifies

  the importance of more prominent stocks in the pricing of other stocks. The coefficient

  on the interaction of ANALYST and HERF_ANALYST is highly significant across the full

  sample period and all the sub-sample periods except 2002-2007.

         These findings also pass the battery of robustness checks used above. The sole

  exception is when we define industries differently using the 17 industry classification of

  Fama and French (1997), and estimate LPCORRk,t and LPCORR_ROAk,t accordingly.

  Though the coefficient on ANALYST remains strongly significant in the full sample and

  all sub-periods, the coefficient on the interaction of ANALYST and HERF_ANALYST

  becomes insignificant in the 1990 to 1995 and 2002 to 2007 sub-periods. Finally,

  estimating [11] with year-by-year cross-sectional regressions yields positive coefficient

  for interaction each year, except for 2003 and 2007, and these coefficients are significant

  in 11 out of 24 years. Their average is also significant using the Newy-West HAC

  standard error to account for the autocorrelation in estimated yearly coefficients.

         These results are consistent with analysts spreading their attention across more

  stocks in an industry damping information spillover to neglected stocks, validating

  information spillover models of the sort developed by Veldkamp (2006a).




                                                     20
4         Causality

Tables 3 through 5 demonstrate correlations, but are silent as to what causes what. An

absence of defensible instruments precludes instrumental variables regressions. However,

we can use stock price reactions to revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts (Griffin

(1976); Givoly and Lakonishok (1979)) to test causality directly. If investors use

information about prominent stocks to price neglected ones, earnings forecast revisions

for highly-followed stocks should affect neglected stocks’ prices; but earnings forecast

revisions for less followed stocks should be less important in pricing highly-followed

stocks.



4.1 Event studies using portfolio-mean forecast revisions

Our first test of this hypothesis uses aggregate forecast revisions at the portfolio level.

We construct a firm-month panel of analysts’ earnings forecast revisions by calculating

changes in mean one-year forward annual EPS forecasts in I/B/E/S for each firm each

month, normalizing each observation by the previous month’s closing stock price and

winsorizing the resulting data at 1% to limit outlier influence. Each year we sort the firms

in each of our 69 industries by analyst coverage. Firms whose earnings are forecast by no

analysts we call no coverage stocks. All others are then sorted into tertiles of high,

medium, and low coverage stocks. Each month t, the revisions in earnings forecasts are

aggregated across each tertile within each industry to obtain FRJ,t, the value-weighted

mean revisions in consensus earnings forecasts across all firms in tertile J, with J = 1

(low), 2(medium), or 3(high). FRJ thus measures information produced by analysts at a

portfolio level.



                                            21
           Our tests regress, rk,t, the return in month t for firm k, on contemporaneous mean

earnings forecast revisions for the low, medium and high coverage tertile portfolios 2:



                                  3
                 a + b rm ,t + ∑ c j FR j ,t + d1 FRk ,t + d 2 rk ,t −1 + d3 rk ,t − 2,t −7 + d 4 ln( SIZEk ,t )
           rk ,t =
    [12]                         j =1

           + d5 ln( BM k ,t ) + d 6 TURNOVERk ,t + ek ,t



           Regression [12] controls for market-wide fluctuations with rm,t, the return on

CRSP value-weighted market portfolio; and for various firm-specific characteristics.

These include the stock’s own return the previous month (rk,t-1) and over the six months

prior to that (t-2 to t-7) to remove time series predictability (Jegadeesh (1990); Jegadeesh

and Titman (1993)). We also control for firm size, ln(SIZE); book-to-market ratios,

ln(BM); and monthly trading volume over shares outstanding, TURNOVER. Changes in

analysts’ forecast of firm k’s earnings obviously can affect firm k’s returns, and so we

also include FRk,t in [12]. The coefficients c1, c2 and c3 thus measure abnormal returns in

stock k associated with mean earnings forecast revisions for portfolios of low, medium,

and high coverage stocks in the same industry after removing market-related fluctuations,

price changes due to revisions in stock k’s own earnings forecasts in that month, and

effects associated with the other control variables.

           Table 6 displays the results. First, the table replicates the standard finding in the

literature: revisions to a firm’s own earnings forecast have a strong contemporaneous

price effect. But to the issue at hand, revisions in the mean forecast earnings of the

2
  Since I/B/E/S reports the consensus earnings forecasts in the middle of each month, we measure the
monthly stock return from mid-month to correspond with the period of change in earnings forecast.
Measuring monthly returns and other monthly variables from the beginning to the end of the month gives
similar results.


                                                             22
portfolios of other firms in their industries also affect firms’ stock prices.

        This effect is strikingly asymmetric. The first column, using all firms, shows that

mean forecast revisions for high coverage firms most strongly affect other stocks in their

industries; revisions for medium coverage firms exert a lesser, but still significant effect

on other stocks; and revisions for low coverage stocks have even smaller effect on their

industry peers’ stock prices. However, high coverage firms’ contribution to industry

comovement is not significantly greater than that of medium coverage firms (t = 1.47),

and the latter’s contribution is insignificantly different from that of low coverage firms (t

= 1.47).    High coverage firms revisions do, however, have a significantly greater

contribution to comovement than low coverage firms revisions (t = 4.05).

        The middle three columns rerun the regression on the tertiles of covered firms

with high, medium, and low analyst followings; and the final column uses only firms

followed by no analysts. This sample partition reveals the same asymmetry: Earnings

forecast revisions for high coverage firms significantly affect the stocks of all four

subsamples. Revisions for medium coverage firms affect the stock prices of only low-

coverage and no coverage firms, with a larger effect on the latter’s prices.

        Moreover, the high followings tertile revisions’ effect is significantly larger than

that of medium coverage firms in the high (t = 2.01) and medium (t = 3.21) coverage

subsample regressions; but the two are insignificantly (t = 1.46) different in the low

coverage subsample regression. The revisions of medium and low coverage tertiles have

insignificantly different effects in all three subsamples. However, revisions of high

coverage firms have significantly larger effects than those of the low coverage firms

across the board (t = 3.02, 4.09, and 3.91) for the high, medium and low coverage




                                              23
subsamples, respectively.

       The major discrepancy in this asymmetric pattern is in the final column, which

runs the regression on the subsample of firms followed by no analysts at all. While

forecast revisions for all three tertiles of followed firms affect unfollowed firms’ prices,

the asymmetry in the other four regressions is not preserved. Medium coverage tertile

revisions affect unfollowed stock prices significantly more than either low-coverage (t =

4.41) or high-coverage tertile revisions (t = 2.38).

       This last finding raises the possibility that information spillover to very neglected

firms might come primarily from somewhat prominent firms, rather than from an

industry’s most intensely followed firms.

       The pattern in Table 6 is economically significant. When analysts raise their EPS

forecasts for the most highly followed tertile by one percent of their stock prices, on

average, stocks with low, medium, and high analyst followings post monthly abnormal

returns of 1.5%, 1.3% and 0.8% percent, respectively. These price changes are

economically significant, in that they are comparable in magnitude to price effects of own

firm forecast revisions (see Stickle (1991) and Gleason and Lee (2003)).

       The results in Table 6 are also quite robust. The findings hold in all six-year

subperiods except 1990 to 1995, in which there is only a marginally significant (at 10

percent level) effect of the revisions in the earnings forecasts for high coverage firms on

the returns of less prominent firms. Our results are also qualitatively unchanged if we

drop all the control variables or add additional control variables such as the fraction of

shares outstanding held by institutional investors, and the size, book-to-market and

momentum factors . Also, including forecast revisions for the previous and next months




                                             24
yields similarly strong price effect of earnings forecast revisions of high coverage firms.

Our results are qualitatively unchanged if we replace individual firms’ returns with the

returns on tertile portfolios, sorted on analyst coverage, as the dependent variable.

Qualitatively similar results likewise ensue if we sort firms into quintiles based on analyst

followings. The earnings forecast revisions in highest coverage firms have the strongest

effect on the stock returns across the board except in the regression of zero coverage

firms.

         However, the asymmetry in the price effects of earnings forecast revisions

changes when we define industries differently throughout, using the 17 industries

classification of Fama and French (1997) and classify firms based on analyst coverage

accordingly. The price effect of earnings forecast revisions in highest coverage firms is

still significant and stronger than that of earnings forecast revisions in lowest coverage

firms across the board except in the regression of zero coverage firms. But the earnings

forecast revisions of medium coverage firms turn out to have the strongest price effect.

By defining industries more broadly from 69 industries to 17 industries, those prominent

firms in the original 69 industries are likely to be classified as medium analyst firms in

the broader 17 industries, which should explain the swing in the asymmetry between

price effects of earnings forecast revisions in high versus medium analyst firms.

         Overall, these findings are consistent with revisions in prominent firms’ earnings

forecasts spilling over to affect neglected stocks’ prices.

         The converse – that changes in neglected firms’ prices affect analysts earnings

forecasts for prominent firms, even after controlling for the latter’ own price changes,

seems to us decidedly implausible. Reverse causality, though unlikely, is not




                                              25
inconceivable: perhaps highly focused analysts are caught off guard by events that

primarily affect neglected firms, and then revise their forecasts for prominent firms’

earnings. To preclude this, we modify our event study in various ways.



4.2 Fuzzy signals

If information about prominent stocks sets neglected stocks’ prices, more ambiguous

signals about the former ought to have weaker effects on the latter, all else equal. This

suggests a more nuanced way of testing for information spillover if we can measure

information ambiguity. We therefore gauge the ambiguity of the information about high

coverage firms’ fundamentals by the standard deviation of the mean of analysts’ forecast

revisions for high coverage firms in each industry each month, and denote this DISP3,t.

       Table 7 thus reruns the regressions in Table 6, but including as an additional

explanatory variable the interaction of FR3,t with DISP3,t; that is



                             3
              a + b rm,t + ∑ c j FR j ,t + cˆ3 FR3,t * DISP3,t + d1 FRk ,t
        rk ,t =
[13]                        j =1

             + d 2 rk ,t −1 + d3 rk ,t − 2,t −7 + d 4 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + d5 ln( BM k ,t ) + d 6 TURNOVERk ,t + ek ,t




The main result from Table 6 is preserved: revisions of high coverage firms’ forecast

earnings again have more impact than revisions of less followed firms’ forecast earnings

on other stocks in their industry.

       The significant negative coefficient on our signal fuzziness measure indicates that

more conflicting information about the fundamentals of different prominent firms in an

industry lessens the information spillover from prominent to neglected firms. Moreover,


                                                      26
signal fuzziness curtails information spillover more strongly for low coverage than high

coverage firms.

         These results also survive the battery of robustness checks applied to Table 6.

The only exceptions are that our signal fuzziness measure becomes insignificant in the

regressions of low and zero coverage firms when we use the returns on analyst tertile

portfolios as the dependent variable, and in the regressions of low and medium coverage

firms when we define industries using the 17 industries classification of Fama and French

(1997). In yet another robustness check, we also include interaction terms of forecast

revisions with dispersion for low and medium analyst firms. Qualitatively similar results

ensue.

         Overall, these findings are consistent with less ambiguous revisions in prominent

firms’ earnings forecasts affecting neglected stocks’ prices more strongly. Reverse

causality here would require analysts to revise prominent firm's earning forecasts more

homogeneously when caught off guard by more important events that primarily affect

neglected stocks. While this is not impossible, we know of no theoretical or empirical

work giving credence to such a scenario.



4.3 Event studies using bellwether stocks

So far, we define prominent firms as those in the highest tertile, ranked by the number of

analysts following them. This portfolio approach to distinguishing prominent from

neglected stocks means we have no precise event dates, and cannot perform precisely

timed daily frequency event studies, which can more reliably preclude reverse causality.

         We therefore turn to an alternative, deliberately narrow, definition of prominence.



                                             27
We define each industry’s bellwether firm as that followed by the most analysts, within

each industry. In a similar vein, the non-bellwether firm refers to the firm with highest

coverage among the firms in the lowest analyst coverage tertile. 3 In case of a tie, we

choose the largest firm by market capitalization. To be sure this alternative definition

yields similar results to those shown above, we replace portfolio level mean forecast

revisions in [12] with monthly revisions in earnings forecast of the bellwether firm,

FRBW,t, and the non-bellwether firm, FRNBW,t:



           rk ,t =
                 a + b rm,t + c1 FRBW ,t + c2 FRNBW ,t + d1 FRk ,t + d 2 rk ,t −1 + d3 rk ,t − 2,t −7
    [14]
                 + d 4 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + d5 ln( BM k ,t ) + d 6 TURNOVERk ,t + ek ,t




           Panel A of Table 8 shows revisions to bellwether firms earnings forecasts

affecting the returns on all other firms in the industry. The effect illustrates the same

asymmetry evident above: it is largest for low coverage firms, and smaller, but

significant, for medium coverage firms, and insignificant for high coverage firms

(excluding the bellwether firm, of course). Firms not covered by any analyst exhibit a

significant price effect in reaction to the forecast revision of the bellwether firm but to a

lesser extent than the low coverage firms. The revisions in earnings forecasts of the non-

bellwether firms, on the other hand, do not have a similar price effect on other firms. The

revisions in earnings forecasts of the non-bellwether firms have a significantly smaller

price impact on other peer firms with low and medium coverage. The returns on

uncovered firms appear to react to revisions in earnings forecasts of both the bellwether


3
 An alternative definition of the non-bellwether firm as the firm with the lowest analyst coverage yields
very few forecast revisions each year, although the results are qualitatively similar.


                                                         28
and non-bellwether firms, suggesting a more general spillover of information to these

firms. These results confirm the asymmetry in price effects associated with the revisions

in earnings forecasts of prominent firms versus relatively neglected firms.

       Panel B reruns [14] but also includes an interaction of the revision in consensus

earnings forecast of the bellwether firm in month t, FRBW,t, with its dispersion in earnings

forecasts, DISPBW,t, as in [13]. The panel shows lower dispersion across bellwether firm's

forecast revisions significantly magnifying information spillover into the abnormal

returns on less prominent stocks in the same industries.

       This effect is economically significant: if forecast dispersion is near zero,

indicating near uniformity across analysts’ forecast revisions, a one percent increase in

forecast earnings for the bellwether firm corresponds to a 0.80 percent rise in low

coverage firms’ prices, versus an unconditional effect of 0.57 percent in Panel A. A one

standard deviation increase in the dispersion of analysts forecast for the bellwether firm

damps the same mean revision’s impact on low coverage firm’s prices by about 0.05

percent. Using firms followed by no analysts yields a significant damping effect due to

dispersion in revisions of the bellwether firm’s earnings forecasts that is statistically

identical in magnitude to that for low coverage firms.

       These results also survive the battery of robustness checks applied to Table 6 with

a few exceptions. The price impact of FRBW,t on other peer firms reported in Panel A is

significant in all sub-periods except for 1990-1995. When we interact the forecast

revision with the dispersion measure, DISPBW,t, the interaction coefficients are generally

significant, except for a couple of analyst tertiles in the sub-period 1996-2001 and when

we reclassify the industries according to the 17-industry classification as in Fama and




                                            29
French (1997). Finally, defining an industry’s bellwether firms as the portfolio of largest

three firms by analyst coverage yields qualitatively similar results.

        We interpret these findings as consistent with information spillover from

bellwether firms to other firms, but not in the reverse direction. This spillover is larger

when revisions to analysts forecasts of bellwether firms’ earnings are more similar.



4.4 Event studies of bellwether stocks using daily data

Isolating bellwether firms lets us address causality more unequivocally, since we can now

identify precise dates upon which the bellwether firm’s forecast earnings are revised and

then look for stock price changes in other firms on those dates. That analysts time their

revisions of bellwether firms’ forecast earnings to fall precisely on dates when neglected

firms prices move en masse relative to industry and market benchmarks begs credulity.

       We designate day zero as the event day on which one or more analysts announce

revised earnings forecasts for the bellwether firm.        We then compute a three-day

cumulative abnormal return, CARj, for every firm j (excluding the bellwether firm) in that

industry from the prior to the subsequent day. Following Gleason and Lee (2003), we

measure CARj as the excess return over a contemporaneous value-weighted return of all

other stocks in j’s size decile. An alternative measure of CARj is the excess return over

the expected return from a four-factor model comprising the Fama-French three factors

(i.e. excess return on the value-weighted CRSP market index over the one-month T-bill

return; small minus big return premium (SMB) and the high book-to-market minus low

book-to-market return premium (HML)) and the momentum factor in Carhart (1997).

Again following previous studies, we treat CARj associated with upward and downward



                                             30
revisions to the bellwether firm’s forecast earnings separately.

       To mitigate bias from confounding events, we apply several filters to our event

study. We exclude the event days when the bellwether firm earnings forecast revisions

coincide with the same firm’s quarterly earnings announcement within a five-day

window, i.e. days -2 to +2 around the event day. When we compute CARj for each event

day, we drop the CARj of other firms in the industry if firm j made an earnings

announcement or had earnings forecast revision during the five-day window around the

event day. This leaves a set of events on which the only relevant news is most likely to be

the bellwether firm’s earnings forecast revision announcement. To facilitate comparison

with previous work using such data, we split these events into upward and downward

earnings forecast revisions.

       Table 9 reports our results. First, we reproduce the standard finding of previous

studies: a firm's earnings forecast revisions cause its stock price to move in the same

direction. The coefficients on CARBW, the three-day cumulative abnormal returns for the

bellwether stock whose earnings are revised, are similar in magnitude to the numbers

reported in Stickel (1991) and Gleason and Lee (2003). For example, we find an average

3-day CAR for the bellwether firm of 0.31 (-0.35) percent following an upward

(downward) revision in its own forecasted earnings. This compares with the

corresponding average CAR of 0.7 (-1.3) percent for all firms in the sample reported in

Gleason and Lee (2003).

       The main result in Table 9 is that the stock prices of other firms in the same

industry also change significantly when bellwether firms’ forecast earnings are revised,

and in the same direction as those revisions. This effect is larger for low coverage firms




                                             31
than for firms in the medium coverage tertile. Firms followed by no analysts post even

more negative significant CARs than low coverage firms upon downward revisions to

bellwether firms’ forecast earnings. Upon upward revisions to bellwether firms’ forecast

earnings, stocks followed by no analysts appear to rise less than those in the low coverage

tertile, but the two CAR estimates are statistically indistinguishable.

       These results also survive a battery of robustness checks. Specifically, the results

remain unchanged if we winsorize the extreme 1% of CARs across all earnings forecast

revision events, or expand the event window from three to five days. When we sort the

firms into quintiles (instead of tertiles) of analyst coverage within each industry, we also

obtain comparable results. We interpret these results as consistent with earnings revisions

for bellwether firms causing neglected firms’ prices to change.




5.     Conclusions

Firm-specific information flows more directly into the prices of some stocks than others.

Informed investors collectively generate greater trading revenues with private

information about larger stocks, since larger informed trades are required to move prices.

Since investors and arbitrageurs are willing to pay more for such information, specialized

information intermediaries, like financial analysts, focus their efforts on such stocks

(Bhushan (1989) and Veldkamp (2006a)). We find that indeed more analysts follow firms

which are larger, more actively traded, and whose fundamentals correlate strongly with

those of other firms.

       We document that the stock returns of firms followed by many analysts contribute

to the synchronicity of stock returns, even after controlling for fundamental correlations


                                             32
(see also Piotroski and Roulstone (2004) and Chan and Hameed (2006)), and this effect

attenuates where more firms are directly followed by analysts. This is consistent with

investors using information about a firm not just to trade that firm’s stock, but also to

value and trade other firms as well. Hence, higher comovement associated with the

number of analysts following a stock thus reflects rational information intermediation.

       We also find that information contained in the forecasted earnings of firms with

intense coverage (or bellwether firms) diffuses to the prices of other firms with low or

zero coverage, especially when there is greater certainty (lower dispersion) in the

earnings forecasts. The converse is not true: revisions in the earnings forecasts of low

coverage firms do not affect the prices of bellwether firms.

       Our findings validate models casting information intermediaries in general, and

financial analysts in particular, in key roles in financial markets. Our results also suggest

that a degree of stock price comovement may well be consistent with rationality given

costly information as in Veldkamp (2006a). Yet, our results also suggest that large scale

stock price comovement indicates that many stock returns are driven not by direct firm

specific information but by inferred industry wide information. More importantly, this

paper provides an empirical understanding of the transmission of information via analysts

and trading in equity markets.

       While a behavioral basis for comovement (Barberis et al. (2005)) or correlated

demand shocks in Greenwood (2008) are not precluded, our findings better accord with a

basis in costly information. However, our results are obtained in a highly developed

capital market with strong institutions. In less developed financial markets, behavioral

considerations might loom more important.




                                             33
34
References

Admati, Anat R., and Paul Pfleiderer, 1990, “Direct and indirect sale of information,”

       Econometrica, Vol. 58, 910-928.

Alford, Andrew W., and Philip G. Berger, 1999, “A simultaneous equations analysis of

       forecast accuracy, analyst following and trading volume,” Journal of Accounting,

       Auditing and Finance, Vol. 14, 219-240.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffery Wurgler, 2005, “Comovement,” Journal

       of Financial Economics, Vol. 75, 283-317.

Brennan, Michael J., and Patricia J. Hughes, 1991, “Stock prices and the supply of

       information,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 46, 1665-1691.

Brennan, Michael J., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 1993,

       “Investment analysis and the adjustment of stock prices to common information, ”

       Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 6, 799-824.

Bhushan, Ravi, 1989, “Firm characteristics and analyst following,” Journal of

       Accounting and Economics, Vol. 11, 255 - 274.

Bushman, Robert M., Joseph D. Piotroski, and Abbie J. Smith, 2005, “Insider trading

       restrictions and analysts' incentives to follow firms,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 60,

       35-66.

Brown, Lawrence D., Robert L. Hagerman, Paul A. Griffin, and Mark E. Zmijewski,

       1987, “Security analyst superiority relative to univariate time series models in

       forecasting quarterly earnings,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 9,

       61–87.

Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, 2001, “Have



                                           35
       individual stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic

       risk,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, 1-43.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, "On persistence in mutual fund performance", Journal of

       Finance, Vol. 52, 57-82.

Chan, Kalok, and Allaudeen Hameed, 2006, “Stock price synchronicity and analyst

       coverage in emerging markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 80, 115-

       147.

Chun, Hyunbae, Jung-Wook Kim, Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung, 2008, “Creative

       destruction and firm-specific performance heterogeneity”, Journal of Financial

       Economics, Vol. 89, 109-135.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1981, “Information aggregation in a

       noisy rational expectations economy,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 9,

       221–235.

Durnev, Artyom, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, “Value enhancing capital

       budgeting and firm-specific stock returns variation,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 59,

       65 – 105.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, "Multifactor explanations of asset

       pricing anomalies," Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, 55-84.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, "Industry costs of equity," Journal of

       Financial Economics, Vol. 43, 153-193.

Foster, George, 1981, “Intra-industry information transfers associated with earnings

       releases,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 3, 201-232.

Frankel, Richard, S. P. Kothari, and Joseph Weber, 2006, “Determinants of the




                                           36
       informativeness of analyst research,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol.

       41, 29-54.

Givoly, Dan, and Josef Lakonishok, 1979, "The information content of financial analysts'

       forecasts of earnings," Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 1, 165-185.

Griffin, Paul A., 1976, " Competitive information in the stock market: an empirical study

       of earnings, dividends and analysts' forecasts," Journal of Finance, Vol. 31, 631-

       650.

Greenwood, Robin, 2008, “Excess comovement of stock returns: evidence from cross-

       sectional variation in Nikkei 225 weights,” Review of Financial Studies,

       forthcoming.

Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, “On the impossibility of informationally

       efficient markets,” American Economic Review, Vol. 70, 393-408.

Gleason, Cristi, and Charles Lee, 2003, “Analyst forecast revisions and market price

       discovery”, The Accounting Review, Vol. 78, 193-225.

Han, Jerry C. Y., and John J. Wild, 1990, “Unexpected earnings and intra-industry

       information transfers: further evidence,” Journal of Accounting Research, Vol.

       28, 211–219.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1990, "Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns,"

       Journal of Finance, Vol. 45, 881-898.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Joonghyuk Kim, Susan D. Krische, and Charles M. C. Lee,

       2004, "Analyzing the analysts: When do recommendations add value?" Journal of

       Finance, Vol. 59, 1083-1124.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, "Returns to buying winners and




                                           37
       selling losers: Implications for stock market efficiency," Journal of Finance, Vol.

       48, 65-91.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, "A simple, positive semi-definite,

       heteroskedasticity   and    autocorrelation    consistent   covariance    matrix,"

       Econometrica, Vol. 55, 703-708.

Jin, Li, and Stewart Myers, 2006, “R-squared around the world: New theory and new

       tests,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 79, 257-292.

Lang, Mark H., and Russell J. Lundholm, 1996, “Corporate disclosure policy and analyst

       behavior,” The Accounting Review, Vol. 71, 467-492.

Merton, Robert C., 1987, “A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete

       information,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 42, 483-510.

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, 2000, “The information content of

       stock markets: Why do emerging markets have synchronous stock price

       movements?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 59, 215-260.

Park, Chul W., and Earl K. Stice, 2000, “Analyst forecasting ability and the stock price

       reaction to forecast revisions,” Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 5, 259-272.

Petersen, Mitchell A., 2007, “Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets:

       Comparing approaches,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Piotroski, Joseph D., and Darren T Roulstone, 2004, “The influence of analysts,

       institutional investors, and insiders on the incorporation of market, industry, and

       firm-specific information into stock prices,” The Account Review, Vol. 79, 1119-

       1151.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, "Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds," Quarterly




                                           38
       Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, 1135-1151.

Ramnath, Sundaresh, 2002, “Investor and analyst reactions to earnings announcements of

       related firms: An empirical analysis,” Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 40,

       1351-1376.

Rock, Steve, Stanley Sedo, and Michael Willenborg, 2000, "Analyst following and

       count-data econometrics," Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 30, 351-

       373.

Roll, Richard, 1988, “R2”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 43, 541-566.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, “The limits of arbitrage,” Journal of

       Finance, Vol. 52, 35-55.

Stickel, Scott E., 1991, "Common stock returns surrounding earnings forecast revisions:

       More puzzling evidence," The Accounting Review, Vol. 66, 402-416.

Veldkamp, Laura L., 2005, “Slow boom, sudden crash,” Journal of Economic Theory,

       Vol. 124, 230-257.

Veldkamp, Laura L., 2006a, “Information markets and the comovement of asset prices,”

       Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 73, 823-845.

Veldkamp, Laura L., 2006b, “Media frenzies in markets for financial information,”

       American Economic Review, Vol. 96, 577-601.

Walther, Beverly, 1997, "Investor sophistication and market earnings expectations,"

       Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 35, 157-179.

Wei, Steven X., and Chu Zhang, 2006, “Why did individual stocks become more

       volatile?,” Journal of Business, Vol. 79, 259-292.




                                           39
Table 1: Number of firms in the sample
The sample consists of common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ (CRSP dataset) over the
period 1984 to 2007. These firms in the CRSP database are merged with those in COMPUSTAT and
I/B/E/S. The final sample consists of firms in CRSP-COMPUSTAT merged sample in which firms not
covered by I/B/E/S are treated as firms with zero analyst coverage.

                                                       CRSP,
                                                     COMPUSTAT         CRSP,
                                        CRSP           merged    COMPUSTAT and
Year                                    sample         Sample  I/B/E/S merged sample
1984                                     6,968            3,207               2,220
1985                                     7,099            3,058               2,292
1986                                     7,544            3,110               2,366
1987                                     7,896            3,251               2,508
1988                                     7,865            2,963               2,309
1989                                     7,613            3,085               2,444
1990                                     7,411            3,108               2,477
1991                                     7,430            2,730               2,183
1992                                     7,760            3,161               2,488
1993                                     8,262            3,692               2,931
1994                                     8,837            4,185               3,267
1995                                     9,243            4,150               3,301
1996                                     9,821            4,536               3,678
1997                                   10,080 .           4,760               3,998
1998                                     9,984            4,655               3,887
1999                                     9,690            4,068               3,390
2000                                     9,362            4,180               3,314
2001                                     8,678            3,541               2,821
2002                                     7,945            3,450               2,750
2003                                     7,507            3,062               2,443
2004                                     7,347            3,434               2,762
2005                                     7,365            3,452               2,808
2006                                     7,431            3,377               2,763
2007                                     7,677            3,319               2,728
Total number of firm-years            196,815 .         85,534 .             68,128 .
Average number of firms per year         8,201            3,564               2,839




                                             40
Table 2: Summary Statistics
In this table, PCORRk measures the partial correlation of firm k’s returns with returns of other firms in the
industry. Each year, for a given pair of firm k and firm i in industry I, we estimate a two-factor market
model regression:
          riw = ai + bi rMw
                         k
                            + ci rIwk + eiw                                               [1]
                                            ,
                                                          k         k
where riw is the return on firm i in week w, and rMw and rIw are the value-weighted return on the market
and industry portfolios excluding firms i and k. We estimate a second regression model which adds rkw,
return of firm k in week w, as an additional explanatory variable:
          riw = ai + bi rMw
                         k
                            + ci rIwk + d i rkw + eiw .                                                                    [2]
The r-squares from equations [1] and [2] are denoted as Ri2,excl .k and Ri2,incl .k respectively. The partial
                                                                   Ri2,incl .k − Ri2,excl .k
correlation of firm k with each other firm i [ PCORRk ,i = (                                   ) ] is averaged across all firms in
                                                                        1 − Ri2,excl .k
the industry to produce PCORRk. A similar measure is constructed using quarterly return on assets (ROA)
and denoted as PCORR_ROAk. ANALYSTk is the number of analysts making one-year forward earnings
forecast for firm k each year. SIZEk is the beginning-of-year market capitalization of firm k. TURNOVERk is
the average of daily share turnover in the previous year. HERF_SALESk is the Herfindahl index of sales
across 2-digit business segments for the fiscal year ending in the year. STDRETk is the standard deviation of
weekly returns in the previous year. In Panel B, we group stocks into tertiles based on the number of
analysts following each year within each industry. Group zero refers to stocks with zero coverage while
groups 1 to 3 have increasing coverage. The last two columns report the robust T-statistics cluster by
industry of the tests for the null hypothesis of equality for high and low (or zero) analyst coverage groups.
Panel C presents the average of correlation coefficients calculated every year.

Panel A: Summary statistics for the pool sample
Variable             Mean              Std.                                Q1                       Median               Q3
PCORRk (%)           2.558            0.934                               2.041                     2.359               2.824
ANALYSTk             7.462            8.814                                 1                         4                   11
PCORR_ROAk(%)       10.884            5.873                               7.289                     9.581              12.858
SIZEk ($billion)     1.981           11.074                               0.063                     0.209               0.829
TURNOVERk (%)        0.528            0.829                               0.147                     0.304               0.624
HERF_SALESk          0.818            0.255                               0.587                       1                    1
STDRETk (%)          5.652            2.806                               3.642                     5.086               7.046

Panel B: Summary statistics across analyst coverage groups
                             Analyst coverage group                                                            T-test
                        0            1                    3                                             High –       High –
Variable             (Zero)       (Low)         2      (High)                                            Zero          Low
ANALYSTk                0          2.641      7.373    18.480                                             NA            NA
PCORRk (%)           2.359         2.476      2.636     2.722                                            8.040         6.171
PCORR_ROAk (%) 10.720             11.013     11.119    10.669                                           -0.124        -1.547
SIZEk ($billion)     0.316         0.265      0.738     6.357                                            7.342         7.360
TURNOVERk (%)        0.313         0.474      0.606     0.676                                            7.378         5.089
HERF_SALESk          0.827         0.848      0.829     0.768                                           -4.232        -5.833
STDRETk (%)          5.306         6.077      5.890     5.240                                           -0.296        -7.286




                                                              41
Panel C: Correlation coefficients
Variable                     PCORRk         ANALYSTk      PCORR_ROAk           SIZEk        TURNOVERk HERF_SALESk             STDRETk
PCORRk(%)                        1           0.175***        0.052***         0.075***        0.079***         0.012*         0.016***
ANALYSTk                                         1             0.002          0.484***        0.177***       -0.123***        -0.093***
PCORR_ROAk(%)                                                     1          -0.023***         -0.007         0.109***        -0.053***
SIZEk($billion)                                                                   1          -0.026***       -0.150***        -0.148***
TURNOVERk (%)                                                                                     1           0.149***        0.443***
HERF_SALESk                                                                                                       1           0.256***
STDRETk(%)                                                                                                                         1
 *, **, and *** indicate that the average correlation coefficient is statistically significant at 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively based
on time series standard deviations of the average correlation coefficients.




                                                                      42
Table 3: Determinants of analyst coverage
ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t ) =
                     a0 + a1 LPCORR _ ROAk ,t + a2 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + a3 TURNOVERk ,t
                                            68                     2006
+ a4 HERF _ SALEk ,t + a5 ln( STDRETk ,t ) + ∑ d I INDDUM I ,t +   ∑      c yYEARDUM y + ek ,t
                         =I 1=y 1984

where, for each firm k and year t, ANALYSTk,t is the number of analysts making one-year ahead earnings
forecast; LPCORR_ROAk,t is the logit transformation of the partial correlation measure based on ROA;
SIZEk,t is the beginning-of-year market value; TURNOVERk,t is the average of daily share turnover;
HERF_SALESk,t is the Herfindahl index of sales across 2-digit business segments; STDRETk,t is the
standard deviation of weekly returns; INDDUMs are industry dummies; and YEARDUMs are year
dummies. The robust t-statistics cluster by industry are provided in Italic.


                                                                   Sample Period
Indep. Var.                      1984 - 2007 1984 - 1989 1990 - 1995 1996 - 2001 2002 - 2007
LPCORR_ROAk,t                        0.048            0.025                0.027           0.054   0.055
                                     3.847            1.680                1.641           2.994   2.763
ln(SIZEk,t)                          0.494            0.575                0.491           0.450   0.459
                                    72.632           68.377               60.411          61.610   48.417
TURNOVERk,t                          0.114            0.620                0.356           0.134   0.070
                                     5.129            9.825               11.374           6.632   3.325
HERF_SALESk,t                        0.264            0.271                0.328           0.233   0.214
                                     9.300            5.714                7.811           7.257   4.011
ln(STDRETk,t)                        0.231            0.075                0.094           0.205   0.337
                                    10.856            2.112                3.499           6.898   8.052
Industry Dummies                      yes              yes                  yes             yes     yes
Year Dummies                          yes              yes                  yes             yes     yes
Adj. Rsq                             0.631            0.700                0.674           0.624   0.600




                                                        43
Table 4: Return comovement and analyst coverage

LPCORRk ,t =+
           a0 a1 ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t ) + a2 LPCORR _ ROAk ,t + a3 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + a4 TURNOVERk ,t
                                              68                     2006
+ a5 HERF _ SALES k ,t + a6 ln( STDRETk ,t ) + ∑ d I INDDUM I ,t +   ∑      c yYEARDUM y + ek ,t
                           =I 1 =y 1984

where, for each firm k and year t, LPCORRk,t and LPCORR_ROAk,t are the logit transformation of the
partial correlation measures based on stock returns and ROA; ANALYSTk,t is the number of analysts making
one-year ahead earnings forecast; SIZEk,t is the beginning-of-year market value; TURNOVERk,t is the
average of daily share turnover; HERF_SALESk,t is the Herfindahl index of sales across 2-digit business
segments; STDRETk,t is the standard deviation of weekly returns; INDDUMs are industry dummies; and
YEARDUMs are year dummies. The robust t-statistics cluster by industry are provided in Italic.


                                                                Sample Period
Indep. Var.                1984 - 2007 1984 - 1989 1990 - 1995 1996 - 2001 2002 - 2007
ln(1+ANALYSTk,t)               0.020               0.012                0.021               0.029   0.037
                               3.064               2.129                2.787               2.896   4.372
LPCORR_ROAk,t                  0.023               0.008                0.007               0.029   0.049
                               4.105               1.852                0.699               2.911   2.865
ln(SIZEk,t)                    0.021               0.008                0.019               0.015   0.030
                               6.799               1.898                3.850               4.469   6.556
TURNOVERk,t                    0.023               0.034                0.012               0.029   0.011
                               5.274               1.799                0.928               5.749   2.353
HERF_SALESk,t                  0.043               0.042                0.044               0.033   0.038
                               3.319               2.993                2.450               1.912   2.053
ln(STDRETk,t)                  0.025               -0.012               0.029               0.026   0.027
                               2.591               -0.848               1.954               1.953   1.614
Industry Dummies                 yes                yes                     yes              yes     yes
Year Dummies                     yes                yes                     yes              yes     yes
Adj. Rsq                       0.169               0.170                0.128               0.204   0.193




                                                           44
    Table 5: Return comovement, analyst coverage and concentration
    LPCORRk ,t =+
               a0 a1 ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t ) + b1 ln(1 + ANALYSTk ,t ) * HERF _ ANALYSTI ,t
    + a2 LPCORR _ ROAk ,t + a3 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + a4 TURNOVERk ,t + a5 HERF _ SALEk ,t + a6 ln( STDRETk ,t )
      68                    2006
    + ∑ d I INDDUM I ,t +   ∑      c yYEARDUM y + ek ,t
=I 1 =y 1984

    where, for each firm k and year t, LPCORRk,t and LPCORR_ROAk,t are the logit transformation of the
    partial correlation measures based on stock returns and ROA; ANALYSTk,t is the number of analysts making
    one-year ahead earnings forecast; HERF_ANALYSTI,t is the Herfindhal index of analyst coverage in the
    industry; SIZEk,t is the beginning-of-year market value; TURNOVERk,t is the average of daily share
    turnover; HERF_SALESk,t is the Herfindahl index of sales across 2-digit business segments; STDRETk,t is
    the standard deviation of weekly returns; INDDUMs are industry dummies; and YEARDUMs are year
    dummies. The robust t-statistics cluster by industry are provided in Italic.


                                                                     Sample Period
    Indep. Var.                       1984 - 2007 1984 - 1989 1990 - 1995 1996 - 2001 2002 - 2007
    ln(1+ANALYSTk,t)                       0.029          0.021            0.033            0.039            0.045
                                           4.798          3.043            3.827            4.361            5.065
    ln(1+ANALYSTk,t)*
    HERF_ANALYSTI,t                        0.403          0.296            0.449            0.565            0.312
                                           3.524          1.955            2.534            2.624            1.616
    LPCORR_ROAk,t                          0.023          0.007            0.018            0.033            0.036
                                           4.702          2.414            2.488            3.448            3.387
    ln(SIZEk,t)                            0.019          0.006            0.017            0.016            0.028
                                           6.420          1.486            3.561            4.803            6.326
    TURNOVERk,t                            0.023          0.028            0.013            0.029            0.012
                                           5.368          1.459            1.098            5.657            2.669
    HERF_SALESk,t                          0.043          0.037            0.046            0.031            0.044
                                           3.427          2.876            2.666            1.903            2.472
    ln(STDRETk,t)                          0.026          -0.007           0.029            0.032            0.024
                                           2.713          -0.540           2.183            2.545            1.448
    Industry Dummies                        yes            yes              yes               yes             yes
    Year Dummies                            yes            yes              yes               yes             yes
    Adj. Rsq                               0.180          0.186            0.120            0.212            0.206




                                                             45
Table 6: Impact of earnings forecast revisions on stock returns
                      3
      a + b rm ,t + ∑ c j FR j ,t + d1 FRk ,t + d 2 rk ,t −1 + d3 rk ,t − 2,t − 7 + d 4 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + d 5 ln( BM k ,t ) + d 6 TURNOVERk ,t + ek ,t
rk ,t =
                     j =1



where, for each firm k in month t, Rk,t is the monthly stock return; FRk,t is the monthly revision in earnings
forecasts for firm k; FRj,t is the value-weighted average of revisions in earnings forecasts for firms in
analyst coverage tertile j (within the same industry); rm,t is the monthly value-weighted return of all stocks
in CRSP; rk,t-2,t-7 is firm k’s cumulative return over month t-7 to month t-2; SIZEk,t is beginning-of-month
market value; BMk,t is book-to-market ratio; TURNROVERk,t is the average daily share turnover in the
previous month. The equation is estimated for all firms and separately for each group of firms sorted on
analyst coverage. The robust t-statistics cluster by industry are provided in Italic.
                                                                  Analyst Coverage Groups
                                                                High      Medium       Low                                    No
Independent Variables                      All firms          Coverage Coverage Coverage                                    Coverage
Intercept                                    0.673                3.451               4.157                1.659               0.465
                                             1.754                7.625               7.231                3.618               0.676
FR1(low)                                     0.185               -0.034               0.057                0.378               0.458
                                             1.817               -0.276               0.363                3.187               3.149
FR2(medium)                                  0.635                0.148               0.307                0.911               1.571
                                             2.269                0.517               1.075                2.377               6.129
FR3(high)                                    1.100                0.838               1.349                1.518               0.826
                                             5.759                3.422               5.072                5.855               4.481
FRk                                          1.637                2.091               2.042                1.244
                                            13.983                5.251              13.026               17.307
rm,t                                         1.024                1.135               1.122                1.011               0.749
                                            14.686               17.537              14.884               15.421               9.600
rk,t-1                                       -0.011              -0.022              -0.014               -0.007               0.002
                                             -3.790              -5.849              -2.580               -1.757               0.351
rk,t-2,t-7                                   0.000               -0.002              -0.001                0.000               0.005
                                             0.035               -0.921              -0.587                0.182               3.450
ln(SIZEk)                                    0.021               -0.170              -0.268               -0.081               0.062
                                             1.208               -5.367              -5.905               -2.015               1.400
ln(BMk,)                                     0.248                0.214               0.136                0.239               0.447
                                             5.694                3.117               2.350                4.186              12.355
TURNOVERk                                    0.044                0.086               0.068               -0.114              -0.141
                                             0.924                1.392               0.864               -1.217              -1.635
Adj. Rsq (%)                                12.530               18.420              15.040               10.840               6.289




                                                                    46
Table 7: Impact of earnings forecast revisions and dispersion in revisions on stock
returns
                         3
      a + b rm,t + ∑ c j FR j ,t + cˆ3 FR3,t * DISP3,t + d1 FRk ,t
rk ,t =
                         j =1

         + d 2 rk ,t −1 + d3 rk ,t − 2,t − 7 + d 4 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + d5 ln( BM k ,t ) + d 6 TURNOVERk ,t + ek ,t
where, for each firm k in month t, Rk,t is the monthly stock return; FRk,t is the monthly revision in earnings
forecasts for firm k; FRj,t is the value-weighted average of revisions in earnings forecasts for firms in
analyst coverage tertile j (within the same industry); DISP3 is the standard deviation of revision in earnings
forecast for the highest analysts coverage tertile; rm,t is the monthly value-weighted return of all stocks in
CRSP; rk,t-2,t-7 is firm k’s cumulative return over month t-7 to month t-2; SIZEk,t is beginning-of-month
market value; BMk,t is book-to-market ratio; TURNROVERk,t is the average daily share turnover in the
previous month. The equation is estimated for all firms and separately for each group of firms based on
analyst coverage. The robust t-statistics cluster by industry are provided in Italic.

                                                                       Analyst Coverage Groups
                                                                    High        Medium        Low                    No
Independent Variables                          All firms          Coverage     Coverage    Coverage               Coverage
Intercept                                        0.375              1.800        2.187       0.927                  0.243
                                                 2.031              8.108        8.007       4.259                  0.707
FR1(low)                                         0.164             -0.051        0.040       0.353                  0.435
                                                 1.613             -0.415        0.247       3.010                  3.001
FR2(medium)                                      0.638              0.138        0.342       0.958                  1.548
                                                 2.673              0.530        1.417       3.136                  6.343
FR3(high)                                        1.893              1.507        2.290       2.606                  1.533
                                                 6.118              4.350        5.938       6.682                  7.014
FR3*DISP3                                       -0.879             -0.684       -1.156      -1.245                 -0.760
                                                -4.108             -3.124       -3.881      -5.443                 -4.399
FRk                                              1.638              2.086        2.043       1.249
                                                13.928              5.235       13.100      17.351
rm,t                                             1.025              1.135        1.122       1.011                  0.750
                                                14.670             17.570       14.864      15.403                  9.537
rk,t-1                                          -0.011             -0.023       -0.014      -0.007                  0.002
                                                -3.835             -5.940       -2.552      -1.768                  0.339
rk,t-2,t-7                                       0.000             -0.002       -0.001       0.000                  0.005
                                                -0.067             -0.978       -0.691       0.135                  3.401
ln(SIZEk)                                        0.019             -0.175       -0.279      -0.093                  0.062
                                                 1.144             -5.566       -6.308      -2.351                  1.424
ln(BMk,)                                         0.249              0.219        0.140       0.238                  0.443
                                                 5.620              3.180        2.410       4.155                 12.174
TURNOVERk                                        0.039              0.082        0.060      -0.126                 -0.147
                                                 0.807              1.329        0.764      -1.331                 -1.660
Adj. Rsq (%)                                    12.550             18.440       15.060      10.850                  6.300




                                                                       47
Table 8: Impact of earnings forecast revisions of bellwether firms on stock returns
rk ,t =
      a + b rm,t + c1 FRBW ,t + c2 FRNBW ,t + d1 FRk ,t
     + d 2 rk ,t −1 + d3 rk ,t − 2,t − 7 + d 4 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + d5 ln( BM k ,t ) + d 6 TURNOVERk ,t + ek ,t
where, for each firm k in month t, Rk,t is the monthly stock return; FRk,t is the monthly revision in earnings
forecasts for firm k; FRBW,t and FRNBW,t are the revisions in earnings forecasts for the bellwether firm and
the comparing non-bellwether firm within the same industry; rm,t is the monthly value-weighted return of
all stocks in CRSP; rk,t-2,t-7 is firm k’s cumulative return over month t-7 to month t-2; BMk,t is book-to-
market ratio; TURNROVERk,t is the average daily share turnover in the previous month. In Panel B, we
interact FRBW with DISPBW, the standard deviation of revision in earnings forecast for the bellwether firms:
                                    ^
rk ,t =
      a + b rm,t + c1 FRBW ,t + c1 FRBW ,t * DISPBW ,t + c2 FRNBW ,t + d1 FRk ,t
     + d 2 rk ,t −1 + d3 rk ,t − 2,t − 7 + d 4 ln( SIZEk ,t ) + d5 ln( BM k ,t ) + d 6 TURNOVERk ,t + ek ,t
These equations are estimated for all firms and separately for each group of firms based on analyst
coverage (the coefficients associated with the control variables are suppressed). The robust t-statistics
cluster by industry are provided in Italic.

Panel A
                                                                 Analyst Coverage Groups
                                             All               High      Medium       Low                           Zero
Independent Variables                       Firms            Coverage Coverage Coverage                           Coverage
FRBW                                        0.318               0.098                0.403               0.569     0.283
                                            2.215               0.852                2.170               4.368     2.196
FRNBW                                      -0.006               -0.088              -0.017               0.057     0.093
                                           -0.181               -2.198              -0.412               0.985     2.270
FRBW - FRNBW                                0.325               0.186                0.419               0.512     0.190
                                            2.260               1.545                2.179               3.606     1.398
Adj. Rsq (%)                               12.450              18.120               15.040              10.720     6.164

Panel B
                                                                 Analyst Coverage Groups
                                             All               High      Medium       Low                           Zero
Independent Variables                       Firms            Coverage Coverage Coverage                           Coverage
FRBW                                        0.574               0.327                0.680               0.799     0.567
                                            3.555               1.973                3.218               5.105     3.371
FRBW*DISPBW                                -0.889               -0.785              -0.960               -0.823    -0.985
                                           -2.456               -2.726              -2.249               -2.270    -1.999
FRNBW                                      -0.010               -0.092              -0.020               0.056     0.090
                                           -0.267               -2.204              -0.487               0.958     2.169
Adj. Rsq (%)                               12.470              18.130               15.050              10.730     6.182




                                                                   48
Table 9: Stocks returns and earnings forecast revisions of bellwether firms: event
study
This table presents the average cumulative abnormal return (CAR) of firms in the same industry in response
to the analyst forecast revisions of bellwether firms. CAR is defined as either cumulative excess return over
the average return corresponding to the firm’s size deciles (Size-adjusted CAR) or cumulative abnormal
return adjusted for Fama-French 3-factor plus momentum factor (Four-factor CAR) over the 3 day window
[-1, +1] surrounding the forecast revision. FRBW is the magnitude of revisions in earnings forecasts for the
bellwether firm (for each industry); CARBW, CARZERO, CARLOW, CARMED are the 3-day cumulative abnormal
returns corresponding to the bellwether, zero coverage, low-coverage and medium-coverage firms within
each industry respectively. CARMED-ZERO (CARMED-LOW) is the difference between CAR for medium analyst
firms and that for zero (low) analyst firms. All variables are expressed in basis points. The average value
across forecast revision events and the robust t-statistics (in Italic) cluster by industry are reported.

                     Upward Forecast Revisions                      Downward Forecast Revisions
                  (Number of observations = 20751)                (Number of observations = 28817)
                    Size-adjusted     Four-factor                   Size-adjusted     Four-factor
                        CAR              CAR                            CAR              CAR
FRBW                               38.397                                         -63.167


CARBW                    31.450                28.359                   -34.958               -29.952
                          7.639                 6.663                   -10.435                -9.837
CARZERO                   6.785                 5.928                    -7.518                -6.637
                          2.529                 2.456                    -2.485                -2.227
CARLOW                   10.731                 7.407                    -6.252                -4.550
                          4.344                 3.276                    -3.230                -2.910
CARMED                    8.048                 4.038                    -2.284                -0.509
                          3.912                 2.244                    -1.258                -0.310
CARMED - ZERO             1.263                -1.890                    5.234                 6.128
                          0.485                -0.717                    1.763                 1.980
CARMED - LOW             -2.684                -3.370                    3.967                 4.041
                         -1.348                -1.589                    1.866                 2.028




                                                    49
