                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE CONSEQUENCES OF ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCE:
                      A REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY ANALYSIS

                                           William R. Kerr
                                            Josh Lerner
                                          Antoinette Schoar

                                        Working Paper 15831
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15831


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2010




We thank James Geshwiler of CommonAngels, Warren Hanselman and Richard Sudek of Tech Coast
Angels, and John May of the Washington Dinner Club for their enthusiastic support of this project
and willingness to share data. We also thank the many entrepreneurs who responded to our inquiries.
Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the Kauffman Foundation supported this research.
Andrei Cristea provided excellent research assistance. All errors and omissions are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by William R. Kerr, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance: A Regression Discontinuity Analysis
William R. Kerr, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 15831
March 2010
JEL No. G24,L26,M13,O31,R51

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper documents the role of angel funding for the growth, survival, and access to follow-on funding
of high-growth start-up firms. We use a regression discontinuity approach to control for unobserved
heterogeneity between firms that obtain funding and those that do not. This technique exploits that
a small change in the collective interest levels of the angels can lead to a discrete change in the probability
of funding for otherwise comparable ventures. We first show that angel funding is positively correlated
with higher survival, additional fundraising outside the angel group, and faster growth measured through
growth in web site traffic. The improvements typically range between 30% and 50%. When using
the regression discontinuity approach, we still find a strong, positive effect of angel funding on the
survival and growth of ventures, but not on access to additional financing. Overall, the results suggest
that the bundle of inputs that angel investors provide have a large and significant impact on the success
and survival of start-up ventures.


William R. Kerr                                        Antoinette Schoar
Harvard Business School                                Sloan School of Management
Rock Center 212                                        50 Memorial Drive, E52-455
Soldiers Field                                         Cambridge, MA 02142
Boston, MA 02163                                       and NBER
and NBER                                               aschoar@mit.edu
wkerr@hbs.edu

Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
       One of the central and most enduring questions in the entrepreneurial finance literature is

the extent to which early stage financiers such as angels or venture funds have a real impact on

the firms in which they invest. An extensive theoretical literature suggests the combination of

intensive monitoring, staged investments, and powerful control rights in these types of deals

should alleviate agency problems between entrepreneurs and institutional investors (examples

include Admati and Pfleiderer, 1994; Berglöf, 1994; Bergmann and Hege, 1998; Cornelli and

Yosha, 2003; and Hellmann, 1998). This bundle of inputs, the works suggest, can lead to

improved governance and operations in the portfolio firms, lower capital constraints, and

ultimately stronger firm growth and performance.

       But the empirical documentation of this claim has been challenging. Hellmann and Puri

(2000) provide a first detailed comparison of the growth path of venture backed versus non

venture backed firms.1 This approach, however, faces the natural challenge that unobserved

heterogeneity across entrepreneurs, such as ability or ambition, might drive the growth path of

the firms as well as the venture capitalists‘ decision to invest. These problems are particularly

acute for evaluating early-stage investments. An alternative approach is to find exogenous

shocks to the level of venture financing. Examples of such exogenous shocks are public policy

changes (Kortum and Lerner, 2000), variations in endowment returns (Samila and Sorenson,

2010), and differences in state pension funding levels (Mollica and Zingales, 2007). These

studies, however, can only examine the impact of entrepreneurial finance activity at an aggregate

level. Given the very modest share that high-potential growth firms represent of all




1
 A similar approach is taken in Puri and Zarutskie (2008) and Chemmanur et al. (2009) who
employ comprehensive Census Bureau records of private firms to form more detailed control
groups based on observable characteristics.
                                                2
entrepreneurial ventures and economic activity overall, these studies face a ―needle in the

haystack‖ type challenge to detect any results.

       This paper takes a fresh look at the question of whether entrepreneurial financiers affect

the success and growth of new ventures. We focus on a neglected segment of entrepreneurial

finance: angel investments. Angel investors have received much less attention than venture

capitalists, despite the fact that some estimates suggest that these investors are as significant a

force for high-potential start-up investments as venture capitalists, and even more significant

investors elsewhere (Shane, 2008; Goldfarb et al., 2007; Sudek et al., 2008). Angel investors are

increasingly structured as semi-formal networks of high net worth individuals, often former

entrepreneurs themselves, who meet in regular intervals (usually once a month for breakfast or

dinner) to hear aspiring entrepreneurs pitch their business plans. The angels then decide to

conduct further due diligence and ultimately whether to invest in some of these deals either

individually or in subgroups of the members. Similarly to traditional venture capital investments,

angel investment groups often adopt a very hands-on role in the deals they get involved in and

provide entrepreneurs with advice and contacts to potential business partners.

       In addition to their inherent interest as funders of early stage companies, angel investment

groups are distinguished from the majority of traditional venture capital organizations by the fact

that they make their investment decisions through well documented collections of interest and, in

some cases, formal votes. By way of contrast, the venture firms that we talked to all employ a

consensual process, in which controversial proposals are withdrawn before coming up for a

formal vote or disagreements are resolved in conversations before the actual voting takes place.

In addition, venture firms also rarely document the detailed voting behind their decisions. Angel

investors, in contrast, express their interest for deals independently from one another and based



                                                  3
upon personal assessment. This allows us to observe the level of support or lack thereof for the

different deals that come before the angel group.

       These properties allow us to undertake a regression discontinuity design using data from

two angel investment groups. This approach, while today widely used in program evaluations by

economists (Lee and Lemieux, 2009), remains underutilized in financial economics (exceptions

include Rauh, 2006; and Cherenko and Sunderam, 2009). We essentially compare firms that fall

just above and those that are just below the criteria for funding for the angel group. The

underlying identification relies on the idea that firms that fall just around the cut-off level have

very similar ex ante characteristics that allow us to estimate the causal effect of obtaining angel

financing. After showing the ex ante comparability of the ventures in the border region, we

examine differences in their long-run performance. In this way, we can employ micro-data on

firm outcomes while minimizing the problem of unobserved heterogeneity between the funded

and rejected transactions.

       Several clear patterns emerge from our analysis: First, and maybe not surprisingly,

companies that elicit higher interest in initial voting at the angel meeting are far more likely to be

ultimately funded by the angel groups. More importantly, angel groups display break points or

discontinuities where a small change in the collective interest levels of the angels leads to a

discrete change in the probability of funding among otherwise comparable ventures. This

provides a powerful empirical foothold for overcoming quality differences and selection bias

between funded and unfunded ventures.

       Second, we look at the impact of angel funding on performance and access to follow-on

financing for firms that received angel funding compared to those that did not. We first compare

the outcomes for the full sample of firms that pitched to the angels and then narrow our



                                                  4
identification strategy to the firms that fall just above and below the funding breakpoint we

identified. We show that funded firms are significantly more like to survive for at least four years

(or until 2010) and to raise additional financing outside the angel group. They are also more

likely to show improved venture performance and growth as measured through growth in web

site traffic and web site rankings. The improvement gains typically range between 30% and 50%.

       An analysis of ventures just above and below the threshold, which removes the

endogeneity of funding and many omitted variable biases, confirms the importance of receiving

angel investments for the survival and growth of the venture. However, we do not see an impact

of angel funding on accessing additional financing using this regression discontinuity approach.

This may suggest that access to additional financing might often be a by-product of how angel

funded firms grow but that this path may not be essential for venture success as we measure it. In

addition, the result on follow-on venture funding might underline that in the time period we

study, prior angel financing was not an essential prerequisite to accessing follow-on funding.

However, the results overall suggest that the bundle of inputs that angel investors provide have a

large and significant impact on the success and survival of the firms.

       Finally, we also show that the impact of angel funding on firm outcomes would be

overstated if we look at the full distribution of ventures that approach the angel groups, since

there is a clear correlation between the quality of the start up and the level of interest. Simply

restricting the treatment and control groups to a narrow range around the border discontinuity

reduces the measured effects by a quarter from the raw correlations. This result reinforces the

need to focus on the regression discontinuity approach we follow in this paper.

       Thus, this paper provides a fresh look and new evidence at an essential question in

entrepreneurial finance. It quantifies the positive impact that angel investors make to the



                                                 5
companies that they fund in a way that simultaneously exploits novel, rich micro-data and

addresses concerns about unobserved heterogeneity. Our work is closest in spirit to the papers in

the entrepreneurial finance literature that focus on the investment process of venture capitalist.

For example, Sorensen (2007) assesses the returns to being funded by different tiers of investors.

Our work instead focuses on the margin of obtaining initial funding or not. Kaplan and

Stromberg (2004) and Kaplan et al. (2009) examine the characteristics and dimensions that

venture capitalists rely on when making investment decisions.

         The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 1 reviews the angel group investment

process. Section 2 introduces our angel investment data and describes our methodology. Section

3 introduces our outcomes data. Section 4 presents the analysis. The final section concludes the

paper.



         1. The Angel Group Investment Process

         Angel investments—or equity investments by individuals into high-risk ventures—is an

among the oldest of human commercial activities, dating back at least as far as the investment

agreements recorded in the Code of Hammurabi circa 1790 B.C. For most of American

economic history, angels represented the primary way in which entrepreneurs obtained high-risk

capital for start-up businesses (e.g., Lamoreaux, Levenstein and Sokoloff, 2004), whether

directly through individuals or through the offices that managed the wealth of high net worth

individuals beginning in the last decades of the nineteenth century. Wealthy families such as the

Phippses, Rockefellers, Vanderbilts, and Whitneys invested in and advised a variety of business

enterprises, including the predecessor entities to AT&T, Eastern Airlines, McDonald-Douglas,

and W.R. Grace.



                                                6
          The first formal venture capital firm, however, was not established until after World War

II: American Research and Development (ARD) was formed by MIT President Karl Compton,

Harvard Business School Professor Georges F. Doriot, and Boston business leaders in 1946.

Over time, a number of the family offices transformed as well into stand-alone venture firms,

including such groups as Bessemer, Venrock, and J.H. Whitney.

          While angel investors have a long history, angel investment groups are a quite recent

phenomenon. Beginning in the mid 1990s, angels began forming groups to collectively evaluate

and invest in entrepreneurial ventures. These groups are seen as having several advantages by the

angels. First, angels can pool their capital to make larger investments than they could otherwise.

Second, each angel can invest smaller amounts in individual ventures, allowing participation in

more opportunities and diversification of investment risks. They can also undertake costly due

diligence of prospective investments as a group, reducing the burdens for individual members.

Fourth, these groups are generally more visible to entrepreneurs and thus receive a superior deal

flow. Finally, the groups frequently include some of the most sophisticated and active angel

investors in the region, which results in superior decision-making.

          The Angel Capital Association (ACA) lists 300 American groups in its database. The

average ACA member angel group had 42 member angels and invested a total of $1.94 million

in 7.3 deals in 2007. Between 10,000 and 15,000 angels are believed to belong to angel groups in

the U.S.2

          Most groups follow a template that is more or less similar. Entrepreneurs typically begin

the process by submitting to the group an application that may also include a copy of their

business plan or executive summary. The firms, after an initial screening by the staff, are then



2
    Statistics are based on http://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/ (accessed February 15, 2010).
                                                  7
invited to give a short presentation to a small group of members, followed by a question-and-

answer session. Promising companies are then invited to present at a monthly meeting (often a

weekday breakfast or dinner). The presenting companies that generate the greatest interest then

enter a detailed due diligence process, although the extent to which due diligence and screening

leads or follows the formal presentation varies across groups. A small group of angel members

conduct this additional, intensive evaluation. If all goes well, this process results in an

investment one to three months after the presentation. Figure 1 provides a detailed template for

Tech Coast Angels (Sudek et al. 2008).



       2. Angel Group Data and Empirical Methodology

       This section jointly introduces our data and empirical methodology. The discussion is

organized around the two groups from which we have obtained large datasets. The unique

features of each investment group, their venture selection procedures, and their data records

require that we employ conceptually similar, but operationally different, techniques for

identifying group-specific discontinuities. We commence with Tech Coast Angels, the larger of

our two investment groups, and we devote extra time in this first data description to also convey

our empirical approach and the biases it is meant to address. We then describe our

complementary approach with CommonAngels and how we ultimately join the two groups

together to analyze their joint behavior.



       2.1. Tech Coast Angels

       Tech Coast Angels is a large angel investment group based in southern California. They

have over 300 angels in five chapters seeking high-growth investments in a variety of high-tech



                                               8
and low-tech industries. The group typically looks for funding opportunities of $1 million or less.

Additional details on this venture group are available at http://www.techcoastangels.com/.

       Tech Coast Angels kindly provided us with access to their database regarding prospective

ventures under explicit restrictions that the confidentiality of individual ventures and angels

remain secure. For our study, this database was exceptional in that it allowed us to fully observe

the deal flow of Tech Coast Angels. Our analysis considers ventures that approached Tech Coast

Angels between 2001 and 2006. We thus mainly build upon data records that existed in early

2007. At this time, there were over 2500 ventures in the database. The database is also

exceptional in that it has detailed information about many of the companies that are not funded

by Tech Coast Angels.

       We first document in Table 1 the distribution of interest from the angel investors across

the full set of potential deals. This description sets the stage for identifying a narrower group of

firms around a funding discontinuity that offers a better approach for evaluating the

consequences of angel financing. Table 2 then evaluates the ex ante comparability of deals

around the border, which is essential for the identification strategy.

       The central variable for the Tech Coast Angel analysis is a count of the number of angels

expressing interest in a given deal. This indication of interest does not represent a financial

commitment, but instead expresses a belief that the venture should be pursued further by the

group. The decision to invest ultimately depends upon a few angels taking the lead and

championing the deal. While this strength of conviction is unobserved, we can observe how

funding relates to obtaining a critical mass of interested angels.

       Table 1 documents the distribution of deals and angel interest levels. The first three

columns of Table 1 show 64% of ventures receive no interest at all. Moreover, 90% of all



                                                  9
ventures receive interest by fewer than ten angels. This narrowing funnel continues until the

highest bracket, where there are 44 firms that receive interest from 35 or more angels. The

maximum observed interest is 191 angels. This funnel shares many of the anecdotal traits of

venture funding—such as selecting a few worthy ventures out of thousands of business plans—

but it is exceptionally rare to have the interest level documented consistently throughout the

distribution and independent of actual funding outcomes.

       The shape of this funnel has several potential interpretations. It may reflect heterogeneity

in quality among companies that are being pitched to the angels. It could also reflect simple

industry differences across ventures. For example, the average software venture may receive

greater interest than a medical devices company if there are more angels within the group

involved in the software industry. There could also be an element of herding around ―hot deals‖.

But independent of what exactly drives this investment behavior of angels, we want to explore

whether there are discontinuities in interest levels such that small changes in angels expressing

interest among otherwise comparable deals results in material shifts in funding probability.

       The central idea behind this identification strategy is that angel interest in ventures does

not map one-to-one into quality differences across ventures, which we verify empirically below.

Instead, there is some randomness or noise in why some firms receive n votes and others receive

n+1. It is reasonable to believe that there are enough idiosyncrasies in the preferences and beliefs

of angels so that the interest count does not present a perfect ranking of the quality of the

underlying firms. Certainly, the 2% of ventures with 35 or more interested angels are not

comparable to the 64% of ventures with zero interest. But we will show that ventures with 18

votes and 22 votes are much more comparable, except that the latter group is much more likely

to be funded.



                                                10
       We thus need to demonstrate two pieces.         First, we need to identify where in the

distribution do small changes in interest level lead to a critical mass of angels, and thus a

substantial increase in funding probability. As Tech Coast Angels does not have explicit funding

rules that yield a mandated cut-off, we must identify from observed behavior where de facto

breaks exist. We then need to show that deals immediately above and below this threshold

appear similar at the time that they approached Tech Coast Angels.

       To investigate the first part, the last column of Table 1 documents the fraction of ventures

in each interest group that are ultimately funded by Tech Coast Angels. None of the ventures

with zero interest are funded, whereas over 40% of deals in the highest interest category are.

The rise in funding probability with interest level is monotonic with interest, excepting some

small fluctuations at high interest levels.

       There is a very stark jump in funding probability between interest levels of 15-19 angels

and 20-24 angels, where the funded share increases from 17% to 38%. This represents a distinct

and permanent shift in the relationship between funding and interest levels. We thus identify this

point as our discontinuity for Tech Coast Angels. In most of what follows, we discard deals that

are far away from this threshold, and instead look around the border. We specifically drop the

90% of deals with fewer than ten interested angels, and we drop the 44 deals with very high

interest levels. We designate our ―above border‖ group as those ventures with interest levels of

20-34; our ―below border‖ group is defined as ventures with 10-19 interest levels.

       Having identified from the data the border discontinuity, we now verify the second

requirement that ventures above and below the border look ex ante comparable except that they

received funding from Tech Coast Angels. This step is necessary to assert that we have identified

a quasi exogenous component to angel investing that is not merely reflecting underlying quality



                                               11
differences among the firms. Once established, a comparison of the outcomes of above border

versus below border ventures will provide a better estimate of the role of angel financing in

venture success as the quality differences inherent in the Table 1‘s distribution will be removed.

       Before assessing this comparability, we make two sample adjustments. First, to allow us

to later jointly analyze our two investment groups, we restrict the sample to ventures that

approached Tech Coast Angels in the 2001-2006 period. This restriction also allows us a

minimum horizon of four years for measuring outcomes. Second, we remove cases where the

funding opportunity is withdrawn from consideration by the venture itself. These withdrawn

deals are mainly due to ventures being funded by venture capital firms (i.e., the venture was

courting multiple financiers simultaneously). As these deals do not fit well into our conceptual

experiment of the benefits and costs of receiving or being denied angel funding, it is best to omit

them from the sample. Our final sample includes 87 firms from Tech Coast Angels, with 46

ventures being above the border and 41 below. 45 of the 87 ventures are funded by Tech Coast

Angels.

       Table 2 shows that the characteristics of ventures above and below the funding threshold

are very similar to one another ex ante. If our empirical approach is correct, the randomness in

how localized interest develops will result in the observable characteristic of firms immediately

above and below the threshold not being statistically different. Table 2 documents this

comparability across a number of venture characteristics. Columns 2 and 3 present the means of

the above border and below border groups, respectively. The fourth column tests for the equality

of the means, and the t-tests allow for unequal variance.

       The two border groups are very comparable in terms of venture traits, industries, and

venture stages. The first four rows show that basic characteristics like the amount of funding



                                                12
requested, the documents provided by the venture to the angels, and the firm‘s number of

managers and employees are not materially different for the firms above and below the

discontinuity. The same is true for industry composition and stage of the business (e.g., is the

firm in the idea stage, in its initial marketing and product development stage, or already revenue

generating). For all of these traits, the null hypothesis that the two groups are similar is not

rejected.

       While there are no observable differences in the characteristics of the ventures in the first

three panels, the fourth panel of Table 2 shows that there are significant differences in how

angels engage with ventures above and below the cut-off. With just a small adjustment in interest

levels, angels assemble many more documents regarding the venture (evidence of due diligence),

have more discussion points in their database about the opportunity, and ultimately are 60%

more likely to fund the venture. All of these differences are statistically significant.



       2.2. CommonAngels

       CommonAngels is the leading angel investment group in Boston, Massachusetts. They

have over 70 angels seeking high-growth investments in high-tech industries. The group

typically looks for funding opportunities between $500 thousand and $5 million. Additional

details on this venture group are available at http://www.commonangels.com.

       CommonAngels kindly provided us with access to their database regarding prospective

ventures under explicit restrictions that the confidentiality of individual ventures and angels

remain secure. The complete database for CommonAngels as of early 2007 contains over 2000

ventures. The funnel process is again such that a small fraction of ventures receive funding.




                                                 13
Unlike the Tech Coast Angels data, however, CommonAngels does not record interest for all

deals. We thus cannot explicitly construct a distribution similar to Table 1.

       CommonAngels does, however, conduct a paper-based poll of members following

pitches at its monthly breakfast meetings. Most importantly, attending angels give the venture an

overall score. Angels also provide comments about ventures and potential investments they

might make in the company. Figure 2 provides a recent evaluation sheet. We focus on the overall

score provided by angels for the venture as this metric is collected on a consistent basis

throughout the sample period.

       CommonAngels provided us with the original ballots for all pitches between 2001 and

2006. After dropping two poor quality records, our sample has 63 pitches in total. One potential

approach would be to order deals by the average interest levels of angels attending the pitch. We

find, however, that the information content in this measure is limited. Instead, the data strongly

suggest that the central funding discontinuity exists around the share of attending angels that

award a venture an extremely high score. During the six years covered, CommonAngels used

both a five and ten point scale. It is extremely rare that an angel awards a perfect score to a pitch.

The breaking point for funding instead exists around the share of attending angels that award the

pitch 90% or more of the maximum score (that is, 4.5 out of 5, 9 out of 10). This is close in spirit

to the dichotomous expression of interest in the Tech Coast Angels database.

       Some simple statistics describe the non-linear effect. Of the 63 pitches, 14 ventures

receive a 90% or above score from at least one angel; no deal receives such a score from more

than 40% of attending angels.          Of these 14 deals, 7 deals are ultimately funded by

CommonAngels. Of the 49 other deals, only 11 are funded. This stark discontinuity is not

present when looking at lower cut-offs for interest levels. For example, all but 12 ventures



                                                 14
receive at least one vote that is 80% of the maximum score (that is, 4 out of 5, 8 out of 10). There

is further no material difference in funding probability based upon receiving more or fewer 80%

votes. The same applies to lower cut-offs for interest levels.

       We restrict the sample to the 43 deals that have at least 20% of the attending angels

giving the presentation a score that is 80% of the maximum possible score or above. As a

specific example, a venture is retained after presenting to a breakfast meeting of 30 angels if at

least six of those angels score the venture as 8 out of 10 or higher. This step removes the weakest

presentations and ventures. We then define our border groups based upon the share of attending

angels that give the venture a score greater than or equal to 90% of the maximum possible score.

To continue our example, a venture is considered above border if it garners six or more angels

awarding the venture 9 out of 10 or better. A venture with only five angels at this extreme value

is classified as below border.

       While distinct, this procedure is conceptually very similar to the sample construction and

culling undertaken with the Tech Coast Angels data. We only drop 20 Common Angel pitches

that receive low scores, but that is because the selection into providing a formal pitch to the

group itself accomplishes much of the pruning. With Tech Coast Angels, we drop 90% of the

potential deals due to low interest levels. We implicitly do the same with CommonAngels by

focusing only on the 63 pitches out of over 2000 deals in the full database.

       Our formal empirical analyses jointly consider Tech Coast Angels and CommonAngels.

To facilitate this merger, we construct simple indicator variables for whether a venture is funded

or not. We likewise construct an indicator variable for above and below the border discontinuity.

We finally construct uniform industry measures across the groups. This pooling produces a

regression sample of 130 ventures.



                                                 15
       3. Outcome Data

       This section documents the data that we collect on venture outcomes. This is the most

significant challenge for this type of project as we seek comparable data for both funded and

unfunded ventures. In many cases, the prospective deals are small and recently formed, and may

not even be incorporated. We develop three broad outcomes: venture survival, venture growth

and performance as measured by web site traffic data, and subsequent financing events.



       3.1. Venture Survival

       Our simplest measure is firm survival as of January 2010. This survival date is a

minimum of four years after the potential funding event with the angel group. We develop this

measure through several data sources. We first directly contacted as many ventures as possible to

learn their current status. Second, we looked for evidence of the ventures‘ operations in the

CorpTech and VentureXpert databases. Finally, we examined every venture‘s web site if one

exists. Existence of a web site is not sufficient for being alive, as some ventures leave a web site

running after closing operations. We thus based our measurement on how recent various items

like press releases were.

       In several cases, ventures have been acquired prior to 2010. We coded whether the

venture was alive or not through a judgment of the size of the acquisition. Ventures are counted

as alive if the acquisition or merger was a successful exit that included major announcements or

large dollar amounts. If the event was termed an ―asset sale‖ or similar, we code the venture as

not having survived. The results below are robust to simply dropping these cases.




                                                16
       3.2. Venture Performance and Web Site Traffic

       Our second set of metrics quantify whether ventures are growing and performing better in

the period after the potential financing event. While we would ideally consider a range of

performance variables like employment, sales, and product introductions, obtaining data on

private, unfunded ventures is extremely challenging. A substantial number of these ventures do

not have employees, which limits their coverage even in comprehensive datasets like the Census

Bureau surveys. We are able to make traction, however, through web traffic records. To our

knowledge, this is the first time that this measure has been employed in an entrepreneurial

finance study.

       We collected web traffic data from www.alexa.com, one of the largest providers of this

type of information. Alexa collects its data primarily by tracking the browsing patterns of web

users who have installed the Alexa Toolbar, a piece of software that attaches itself onto a user‘s

Internet browser and records the user‘s web use in detail. According to the company, there are

currently millions of such users. The statistics are then extrapolated from this user subset to the

Internet population as a whole. The two ‗building block‘ pieces of information collected by the

toolbar are web reach and page views. Web reach is a measure of what percentage of the total

number of Internet users visit a website in question, and page views measures how many pages,

on average, they visit on that website. Multiple page views by the same user in the same day only

count as one entry in the data. The two usage variables are then combined to produce a variable

known as site rank, with the most visited sites like Yahoo and Google having lower ranks.

       We collected web traffic data in the summer of 2008 and January 2010. We identify 91 of

our 130 ventures in one of the two periods, and 58 ventures in both periods. The absolute level of

web traffic and its rank are very dependent upon the specific traits and business models of



                                                17
ventures. This is true even within broad industry groups as degrees of customer interaction vary.

Some venture groups may also wish to remain ―under the radar‖ for a few years until they are

ready for product launch or have obtained intellectual property protection for their work.

Moreover, the collection method by Alexa may introduce biases for certain venture types. We

thus consider the changes in web performance for the venture between the two periods. These

improvements or declines are more generally comparable across ventures.

          One variable simply compares the log ratio of the web rank in 2010 to that in 2008. This

variable is attractive in that it measures the magnitudes of improvements and declines in traffic.

A limitation, however, is that it is only defined for ventures whose web sites are active in both

periods. We thus also define a second outcome measure as an indicator variable for improved

venture performance on the web. If we observe the web ranks of a company in both 2008 and

2010, the indicator variable takes a value of one if the rank in 2010 is better than that in 2008. If

we only observe the company on the web in 2008, we deem its web performance to have

declined by 2010. Likewise, if we only observe a company in 2010, we deem its web

performance to have improved. This technique allows us to consider all 91 ventures for which

we observe web traffic at some point, while sacrificing the granularity of the other measure.



          3.3. Subsequent Financing Events

          Our final measures describe whether the venture received subsequent financing external

to the angel group. We define this measure through data collected from CorpTech and

VentureXpert, cross-checked with as many ventures directly as possible. We consider a simply

indicator variable for a subsequent, external financing and a count of the number of financing

rounds.



                                                 18
       4. Results

       This section documents our empirical results. We first more closely examine the

relationship between border investments and angel funding. We then compare the subsequent

outcomes of funded ventures with non-funded ventures; we likewise compare above border

ventures with those below the discontinuity.



       4.1. Border Discontinuities and Angel Funding

       Table 3 formally tests that there is a significant discontinuity in funding around the

thresholds for the ventures considered by Tech Coast Angels and CommonAngels. The

dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm received funding and zero

otherwise. The primary explanatory variable is an indicator variable for the venture being above

or below the interest discontinuity.

       Column 1 controls for angel group fixed effects, year fixed effects, and industry fixed

effects. Year fixed effects are for the year that the venture approached the angel group. These

regressions combine data from the two angel groups. Across these two groups, we have 130

deals that are evenly distributed above and below the discontinuity. We find that there is a

statistically and economically significant relationship between funding likelihood and being

above the border: being above the border increases funding likelihood by about 33%. Clearly,

the border line designation is not an identity or perfect rule, but it does signify a very strong shift

in funding probability among ventures that are ex ante comparable as shown in Table 2.

       Column 2 shows similar results when we add year*angel group fixed effects. These

fixed effects control for the secular trends of each angel group. The funding jump also holds for



                                                  19
each angel group individually. Column 3 repeats the regression controlling for deal

characteristics like firm size and number of employees at the time of the pitch. The sample size

shrinks to 87 as we only have this information for Tech Coast Angel deals. But despite the

smaller sample size, we still find a significant difference in funding probability. The magnitude

of the effect is comparable to the full sample at 29%. Unreported regressions find a group-

specific elasticity for CommonAngels of 0.45 (0.21). These patterns further hold in a variety of

unreported robustness checks. These results suggest that the identified discontinuities provide a

reasonable identification strategy.



        4.2. The Impact of Funding on Firm Outcomes

        We now look at the relationship between funding and firm outcomes. In the first column

of Table 4, we regress a dummy variable for whether the venture was alive in 2010 on the

indicator for whether the firm received funding from the angel group. We control for angel

group, year, and industry fixed effects. The coefficient on indicator variable is 0.27 and is

statistically significant at the 1% level. Firms that received angel funding are 27% more likely to

survive for at least 4 years.

        Columns 2 through 5 repeat this regression specification for the other outcomes variables.

Funded companies show improvements in web traffic performance. Funded ventures are 16%

more likely to have improved performance, but this estimate is not precisely measured. On the

other hand, our intensive measure of firm performance, the log ratio of web site ranks, finds a

more powerful effect. Funded ventures show on average 39% stronger improvements in web

rank than unfunded ventures.




                                                20
       Finally, we estimate whether angel funding promotes future funding opportunities. We

only look at venture funding external to the angel group in question. Column 4 finds a very large

effect: angel funding increases the likelihood of subsequent venture investment by 44%. This

relationship is very precisely measured. Column 5 also shows a positive relationship to a count

of additional venture rounds. Funded firms have about 3.8 more follow-on funding rounds than

those firms that did not get angel funding in the first place.

       Of course, we cannot tell from this analysis whether angel-backed companies pursue

different growth or investment strategies and thus have to rely on more external funding.

Alternatively, the powerful relationships could reflect a supply effect where angel group

investors and board members provide networks, connections, and introductions that help

ventures access additional funding. We return this issue below after viewing our border

discontinuity results.



       4.3. The Role of Sample Construction

       The results in Table 4 suggest an important association between angel funding and

venture performance. In describing our data and empirical methodology, we noted several ways

that our analysis differed from a standard regression. We first consider only ventures that

approach our angel investors, rather than attempting to draw similar firms from the full

population of business activity to compare to funded ventures. This step helps ensure ex ante

comparable treatment and control groups in that all the ventures are seeking funding. Second, we

substantially narrow even this distribution of prospective deals (illustrated in Table 1) until we

have a group of funded and unfunded companies that are ex ante comparable (show in Table 2).




                                                  21
This removes heterogeneous quality in the ventures that approach the angel investors. Finally,

we introduce the border discontinuity to bring exogenous variation in funding outcomes.

       Before proceeding to the border discontinuity, it is useful to gauge how much the second

step— narrowing the sample of ventures to remove quality differences inherent in the selection

funnel—influences our regression estimates. Table 5 presents this analysis for one outcome

variable and the Tech Coast Angels data. We are restricted to only one outcome variable by the

intense effort to build any outcomes data for unfunded ventures. The likelihood of receiving

subsequent venture funding is the easiest variable to extend to the full sample.

       The first column repeats a modified, univariate form of Column 4 in Table 4 with just the

Tech Coast Angels sample. The elasticities are very similar. The second column expands the

sample to include 2385 potential ventures in the Tech Coast Angels database. The elasticity

increases 25% to 0.56. The difference in elasticities between the two columns demonstrates the

role of sample construction in assessing angel funding and venture performance. The narrower

sample provides a more comparable control group. Our rough estimate of the bias due to not

controlling for heterogeneous quality is thus about a quarter of the true association.



       4.4. Border Discontinuities and Firm Outcomes

       Table 6 considers venture outcomes and the border discontinuity. Even with eliminating

observable heterogeneity through sample selection, the results in Table 4 are still subject to the

criticism that ventures are endogenously funded. Omitted variables may also be present. Looking

above and below the funding discontinuity helps us to evaluate whether the ventures that looked

ex ante comparable, except in their probability of being funded, are now performing differently.




                                                 22
This test provides a measure of exogeneity to the relationship between angel financing and

venture success.

        Table 6 has the same format as Table 5; the only difference is that the explanatory

variable is the indicator variable for being above the funding border. The results are similar in

direction and magnitude for the first three outcomes, although the coefficients in Tables 5 and 6

are not directly comparable in a strict sense. Being above the border is associated with stronger

chances for survival and better operating performance as measured by web site traffic. This

comparability indicates that endogeneity in funding choices and omitted variable biases are not

driving these associations for the impact of angel financing.

        On the other hand, the last two columns show no relationship between being above the

border discontinuity and improved funding prospects in later years. Our experiment thus does not

confirm that angel financing leads to improved future investment flows to portfolio companies.

This may indicate the least squares association between current financing and future financing

reflects the investment and growth strategies of the financiers, but that this path is not necessary

for venture success as measured by our outcome variables. This interpretation, however, should

be treated with caution as we are not able to measure a number of outcomes that would be of

interest (e.g., the ultimate value of the venture at exit).



        5. Conclusions and Interpretations

        The results of this study, and our border analysis in particular, suggest that angel

investments improve entrepreneurial success. By looking above and below the discontinuity in a

restricted sample, we remove the most worrisome endogeneity problems and the sorting between

ventures and investors. We find that the localized increases in interest by angels at break points,



                                                   23
which are clearly linked to obtaining critical mass for funding, are associated with discrete jumps

in future outcomes like survival and stronger web traffic performance.

       Our evidence regarding the role of angel funding for access to future venture financing is

more mixed. The latter result could suggest that start-up firms during that time period had a

number of funding options and thus could go to other financiers when turned down by our

respective angel groups. Angel funding per se was not central in whether the firm obtained

follow-on financing at a later point. However, angel funding by one of the groups in our sample

does positively affect the long run survival and web traffic of the start-ups. We do not want to

push this asymmetry too far, but one might speculate that access to capital per se is not the most

important value added that angel groups bring. Our results suggest that some of the ―softer‖

features, such as their mentoring or business contacts, may help new ventures the most.

       Overall we find that the interest levels of angels at the stages of the initial presentation

and due diligence are predictive of investment success. However, additional screening and

evaluation do not substantially improve the selection and composition of the portfolio further.

These findings suggest that the selection and screening process is efficient at sorting proposals

into approximate bins: complete losers, potential winners, and so on. The process has natural

limitations, however, in further differentiating among the potential winners (e.g., Kerr and

Nanda, 2009).

       At the same time, this paper has important limitations. Our experiment does not allow us

to identify the costs to ventures of angel group support (e.g., Hsu, 2004), as equity positions in

the counterfactual, unfunded ventures are not defined. We thus cannot evaluate whether taking

the money was worth it from the entrepreneur‘s perspective after these costs are considered. On a

similar note, we have looked at just a few of the many angel investment groups that are active in



                                                24
the US. Our groups are professionally organized and managed, and it is important for future

research to examine a broader distribution of investment groups and their impact for venture

success. This project demonstrates that angel investments are important and also offer an

empirical foothold for analyzing many important questions in entrepreneurial finance




                                              25
References

Admati, A., and Pfleiderer, P. 1994. Robust financial contracting and the role for venture
      capitalists. Journal of Finance 49, 371–402.

Berglöf, E. 1994. A control theory of venture capital finance. Journal of Law, Economics, and
       Organizations 10, 247–67.

Bergemann, D., and Hege, U. 1998. Venture capital financing, moral hazard, and learning.
      Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 703-35.

Chemmanur, T., Krishnan, K., and Nandy, D. 2009. How does venture capital financing improve
     efficiency in private firms? a look beneath the surface. Unpublished working paper, Center
     for Economic Studies.

Cherenko, S., and Sunderam, A. 2009. The real consequences of market segmentation. Unpublished
      working paper, Harvard University.

Cornelli, F., and Yosha, O. 2003. Stage financing and the role of convertible debt. Review of
       Economic Studies 70, 1–32.

Goldfarb, B., Hoberg, G., Kirsch, D., and Triantis, A. 2007. Are angels preferred series a investors?
       Unpublished working paper, University of Maryland.

Hellmann, T. 1998. The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts. RAND Journal of
      Economics 29, 57–76.

Hellmann, T., and Puri, M. 2000. The interaction between product market and financing strategy:
      the role of venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 13, 959–84.

Hsu, D. 2004. What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation? Journal of Finance 59,
       1805–44.

Kaplan, S., and Strömberg, P. 2004. Characteristics, contracts, and actions: evidence from
       venture capitalist analyses. Journal of Finance 59, 2177–210.

Kaplan, S., Sensoy, B., and Strömberg, P. 2009. Should investors bet on the jockey or the horse?
       evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies.
       Journal of Finance 64, 75–115.

Kerr, W., and Nanda, R. 2009. Democratizing entry: banking deregulations, financing constraints,
       and entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics 94, 124–49.

Kortum, S., and Lerner, J. 2000. Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation.
      RAND Journal of Economics 31, 674–92.



                                                 26
Lamoreaux, N., Levenstein, M., and Sokoloff, K. 2004. Financing invention during the second
      industrial revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920. Working paper no. 10923, National
      Bureau of Economic Research.

Lee, D., and Lemieux, T. 2009. Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Working paper
       no. 14723, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mollica, M., and Zingales, L. 2007. The impact of venture capital on innovation and the creation
       of new businesses. Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.

Puri, M., and Zarutskie, R. 2008. On the lifecycle dynamics of venture-capital- and non-venture-
       capital-financed firms. Unpublished working paper, Center for Economic Studies.

Rauh, J. 2006. Investment and financing constraints: evidence from the funding of corporate
       pension plans. Journal of Finance 61, 31–71.

Samila, S., and Sorenson, O. 2010. Venture capital, entrepreneurship and economic growth.
       Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Shane, S. 2008. The importance of angel investing in financing the growth of entrepreneurial
       ventures. Unpublished working paper, U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of
       Advocacy.

Sorensen, M. 2007. How smart is the smart money? a two-sided matching model of venture
       capital. Journal of Finance 62, 2725–62.

Sudek, R., Mitteness, C., and Baucus, M. 2008. Betting on the horse or the jockey: the impact of
       expertise on angel investing. Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings.




                                              27
Figure 1: Tech Coast Angels Investment Process




                                          28
Figure 2: CommonAngels Pitch Evaluation Sheet




                                        29
                Table 1: Angel group selection funnel
   Angel group             Number of            Cumulative            Share funded
   interest level           ventures          share of ventures      by angel group

         0                    1640                   64%                  0.000
        1-4                    537                   84%                  0.007
        5-9                    135                   90%                  0.037
       10-14                    75                   93%                  0.120
       15-19                    52                   95%                  0.173
       20-24                    42                   96%                  0.381
       25-29                    33                   97%                  0.303
       30-34                    21                   98%                  0.286
        35+                     44                  100%                  0.409
Notes: Table documents the selection funnel for Tech Coast Angels. The vast majority of
ventures proposed to Tech Coast Angels receive very little interest, with 90% of plans
obtaining the interest of fewer than ten angels. A small fraction of ventures obtain
extremely high interest levels with a maximum of 191 angels expressing interest. We
identify an interest level of 20 angels as our border discontinuity. Our "below border"
group consists of ventures receiving 10-19 interested angels. Our "above border" group
consists of ventures receiving 20-34 interested angels.
        Table 2: Comparison of groups above and below border discontinuity
         Traits of ventures above and                  Above border            Below border           Two-tailed t-test
         below border discontinuity                      ventures                ventures           for equality of means

Basic characteristics
Financing sought ($ thousands)                              1573                    1083                     0.277
Documents from company                                       3.0                     2.5                     0.600
Management team size                                         5.8                     5.4                     0.264
Employee count                                              13.4                    11.2                     0.609
Primary industry (%)
Biopharma and healthcare                                     23.9                    29.3                    0.579
Computers, electronics, and measurement                      15.2                    17.1                    0.817
Internet and e-commerce                                      39.1                    39.0                    0.992
Other industries                                             21.7                    14.6                    0.395
Company stage (%)
Good idea                                                     2.2                     2.4                    0.936
Initial marketing and product development                    34.8                    46.3                    0.279
Revenue generating                                           63.0                    51.2                    0.272
Angel group decisions
Documents by angel members                                   10.5                     5.1                    0.004
Discussion items by angel members                            12.0                     6.7                    0.002
Share funded                                                 63.0                    39.0                    0.025
Notes: Table demonstrates the ex ante comparability of ventures above and below the border discontinuity. Columns 2
and 3 present the means of the above border and below border groups, respectively. The fourth column tests for the
equality of the means, and the t-tests allow for unequal variance. The first three panels show that the two groups are very
comparable in terms of venture traits, industries, and venture stage. The first row tests equality for log value of financing
sought. For none of these ex ante traits are the groups statistically different from each other. The two groups differ
remarkably, however, in the likelihood of receiving funding. This is shown in the fourth panel. Comparisons of the
subsequent performance of these two groups thus offers a better estimate of the role of angel financing in venture success
as the quality heterogeneity of ventures inherent in the full distribution of Table 1 is removed.
           Table 3: Border discontinuity and venture funding by angel groups
                                                          (0,1) indicator variable for being funded by angel group
                                                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being                     0.328                 0.324                  0.292
above the funding border discontinuity                        (0.089)               (0.094)                (0.110)

Angel group, year, and industry fixed effects                   Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Year x angel group fixed effects                                                      Yes
Additional controls                                                                                          Yes
Observations                                                    130                   130                    87
Notes: Regressions employ linear probability models to quantify the funding discontinuity in the border region. Both Tech
Coast Angels and CommonAngels data are employed excepting Column 3. Additional controls in Column 3 include stage
of company and employment levels fixed effects. A strong, robust increase in funding probability of about 30% exists for
ventures just above the border discontinuity compared to those below. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                Table 4: Analysis of angel group financing and venture performance
                                                        (0,1) indicator         (0,1) indicator         Log ratio of         (0,1) indicator             Count
                                                         variable for            variable for         2010 web rank            variable for          of subsequent
                                                        venture being           improved web           to 2008 rank          receiving later       venture financing
                                                       alive in January        rank from 2008        (negative values       funding external        rounds external
                                                             2010                   to 2010         are improvements)        to angel group          to angel group
                                                              (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)                    (5)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture                         0.276                  0.162                  -0.389                 0.438                  3.894
funding being received from angel group                     (0.082)                (0.107)                (0.212)                (0.083)                (1.229)

Angel group, year, and industry fixed effects                 Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Observations                                                  130                    91                     58                     130                    130
Notes: Linear regressions quantify the relationship between funding and venture outcomes. Both Tech Coast Angels and CommonAngels data for 2001-2006 are
employed in all regressions. Differences in sample sizes across columns are due to the availability of outcome variables. The first column tests whether the venture is
alive in 2010. The second and third columns test for improved venture performance through web site traffic data from 2008 to 2010. Column 2 is an indicator variable
for improved performance, while Column 3 gives log ratios of web traffic (a negative value indicates better performance). The last two columns test whether the
venture received subsequent financing outside of the angel group by 2010. Across all of these outcomes, funding by an angel group is associated with stronger
subsequent venture performance. Robust standard errors are reported.
               Table 5: Border samples versus full samples
      Outcome variable is (0,1) indicator               Simple TCA              Full TCA
      variable for receiving later funding               univariate             univariate
            external to angel group                   regression with        regression with
          (see Column 4 of Table 4)                    border sample        complete sample
                                                             (1)                    (2)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture                        0.432                  0.562
funding being received from angel group                    (0.095)                (0.054)

Observations                                                  87                   2385
Notes: Linear regressions quantify the role of sample construction in the relationship between
funding and venture outcomes. Column 1 repeats a modified, univariate form of the Column 4 in
Table 4 with just the Tech Coast Angels sample. Column 2 expands the sample to include all of
the potential ventures in the Tech Coast Angels database, similar to Table 1. The difference in
elasticities between the two columns demonstrates the role of sample construction in assessing
angel funding and venture performance. The narrower sample provides a more comparable
control group. Robust standard errors are reported.
                                Table 6: Analysis of border discontinuity and venture performance
                                                       (0,1) indicator        (0,1) indicator         Log ratio of         (0,1) indicator            Count
                                                        variable for           variable for         2010 web rank            variable for         of subsequent
                                                       venture being          improved web           to 2008 rank          receiving later      venture financing
                                                      alive in January       rank from 2008        (negative values       funding external       rounds external
                                                            2010                  to 2010         are improvements)        to angel group         to angel group
                                                             (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)                   (5)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being                  0.229                  0.232                  -0.382                0.106                  -0.318
above the funding border discontinuity                     (0.094)                (0.120)                (0.249)               (0.100)                (1.160)

Angel group, year, and industry fixed effects                Yes                    Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Observations                                                 130                    91                     58                    130                    130
Notes: See Table 4. Linear regressions quantify the relationship between the border discontinuity and venture outcomes. Companies above the border are more likely
to be alive in 2010 and have improved web performance relative to companies below the border. These results are similar to the funding relationships in Table 4. The
border discontinuity in the last two columns, however, is not associated with increased subsequent financing events.
