NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO POWERFUL POLITICIANS CAUSE CORPORATE DOWNSIZING?
Lauren Cohen
Joshua D. Coval
Christopher Malloy
Working Paper 15839
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15839

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

We would like to thank Stephen Ansolabehere, Malcolm Baker, Utpal Bhattacharya, Bo Becker, Dan
Bergstresser, John Campbell, Jon Carmel, John Cochrane, Randy Cohen, Shawn Cole, Jess Cornaggia,
Stefano DellaVigna, Ray Fisman, Fritz Foley, Ken Froot, Eitan Goldman, David Goldreich, Rick Green,
Chris Leach, Thomas Philippon, Julio Rotemberg, Al Roth, Rick Ruback, Huntley Schaller, Chester
Spatt, Erik Stafford, Jeremy Stein, Anjan Thakor, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Eric Zitzewitz, and seminar
participants at Colorado, Georgia Tech, Harvard Business School, Indiana, Michigan, Penn State,
Rotterdam, Singapore Management University, Texas, Tilburg, Toronto, UCLA, the NBER Political
Economy Meeting, the Washington University Corporate Finance Conference, the UBC Summer Finance
Conference, the Financial Research Association (FRA) Conference, and the Utah Winter Finance Conference
for helpful comments and discussions. We also thank David Kim for excellent research assistance.
We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Lauren Cohen, Joshua D. Coval, and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Powerful Politicians Cause Corporate Downsizing?
Lauren Cohen, Joshua D. Coval, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 15839
March 2010
JEL No. E13,E62,G31
ABSTRACT
This paper employs a new empirical approach for identifying the impact of government spending on
the private sector. Our key innovation is to use changes in congressional committee chairmanship
as a source of exogenous variation in state-level federal expenditures. In doing so, we show that fiscal
spending shocks appear to significantly dampen corporate sector investment and employment activity.
These corporate reactions follow both Senate and House committee chair changes, are present among
large and small firms and within large and small states, are partially reversed when the congressman
resigns, and are most pronounced among geographically-concentrated firms. The effects are economically
meaningful and the mechanism - entirely distinct from the more traditional interest rate and tax channels
- suggests new considerations in assessing the impact of government spending on private sector economic
activity.

Lauren Cohen
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu
Joshua D. Coval
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jcoval@hbs.edu

Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 277
Boston, MA 02163
cmalloy@hbs.edu

Does public sector spending complement or crowd out private sector economic activity?
This question, which has occupied economists for much of the past century, remains a
critical, and unresolved issue. Keynesian and neoclassical macroeconomic theories reach
strong and generally conflicting conclusions regarding the ability of public spending to
stimulate the private sector. A major obstacle limiting empirical progress on the topic is
the difficulty in identifying changes to government purchases that are truly exogenous.
Because government behavior is influenced by developments in the private economy,
changes in private sector investment and productivity confound the effects of government
spending and the factors that cause that spending to change.
This paper offers a novel empirical approach that allows us to overcome this
challenge and shed considerable light on the impact of government spending on the
private sector.

Our key innovation is to use changes in congressional committee

chairmanship as a source of exogenous variation in state-level federal expenditures. Since
chairmanship is determined almost entirely by seniority — to be appointed chair a
congressman must simply become the most senior member of the party in power on that
committee1 — this means that chair turnover can only result from the resignation (or
defeat) of the incumbent, or a change in the party controlling that branch of congress.
And because both of these events depend almost entirely on political circumstances in

other states, ascension to chairmanship is essentially unrelated to events or conditions in
the new chairman’s home state (e.g., a congressman will often not even be up for election
during the year of his or her ascension). We show that becoming a powerful committee
chair results in a significant increase in federal funds flowing to the ascending chairman’s
state. Thus, a congressman’s ascension to a powerful committee chair creates a positive
shock to his or her state’s share of federal funds that is virtually independent of the
state’s economic conditions.
We focus specifically on the 232 instances over the last 42 years where the
senator or representative of a particular state ascends to the chairmanship of a powerful
congressional committee.

During the year that follows the appointment, the state

1

This use of seniority-based chairmanship has been a governing practice in both houses of Congress for
over 100 years. In recent years there have been occasional deviations from this rule (see Deering and
Wahlbeck (2006)), but our results are very similar if we exclude these exceptions, or if we use changes in
the identity of the most-senior committee member in place of changes in committee chairmanship.
Powerful Politicians — Page 3

experiences an increase of 40-50 percent in their share of federal earmark spending, and a
9-10 percent increase in total state-level government transfers.

The funding increase

persists throughout the chair’s tenure and is gradually reversed upon his departure.
Because these spending shocks are sufficiently numerous, are spread out across time and
different locations, and are economically meaningful, they provide us with significant
power to examine the impact of fiscal policy on the private sector.2
To better understand our approach, consider the example of the appointment of
Richard Shelby (Republican Senator, AL) to the chair of the Senate Select Intelligence
Committee in 1997. Senator Shelby had been both a congressman in the US House of
Representatives and Senate as a Democrat from Alabama. He switched affiliations in
1994, and the combination of his seniority and affiliation with majority party afforded
him the opportunity to take the chair of the Committee. Following his appointment to
this committee chairmanship, Alabama (a state which had no top committee chairmen3
appointed in over 20 years) experienced a marked increase in its share of federal
earmarks. This is represented in Figure I, which compares Alabama’s annual earmarks to
those in the rest of the United States.

Although earmark spending increased

substantially in the US during this period, Alabama experienced roughly twice the
average growth of all other states following Shelby’s appointment.

Specifically, while

Alabama averaged 6 million dollars less in annual earmarks than the average of other US
states before Shelby’s appointment, they averaged over 90 million dollars more than other
states after his appointment.
At this time, Homes Inc. was a large manufacturer of lower-cost fabricated homes
headquartered in northern Alabama.4

When Richard Shelby ascended to the

chairmanship in 1997 and earmarks to Alabama increased, Homes Inc. significantly
decreased its capital expenditures and employee base during the ensuing years.

2

A

In describing the impact of his Senate seniority on his home state of Pennsylvania, Arlen Specter recently
remarked: "My senior position on appropriations has enabled me to bring a lot of jobs and a lot of federal
funding to this state. Pennsylvania has a big interest in my seniority, a big interest."
3
We use several measures of top committees throughout the paper. Here, we refer to our most broad
category. The list of the top 10 most influential committees is from Edwards and Stewart (2006); for the
Senate these committees are Finance, Veterans Affairs, Appropriations, Rules, Armed Services, Foreign
Relations, Intelligence, Judiciary, Budget, and Commerce.
4
We have masked the name of this firm, although this is an actual example from our sample.
Powerful Politicians — Page 4

comparison of Homes Inc. to the rest of its industry outside of Alabama5 reveals that
while Homes Inc. significantly reduced its capital expenditures from this pre-appointment
period, the rest of its industry in fact increased its rate of capital accumulation (-79.5%
vs. 16.6% as a percentage of assets).

Further, while the industry reduced its rate of

employment growth only modestly from the pre-appointment period, Homes Inc.’s
curtailment in employment was much more substantial (-30.2% vs. -7.9%). Lastly, while
Homes Inc. saw a large and significant drop in sales, the rest of the industry remained
approximately flat (-38.2% vs. -3.1%).

As a more tangible example of the possible

mechanism, in the post-appointment period over $15 million in earmarks went specifically
to the construction of housing and facilities for lower income families (which are a direct
competitor to the prefabricated homes produced by Homes Inc.), contrasted with only
$500,000 over the entire pre-appointment period.
We show that the events in this example represent a much more systematic
pattern across the universe of U.S. firms. To do so, we investigate the private sector
consequences of seniority shocks by studying the behavior of the public corporations
headquartered in the congressman’s state.

Focusing on the investment (capital

expenditure), employment, R&D, and payout decisions of these firms, we find strong and
widespread evidence of corporate retrenchment in response to government spending
shocks. In the year that follows a congressman’s ascendency, the average firm in his state
cuts back capital expenditures by roughly 15%.

These firms also significantly reduce

R&D expenditures and increase payouts to their investors. The magnitude of this private
sector response is nontrivial: in the median state (which receives roughly $200 million per
year in increased earmarks and federal transfers as a result of a seniority shock), capex
and R&D reductions total $39 million and $34 million per year, respectively, while
payout increases total $21 million per year. These changes in firm behavior persist
throughout the chairmanship and begin to reverse after the congressman relinquishes the
chairmanship. We also find some evidence that firms scale back their employment, and
experience a decline in sales growth.
To explore the robustness of these findings, we verify that the patterns hold up
under a wide variety of conditions and specifications. We employ panel regressions using
5

Industry is defined as 1-digit SIC Code, which is 2 for Homes Inc.’s industry.
Powerful Politicians — Page 5

state and time fixed effects and a range of controls.

We also conduct state-level

regressions, averaging coefficients across states, and other non-parametric tests, verifying
that a powerful committee chair has a statistically and economically large impact on the
decisions of firms in their state.
We also examine a variety of other predictions of how spending is likely to impact
private sector firms. In particular, we find that our results are mainly found in firms
with geographically concentrated operations (e.g., domestic only firms) — firms that are
likely to have more operations in the headquarter state, as well as firms with high
capacity utilization (i.e., those with little slack in their capital stock). Also, consistent
with Keynes’ view that crowding out should only occur under conditions of full
employment, we find a weaker firm response to spending shocks when state-level
employment is at or below its long-term historical average.
A unique feature of our approach is that we can rule out the standard interest rate
channel as an explanation for how government spending crowds out private sector
investment. Since our mechanism entails simply shifting the same government spending
from the former chairman’s state to the new chairman’s state, no new government funds
are implied; as a result, no increased taxation or increased borrowing costs are required.
In addition, we conduct cross-state comparisons, thus abstracting from all national level
effects.

Thus, our approach identifies a distinct and alternative mechanism by which

government spending deters corporate investment.

In particular, we provide evidence

that crowding out occurs through factors of production including the labor market and
fixed industrial assets. These findings argue that tax and interest rate channels, while
obviously important, may not account for all or even most of the costs imposed by
government spending. Even in a setting in which government spending is “free” — that
is, does not need to be financed with additional taxes or borrowing — its distortionary
consequences may be nontrivial.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a brief
background and literature review. Section II describes the data we use, while Sections III
and IV explore our findings on the effects of seniority on congressional spending, and
firms’ responses to these seniority shocks in their respective states. Section V provides a
more detailed discussion of these findings. Section VI concludes.

Powerful Politicians — Page 6

I. Background and literature review
There is a large empirical literature investigating the impact of government
spending on consumption, investment, and output variables. The standard approach in
this literature is to apply a VAR methodology to macroeconomic data in order to identify
shocks to government spending.6 Most of these studies focus on quarterly post-war data
in the U.S., which places a heavy burden on the econometrics to uncover the relationship
from a limited time series of highly persistent variables. Although some studies consider
international panel data, variation in economic size and openness, labor market rigidities,
and other considerations limit the amount of additional power these data add.7

The

literature has also pursued some alternative strategies to isolate changes in government
spending that are truly exogenous.

For instance, several studies focus on periods of

significant expansion in US defense spending (the so-called “Ramey-Shapiro episodes”) to
examine the impact of spending shocks.8 Because defense spending is viewed to be largely
independent of domestic macroeconomic considerations, major changes therein offer
opportunities to examine exogenous spending shocks. Unfortunately, the occurrence of
large and unambiguous shocks to government defense spending is somewhat rare, which
restricts the power of these tests.9 An advantage of our approach is that we are able to
examine numerous exogenous shocks to state-level federal expenditures over an extended
period of time and to quantify their impact on the behavior of US public corporations.
There is also a literature comprised of mostly empirical studies examining how
political representation translates to government expenditures.

These studies include

Atlas et al. (1995), Hoover and Pecorino (2005), Crain and Tollison (1977, 1981), Goss
(1972), Greene and Munley (1980), Kiel and McKenzie (1983), Ray (1980, 1981), Ritt
(1976), Rundquist (1978), and Rundquist and Griffiths (1976).

Atlas et al. (1995) and

Hoover and Pecorino (2005) document a positive relationship between per capita
6

See, for example, Rotemberg and Woodford (1992), Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Fatás and Mihov
(2001), Mountford and Uhlig (2002), Perotti (2005), Pappa (2005), Caldara and Kamps (2006), and Galí,
López-Salido, and Vallés (2007), Ramey (2008).
7
See Giavazzi and Pagano (1990).
8
See Ramey and Shapiro (1998), Edelberg, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (1999), Burnside, Eichenbaum, and
Fisher (2004), and Cavallo (2005)).
9
Cullen and Fishback (2006) document significant county-level variation in WWII spending increases and
use this to examine the impact of government spending on longer-term private sector economic activity.
Powerful Politicians — Page 7

representation in the Senate and state-level federal expenditures but find only limited
evidence with respect to House representation.

Levitt and Poterba (1999) also find

somewhat mixed evidence linking congressional seniority to federal spending; they do,
however, find that senior Democratic members of the House were able to use their
positions to improve their state’s economic performance.

Lastly, Aghion et al. (2009)

show that representation on appropriations committees has an effect on education
expenditures to states, finding support for some of these expenditures translating into
future growth.10 Taken as a whole, the literature finds only modest linkages between the
nature of congressional representation and the distribution of congressional spending.
Using novel data on government discretionary earmark spending, our paper adds new
evidence to this literature by showing that changes in congressional committee
chairmanship can have a significant influence on government spending outcomes.

II. Data
The data in this study are collected and coded from several sources.

For the

majority of sources, we hand-collect, -code, and -match the data to combine the sources
for our analysis. To start, we obtain congressional earmark data from Citizens Against
Government Waste, which collects earmark data by state starting in 1991. An earmark
is defined as a line item in an appropriations bill that designates tax dollars for a specific
purpose in circumvention of established budgetary procedures.

While some of the

earmarks are state designated, many are not, and so we read through and hand-match
over 24,000 of these undesignated earmarks to the specific designated state. In addition,
for earmarks designated to more than one state, we split the amounts equally among the
designated states. For instance, one $200,000 earmark had no specific state designation,
but was simply listed as designated for the "Sokaogon Chippewa Community," to
"investigate impacts of a mine."

As this is a band of the Lake Superior Chippewa

residing in Wisconsin, we match this earmark back to Wisconsin.

In addition, an

example of a multi-state designated earmark is a $5,500,000 earmark labeled: "Dalles

10

Other papers that have used instruments for state-level government spending include Knight (2002 and
2005) who uses transportation committee membership, and Anderson and Tollison (1991) and Gruber and
Hungerman (2007), who use the tenure of appropriations committee members.
Powerful Politicians — Page 8

Powerhouse (Units 1-14), WA & OR (Corps of Engineers - Construction, General)",
which we split equally at $2,750,000 to both of the affected states, WA and OR.
In addition to the earmark data, we also collect data on broader categories of
government expenditures. We obtain these from the annual survey of state and local
government finances conducted by the US Census Bureau and reported on their website,11
with the data starting in 1992, broken down at the state level. These transfers include
highway and parks funding, agricultural funds, and other payments distributed to
states.12 In addition to this transfer data, we collect state-level population and square
mileage figures from the Census Bureau.
Lastly, we use data on congressional committees from Stewart and Woon (2009)
and Nelson (2005),13 and link politicians (by state) to firms using the headquarters of all
firms listed on Compustat.14 Congressional committee data is available for the 80th to
110th Congresses (corresponding to the time period 1947-2009), which allows us to match
politicians to firms as far back as accurate Compustat accounting information is
available.15

From Compustat, we extract a host of firm-specific accounting variables,

such as capital expenditures, research and development (R&D) expenditures, total
payouts (equal to cash dividends plus repurchases), and number of employees.
We define seniority shocks by assigning a dummy variable equal to 1 if the senator
(or representative) of a given state first becomes chairman of an influential congressional
committee. The list of the 10 most influential committees is from Edwards and Stewart
(2006); for the Senate these committees are Finance, Veterans Affairs, Appropriations,
Rules, Armed Services, Foreign Relations, Intelligence, Judiciary, Budget, and Commerce,
and for the House these committees are Ways and Means, Appropriations, Energy and
Commerce, Rules, International Relations, Armed Services, Intelligence, Judiciary,
11

http://www.census.gov/govs/www/estimate.html.
In our tests using this transfer data, we exclude category B79, which consists of nondiscretionary
spending on public welfare items, e.g., Medicaid.
13
This data is available online on Charles Stewart’s website:
http://web.mit.edu/17.251/www/data_page.html.
14
Compustat’s firm headquarters variable is backfilled, so that firms that have moved are miscoded
historically; however, the incidence of firm headquarters relocation is extremely rare, and we have corrected
the obvious errors.
15
For members of the House of Representatives, note that we are unable to historically match all firms to
individual congressional districts, since mappings between zipcodes and congressional districts are only
available from the 103rd Congress onwards; thus we map both senators and representatives to their home
states.
12

Powerful Politicians — Page 9

Homeland Security, and Transportation and Infrastructure. We categorize shocks into
various groups based on the committee rankings; for example, Shock Top1ChairOnly
means the senator (representative) was appointed chairman of the top-ranked Senate
Finance Committee (the House Ways and Means Committee).

We also construct an

alternative shock definition that includes both the chairman and the ranking minority
member (i.e., the most senior committee member who is a member of the party not
currently in control of that House of congress), so that Shock Top1Chair&Rank is equal
to 1 if a senator becomes either chairman or the ranking minority member of the
committee, when he/she was previously not in either position in the prior Congress. In
our baseline specification, we code seniority shocks as starting in the year of appointment,
and apply them for 6 years (term of a senator), although we vary this timing in a number
of robustness checks.16

III. Results

A. Congressional Spending and Seniority
Our main sample focuses on the behavior of 16,734 firms over the past 42 years
(1967-2008).

Summary statistics are reported in Table I.

In addition to our main

dependent and control variables, Panel A reports the fraction of firm-year observations
that occur in a state represented by a congressman who has been appointed chair (or has
become the ranking minority member) of a powerful congressional committee within the
past six years.

We consider separately observations represented by a congressman

chairing a Senate committee and chairing a House committee. We use the Edwards and
Stewart (2006) ranking of committees to identify the most powerful committees (outlined
in Section II) and report the fraction of firm-year observations from the top 1, 3, 5, and
10 most powerful Senate committees as well as the top 1 and 3 most powerful House
committees.
Table I indicates that, depending on how many committees are included, between
3.0% and 19.6% of the firm-year observations are headquartered in states represented by

16

We apply these shocks only to firms alive in the initial year of the shock, but we have also run all of the
tests in the paper with shocks applied to all firms alive at any point during the full shock period and the
results are very similar to those reported here.
Powerful Politicians — Page 10

a senator that has recently become chairman (or ranking minority member). We also
report the fraction of firm-year observations in states where the senator stepped down
from the chair within the past six years. The last six rows of Panel A also examine
shocks to the most powerful House committees. For the House shocks, we see that a
relatively greater fraction of firm-year observations occur in states represented by a
House committee chair. This reflects the fact that larger states, which have larger House
congressional delegations, are more likely to find one of their representatives chairing a
powerful House committee.

This also suggests that our House and Senate shocks are

occurring in a relatively non-overlapping set of firm-year observations.
More generally, an advantageous aspect of our data and identification is that
House and Senate committee chair shocks occur, in large part, in different states (and
years). Thus, each chamber’s shocks can be seen as independent testing samples for the
effect of these government spending shocks on firm behavior. This state-shock difference
is seen more clearly in the last two columns of Table II.
We also report state-level variables in Panel B of Table I. Since we only have
earmark data from 1991 through 2008, the main variables are reported for this 18-year
period.

Average annual earmarks are $116 million per state, with the median state

receiving $72 million in a given year. Panel C of Table I reports the average number of
years that each chairman (or ranking member) remains in his position, for all Top 10
committees. In the Senate, the average chair tenure is 7.6 years (median of 6, max of
24), and in the House, the average chair tenure is 6.3 (median 6, max of 24); these figures
suggest that firms are unlikely to view these seniority shocks as temporary events that
might induce firms to simply shift capital or labor investments out a few years into the
future, but rather as a long-term shock. For instance, it is unlikely that a firm could
convince workers to take (in expectation) a seven-year furlow; thus the reductions we see
are likely not short-run shifts in allocations over time.
Table II confirms that most states have, at some point in the past 42 years, had
one of its senators or representatives chairing a powerful committee. And while earmark
spending lines up somewhat well with population, a number of low-population states
appear surprisingly high on the list.

To see this more closely, in Figure II we plot

earmarks against state population. The expected positive relationship is confirmed but

Powerful Politicians — Page 11

the figure also reveals a number of significant positive outliers in terms of earmarks, the
largest of which are Hawaii, Alaska, Mississippi, West Virginia, and Alabama: All states
which had powerful congressional chairmen over our sample period.
In Table III, we report the results of regressions that seek to explain variation in
annual state-level earmarks with changes in congressional committee chairmanship. We
include state and year fixed effects in each regression, and standard errors are clustered
at the state level.17 The analysis reveals a strong relationship between seniority shocks
and earmark spending. A state whose senator is appointed chair of one of the three most
powerful committees receives roughly a 40-50% increase in earmark spending.

For

instance, the coefficient on ShockTop1ChairOnly in Column 2 indicates that having a top
committee chair increases that state’s earmarks over the subsequent six years by 44.6%
(t=8.77) per year. From Table I, the average (median) annual earmarks per state are
$116 million ($72 million), so this implies a $51 million ($32 million) increase in earmarks
per year to a state upon having its senator appointed chairman of the Senate Finance
Committee (most powerful Senate committee). In Column 2, we add a series of controls,
including (the log of) state-level population, the state-level average of (log) per capita
income over the past 6 years, and lagged values of state level (log) per capita income
growth and state-level unemployment rates. Including these controls leaves the results
unchanged.
As we broaden the set of powerful committees, the effect gets weaker but remains
large and statistically significant (for the Top 10 committees, the increase is 22.4%
(t=2.49)).

The same holds true as we include ranking minority members (e.g.

Chair&Rank vs. ChairOnly). To the extent that these senators are less powerful than
those chairing one of the very top committees, we might expect a decline in their ability
to deliver earmark spending to their state.

However, even in these Chair&Rank

measures, the effect remains large and statistically significant. In unreported tests we
also find evidence that earmark spending declines upon the departure of a committee
chair, with states represented by a senator who relinquishes one of the top committees
17

Also, we have run these tests clustering standard errors by state-shock period, rather than just state.
Since our analysis exploits variation within state, clustering by state is conservative. Clustering by stateshock period produces smaller standard errors (and so larger t-stats), for instance the full specification
Column 2’s t-stat is 9.07 (vs. 8.77 with the currently reported clustering by state), and so we report the
more conservative measure.
Powerful Politicians — Page 12

experiencing a 20-30% decline in their earmarks.18

B. Seniority and Corporate Retrenchment
We have shown: i.) that there is considerable variation in earmark spending across
states, and ii.) that having a powerful congressional committee chairman appointed from
one’s state has a strong influence on this spending. We now turn to the impact of this
spending on corporate behavior.

Specifically, we investigate whether exogenous

government spending shocks — as instrumented by congressional seniority shocks — have a
material influence on corporate behavior. We examine a number of corporate investment
decisions including capital expenditure, R&D expenditure, payout, and employment
decisions.

We regress each of these firm-level dependent variables on the state-level

seniority shocks as well as a number of firm-level controls.

We consider separately

positive and negative shocks to seniority as well as shocks to the seniority of Senate and
House members.
Our first analysis focuses on the capital expenditure decision of firms.

The

motivation behind this test is that the federal transfer itself may structurally substitute
for private capital investment. An often cited example of this is the Tennessee Valley
Authority’s (TVA) construction of electricity plants along the Tennessee Valley in the
1930’s. Private enterprises that had planned expansion and provision of service of this
same region were forced to decrease investment and to downsize employees. For instance,
the nation’s largest electric utility holding company entering into the depression,
Commonwealth and Southern Corporation, was unable to compete with the TVA in the
Tennessee Valley and as a result was forced to decrease investment there, and to
eventually dispose of properties in the Tennessee Valley, selling them directly to the TVA
for $78.6 million in 1939 (Barnard (1966) and Manchester (1974)).
The regressions in Table IV regress capital expenditures, measured as firm capex
scaled by (lagged) firm assets, on Senate seniority shocks and a number of control
variables. This represents a reduced form estimation using our instrument of shocks to
senior chairmanship. We explore in the next section (and in Table V) a two stage least
18

For instance, following the drop of a chair or ranking member of a Top 3 committee, earmarks are cut
back by 33.3% (t=1.72).
Powerful Politicians — Page 13

squares estimation (regressing earmarks on seniority in the first stage) that yields the
instrumented value of government transfers, along with falsification tests for the
instrument itself. The regressions in Table IV include firm and year fixed effects, and
standard errors are clustered at the state and year level.
From Columns 1-7 of Table IV, seniority shocks result in economically and
statistically significant declines in firm capital expenditures.
seniority, the declines are large and highly significant.

Across all measures of

For instance, again looking at

ShockTop1ChairOnly, the coefficient implies a 1.2% drop in scaled capital expenditures
(t=3.46). Since firms have average capital expenditures of 8 percent of assets, Senate
chairmanship causes a roughly 15 percent reduction in the representative firm’s capex.19
Including controls in Columns 2-7 has only a modest effect on the magnitude of shocks,
and all are still statistically significant. In line with the earmarks results in Table III is
the fact that chairmen of more powerful committees have a larger impact on firm capex
as well. Lastly, from Columns 8 and 9, again consistent with the reduction in earmarks
following the relinquishing of chairmanship, following replacement of the chairman firms
in the state partially restore their capex spending, increasing it by 0.6 to 0.7 percent of
assets which represents around 8 percent of the average firm’s capital expenditures.
In Panel A of Table V, we repeat the capital expenditure analysis with House
seniority shocks.

The results are statistically strong but slightly smaller in economic

magnitude. Depending on the specification, capital expenditures decline between 0.1 - 0.6
percent. This corresponds to (again for ShockTop1ChairOnly, now corresponding to the
House Ways and Means Committee) a 7 percent reduction the representative firm’s
capex.

The more modest effect might be expected as House members may be more

interested in directing funds towards their particular district (as opposed to their state in
general). Thus, firms headquartered in other districts within their state may be less
impacted by state-level federal spending increases that result from seniority shocks in the
House, as opposed to those from the Senate. In Columns 8 and 9, we again see firms
increasing their capex after their congressman relinquishes his or her chairmanship.

19

Further, as we demonstrate later in Table V Panel B, when we split the sample into above- and belowmedian sized firms, both groups of firms respond significantly to seniority shocks, and the estimated
coefficients are similar, suggesting that our results are not limited to small firms.
Powerful Politicians — Page 14

C. Instrument of Committee Chairman Shocks
The fact that government behavior is affected by private sector economic activity
makes it difficult to identify the effects of government spending from the factors that
cause that government spending to change. As disentangling this is the key to gaining
insight into the impact of government spending on private sector activity, some kind of
exogenous variation in government spending is needed. As noted above, the instrument
we use is the appointment to powerful committee chairmanship in the Senate and House.
Our choice is motivated by the fact that one’s appointment to committee chairmanship is
based almost entirely on seniority within the chamber (see Polsby et al. (1969)).20 Thus,
the only way for a congressman to be appointed the chairman of a committee is for the
current chairman to relinquish the chairmanship: either through that chairman’s election
defeat, resignation, death, or through the chairman losing party-control of that chamber
of Congress. Since all of these events depend largely on political circumstances or events
in other states, a congressman’s ascension to a powerful committee chair creates a
positive shock to his or her state’s share of federal funds that is virtually independent of
his or her state’s economic conditions.

We have shown in Table III that this shock

results in economically large and significant government spending transfers to the new
chairman’s state.
In the absence of an instrument, the direction of the expected corporate response is
unclear; the government may choose to send money to struggling areas, populated by
firms with relatively poor investment opportunities, or the government may try to
maximize spending-impact by sending capital to regions with especially good investment
opportunities. To illustrate this endogeneity between government spending and private
sector economic activity, and the problems this can cause for identification, in Column 1
of Table V Panel B we simply regress earmark spending on scaled capital expenditures.
20

As mentioned in Footnote 1, the seniority system has been the prevailing determinant of committee
chairmanships since the early days of Congress in both chambers. Although occasional deviations from
seniority-based chairmanship do appear in the data (see Deering and Wahlbeck (2006) for a discussion), our
results are very similar if we use changes in the identity of the most-senior committee member in place of
changes in committee chairmanship. For example, the coefficient in column 3 of Table IV (=-0.008,
t=2.94, using changes in chairmanship) is virtually identical (=-0.008, t=3.11) when we instead use changes
in the identity of the most-senior committee member to define our shocks. This fact holds true across all
shock variables, and across all outcome variables (i.e., earmarks, capex, R&D, payouts, employment
changes, and sales growth).
Powerful Politicians — Page 15

From Column 1, the regression exhibits no relationship, with the coefficient on earmarks
being small and statistically zero (t=0.55).

However, when we use the instrumented

value in Column 2, which consists solely of the portion of earmarks that is related to
seniority shocks (the first stage is given in Table III), the strong negative relationship
returns.

Here we use the Top3ChairOnly as the measure of powerful committee, so

comparing this to the corresponding Column 4 in Table IV, we see that the IV estimate
here of -1.2% decline (t=2.26) is roughly double the magnitude of even the reduced form
estimate (-0.6%) albeit over a shorter time period. Thus these results in Columns 1 and
2 of Table V Panel B suggest that a significant portion of the variation in earmark
spending is, indeed, determined endogenously in the context of corporate investment
behavior, and breaking this endogeneity is critical to making the correct inference of the
impact of government spending on firm behavior.
Even though we obtain stronger results in magnitude when we use the
instrumented values for earmark spending (Table V Panel B, Column 2), we use the
reduced form shocks for most of the tests performed in the paper. The reason we prefer
these is that we have data on the shocks going back to the late 1940’s, as opposed to only
1991 for the earmark data, so we get a richer period of time and events (more changes in
committee seniority and chairmanship, more investment decisions by firms, etc.) to
examine the relationship between government spending and the behavior of firms.
In Column 3 of Panel B, we also perform a falsification test on our instrument.
Instead of using the actual shocks to senior powerful committee chairmanship, we create
a variable called Random Shocks, which takes the entire matrix of state-years, and
assigns purely random committee chair "shocks" using a random number generator.21 We
then regress these random state-year shocks on scaled capital expenditures, to make sure
we are not identifying random variation. From Column 3, the coefficient is basically zero
(-0.00% (t=0.57)).

This result suggests that the identification being captured by our

powerful committee chair shocks is not simply spurious variation.
In Columns 4 and 5, we repeat the basic capex regression used in Table IV, but

21

We keep the same measurement, allowing these shocks to persist for six years following the random
"shock to chairmanship." As with the real chair shocks, we have varied this length and it makes no
difference to these results. We report the six year length to make these comparable to the true shock
variables we report.
Powerful Politicians — Page 16

now on two different subsamples. In Column 4, we restrict our sample to only those
firms above the median in lagged market capitalization each year (computed from our
sample), in order to assess if our results are driven entirely by small firms. Column 4
reveals a large and significant effect of seniority shocks on the capex decisions of large
firms as well, with the coefficient of similar magnitude to the full sample result (-0.005 vs.
-0.006 for the full sample from Table IV Column 5).

Lastly, we again run the same

specification from Table IV Column 5, but this time on a subsample of the Senate shocks
that excludes those seniority shocks where the prior chairman lost an election or
primary.22 Column 5 of Table V indicates that this filter has no effect on our results, as
the magnitude of the coefficient on the shock variable (=-0.006, t=3.44) is identical to
the coefficient reported in Table IV Column 5 (=-0.006, t=3.57).

D. Research and Development Investments and Payouts
We next examine other firm behaviors that may be affected by a firm facing a
different investment set following a government spending shock. Specifically we look at
both R&D spending and payout decisions of firms. We present these results in Table VI
with firm-level R&D in Panel A, and payout decisions in Panel B, with both scaled by
lagged assets (as in the capital expenditure tests). Again we include firm level controls,
in addition to firm and year fixed effects.

Consistent with firm capital expenditure

behavior from Sections B and C, Panel A of Table VI illustrates that seniority shocks
result in material reductions in R&D investment.

Specifically, looking at House and

Senate shocks,23 from Columns 1 and 7, Senate and House seniority shocks results in a
reduction in R&D spending of between 0.5-0.9% (t=2.64 and 3.31) per firm. Since the
average firm R&D is 7.3 percent of assets, the impact is non-trivial in economic terms (a
roughly 7-12 percent scaling back of R&D). We again find corroborating evidence that
upon the departure of the committee chair, R&D spending is restored.
22

Our sample consists of 232 seniority shocks to a Top 10 committee chair or ranking minority seat, 115
from the Senate and 117 from the House. More than half of these Top 10 shocks were due to the death or
resignation of the prior chairman, and only 17 of these shocks in the Senate (and 19 in the House) involve a
lost election by the prior chair or ranking member.
23
For brevity here, we only report Top1 and Top3 committee shocks. The results for other measures, as in
Tables IV, are both stronger for ChairOnly, and gradually weaken as we allow in relatively less powerful
committees, which is also consistent with the estimated impacts on earmark appropriations from the
relative power of the different committee chairmanships.
Powerful Politicians — Page 17

Panel B then examines the effect on payout decisions. If public firms are crowding
out the investment opportunity sets of firms, we might expect firms to respond to this
reduced investment opportunity set by (investing less and) paying more out to
shareholders. This is precisely what we see in Panel B of Table VI. Following a seniority
shock, we see payouts significantly increasing. Column 1 reveals that payouts increase
after seniority shocks by 0.3% (t=4.15); for our firms, payout averages 2.3 percent of
assets, so this represents a 13% increase in payouts. The results are similar after House
shocks (with the effect ranging between 0.1-0.3%). We also find some evidence that this
effect again appears to reverse following the congressman’s departure (e.g., the coefficient
on Drop_Top1ChairOnly is -0.001, t=1.71).

E. Firm Level Employment and Valuation Consequences
In our next set of tests, we examine the impact of shocks to congressional seniority
on firm-level employment.

The same reasoning behind retrenchment in corporate

investment behavior applies to the labor decisions of firms. Any downsizing of firms may
involve scaling back both investments in labor and capital. Also, as the government may
compete for skilled (and perhaps specialized) labor, this may reduce the labor pool for the
private sector.
We test this prediction of the impact of seniority shocks on firm-level employment
growth in Panel A of Table VII. Panel A illustrates a modest effect of seniority shocks
on firm-level changes in the number of employees. In Columns 1-3 the sign is always
negative for Senate shocks (and also for the rest of the unreported shocks), but the effect
is only significant for Shock_Top3Chair&Rank (=-0.011, t=2.41).

House seniority

shocks have a consistently negative and significant effect on firm-level changes in
employment. The magnitudes of the coefficients ranges between -0.6% to -2.7%, implying
that corporations scale down their employment growth rates by 3-15%. For both the
House and the Senate, Columns 7 and 8 demonstrate that the effects are stronger in the
second half of the sample period (1990-2008): the coefficients on Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
during this period are -0.024 (t=3.12) and -0.017 (t=2.41), respectively.
Although our evidence thus far identifies corporate retrenchment in response to
federal spending shocks, the valuation consequences of these shocks for public
Powerful Politicians — Page 18

corporations remains somewhat ambiguous. In particular, it is conceivable that, although
firms cut capex, R&D, and to a lesser extent employment (and meanwhile increase
payouts to shareholders), the federal spending shocks generate spillovers from which they
benefit.

Typically, endogeneity concerns compel researchers to study the valuation

consequences of such shocks by examining share price responses.

Unfortunately, such

event-study market price tests lose power rapidly in settings where the event window is
necessarily wide because the precise timing of the event is poorly known. Our setting
likely requires a window on the order of several months to a year, because spending
shocks are revealed gradually as the probability of a given congressman’s ascension
evolves with changes in polling data about election outcomes and factors influencing
incumbent retirement.
An alternative is to examine accounting measures directly. Because of our reliance
on a clean instrument for federal spending shocks, we can directly infer the causal effect
of increased government spending on accounting measures of corporate welfare. In Panel
B of Table VII, we present regressions of sales growth on our seniority shocks.24 The
results suggest that a seniority shock causes firm sales growth to retract 0.9 to 5.4
percent per year during the subsequent six years relative to non-shocked firms and
periods. However, these results are only statistically significant for the House shocks and
for the Senate Shock_Top3Chair&Rank specification; thus we interpret these results as
less strong, yet still suggestive evidence of possible negative valuation consequences for
the public firms that operate out of states that are recipients of federal government
transfers. As with the employment results, the negative impact on sales growth is more
pronounced in the second half of the sample: the coefficients on Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
for the House and Senate during the 1990-2008 period are -0.039 (t=3.46) and -0.026
(t=2.72), respectively.

24

We have run similar tests where we replace sales growth in these regressions with return on assets (a
measure of profitability), and find generally negative (but insignificant) effects of seniority shocks on
profitability.
Powerful Politicians — Page 19

IV. Mechanism and Robustness

A. Federal Transfers and Factor Slack
In this section we begin to explore the mechanism at work behind our results. We
start by examining whether our results apply to broader measures of state-level federal
spending. Specifically, Column 1 of Table VIII uses data from the US Census Bureau’s
annual survey of state and local government finances. We use annual federal transfers to
state governments from 1992-2007 on the left-hand side of these regressions in place of
the annual earmarks employed previously in Table III. These transfers, which include
highway and parks funding, agricultural funds, etc., average roughly $3 billion per year
per state.

Although the measure is noisier and likely contains elements of non-

discretionary federal spending, we do explicitly exclude category B79, which consists of
obvious non-discretionary spending on public welfare items (e.g., Medicaid). Using this
transfer measure, we find similar results to those with earmark spending. In particular, a
seniority shock results in a 9.4% (t=2.85) increase in total federal transfers to the state.
Since the average (median) state receives $3 billion ($1.8 billion), this translates to an
increase of roughly $280 million ($172 million) per year in federal transfers.
In addition to examining broader measures of spending, we also explore the
particular firms for which (and conditions under which) we might expect state-level
increases in federal spending to have a more pronounced effect on corporate investment.
Specifically, we test whether firms with high capacity utilization (implying a relatively
small amount of slack private capital) are those for whom spending shocks have larger
effects on corporate investment, as competition from the public sector may have a more
pronounced effect on firms for whom facilities and specialized capital are already in high
demand. We use a capacity utilization measure collected by the US Federal Reserve for
industries in manufacturing, mining, and electric and gas utilities. The measure, which is
available on their website,25 captures each industry’s seasonally-adjusted output level
relative to its maximum sustainable level of output. The latter value, which is measured
at the plant level, is the maximum level of output the plant can achieve under a
reasonable work schedule and with sufficient availability of inputs to operate the capital

25

http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/G17/About.htm
Powerful Politicians — Page 20

in place. We then regress firm-level scaled capital expenditures on the seniority shock as
well as an indicator variable that identifies firms operating at a time when their
industry’s capacity utilization is at or below the median capacity utilization across all
firms in a given year (Low Util).
The regression in Column 2 of Table VIII confirms the basic negative relation
between seniority and capital expenditures, but the interaction term between shock and
low capacity utilization is positive. This suggests the crowding out of private investment
is particularly pronounced in industries operating at a high level of capacity where
competition for additional factors of production including facilities and specialized capital
is expected to be strong (and conversely, that where capacity utilization is low (i.e., when

Low Util equals 1), there is a smaller effect of the shocks).
We then explore if the government’s hiring of skilled labor may be especially
harmful to private firms when there is scarce employable labor (a notion of full
employment), while conversely, with slack in the labor market, government hiring shocks
may have an attenuated effect. To investigate whether the crowding out of corporate
employment is particularly pronounced when unemployment is low, we split seniority
shocks into those that occur when the state’s unemployment rate is above its long-run
average and those that occur when it is below. As Table VIII reports (in Column 3), the
coefficient on firms in states with low unemployment is -0.016. For firms in states with
high unemployment, the coefficient is 0.024 larger, which is sufficient to reverse the effect
entirely (even considering the main effect of High Unemployment itself). This result can
be interpreted as providing evidence consistent with the view that government stimulus
crowds out private sector employment when the economy has little slack in the labor
market, but does not when the economy is experiencing significant slack in the labor
market.

B. Who Benefits?
Our results demonstrate that the average firm retrenches in the face of
government spending shocks, but it is certainly possible (and perhaps likely) that some
individual firms do in fact benefit from these spending shocks. The incidence of lobbying
by firms certainly suggests that firms perceive some possible benefits from currying favor
Powerful Politicians — Page 21

with politicians (see Roberts (1990), Jayachandran (2006), Goldman et al. (2007, 2008),
Faccio (2006), Faccio et al. (2006), Faccio and Parsley (2006), Fisman (2001), and
Fisman et al. (2007) for evidence linking politicians and political connections to firm
benefits). While we have much less power to detect benefits to individual firms using our
approach (which relies on state-level seniority shocks that apply to all firms in a given
state), we do provide some indirect evidence in this section that certain specific firms that
we can identify as having received valuable contracts from the government are less likely
to retrench in the face of seniority shocks.
To do this we exploit firm-level data on government procurement contracts. Our
data consists of 2.1 million contracts with a total value of over $1.4 trillion awarded to
1560 publicly-firms over the period 1984-2008, provided by the company Eagle Eye.
Specifically, in Column 4 of Table VIII we re-run our baseline capex regressions from
Table IV, but now also interact the seniority shock variable (Shock_Top1ChairOnly)
with a dummy for whether or not the firm in question received a government
procurement contract at some point earlier in our sample.

The magnitude of this

interaction term (=0.009, t=3.12) is equally large (but of opposite sign) as the main
effect on the shock variable (=-0.010, t=6.27), suggesting that firms that have received
government procurement contracts do not cut back in response to government spending
shocks.

C. Robustness and Additional Tests
Our final tests examine the robustness of our results, and provide a few ancillary
tests of our findings. Our first robustness test is to examine whether the results hold up
when we consider each state separately in our regressions and then evaluate the average
coefficients produced. This approach effectively treats all observations in a given state as
a single observation. To the extent that our results thus far are driven disproportionately
by the firms of a few large states, this specification will severely limit their ability to
impact our results. Also, to the extent that a large amount of correlation exists within
states in the investment, R&D, payout, and employment decisions, this specification will
conservatively consider these decisions to be effectively perfectly correlated with one
another. Thus we are sacrificing a large amount of power to get an alternate (quite strict
Powerful Politicians — Page 22

and conservative) estimate of our effects.
In Panel A of Table IX, we report the cross-sectional average of the state
regression coefficients and the associated test statistic against a null that the average
coefficient is zero. Specifically, we run the exact same firm-level regressions as in Tables
IV-VII, but run them each fifty separate times, once for each state (similar to a FamaMacBeth approach); we then report the cross-sectional average of the fifty shock
coefficients from the state-level regressions. Overall, the results are remarkably similar to
those reported earlier.

Seniority shocks lead to a 2.6 percent decline in capex, a 0.3

percent decline in R&D, a 9.1 percent decline in employment growth, a 13.0 percent
decline in sales growth, and a 0.4 percent increase in total payouts. Considering that we
include any of the top 10 committees in this specification in order to maximize the
number of states affected by a shock, the economic magnitudes here are generally larger
when states are treated as single observations. A non-parametric test that asks whether
the fraction of states with coefficients of the predicted sign is significantly different from
0.5 is rejected at the one percent level for four of the five dependent variables.
In Panel B of Table IX we test an additional implication of the mechanism of
government spending crowding out private sector economic activity.

Specifically, the

effect of government spending shocks on firm behavior should be larger for those firms
with concentrated operations; i.e., firms that cannot shift investment out of state, and
that have more difficulty accessing inter-state capital, land, and labor markets. We use
the Compustat Segment Database to identify the various geographic segments of firms.
Unfortunately, the segment database only lists segment location data at the country level
(as opposed to state), so we proxy for geographic concentration of firms with those that
do not (versus those that do) have international operations. We see that our results —
especially the capex and employment reactions — are more pronounced among domesticonly firms.26

Thus, firms with more limited ability to shift their operations to other

countries or states are more compelled to reduce their capex and employment in response
to government spending shocks.
26

We find similar results in panel regressions that include an interaction effect designed to measure the
impact of shocks on only those firms with domestic operations, and controlling for firm size, and firm fixed
and year fixed effects. For brevity, the results shown here (and in Panel C below) only employ the
Shock_Top3Chair&Rank variable, but the findings in both panels are similar regardless of the shock
variable used.
Powerful Politicians — Page 23

Finally, in Panel C we report the timing of corporate responses to seniority shocks.
For capex, R&D, and payout, the adjustment is rapid and permanent. The adjustment
that occurs during the year following the shock captures most of the long-run effect. On
the other hand, the employment adjustment appears more gradual, with virtually none of
the long-run adjustment occurring during the first year. This suggests that firms can
retrench on the investment front more easily than labor. The final two columns compare
the regression coefficients for our main dependent variables of interest prior to and
following the shock, but only for the subset of firms that are shocked during the sample
period. The penultimate column reports the coefficients produced if the shock variable
(Shock_Top3Chair&Rank) is turned on for the six years following the appointment, as in
Tables III-VII, while the last column reports the coefficients when the variable is turned
on during the six years preceding the appointment. The shock coefficients are similar to
those reported earlier, while the pre-shock coefficients are all insignificant and essentially
zero in magnitude.

Thus we find no evidence that firms anticipate and prepare for

changes in committee chairmanship.

V. Discussion
The central finding of this paper is that positive shocks to the seniority of a state’s
congressional delegation cause large and persistent increases in government allocated
funding to the states, and significant retrenchment on the part of the corporations
headquartered in the state. This retrenchment appears to be a response to the large and
persistent increase in federal funding that the state receives following the shock.
Following the appointment of a senator to the chair of a powerful committee, we estimate
that his state experiences, on average, a 40-50 percent increase in its share of
congressional earmark spending, and a 9-10 percent increase in its share of total statelevel government transfers. At the same time, firms residing in the state cut their capital
expenditures by 8-15 percent, reduce R&D by 7-12 percent, and increase payout by 4-13
percent.

Employment and sales growth are also impacted, as corporations scale back

employment growth by 3-15%, and sales growth falls by up to 15%.
We focus on firm-level responses, rather than state-level measures of economic
activity such as GDP or employment, since firm-level capital and R&D expenditures,
Powerful Politicians — Page 24

payout decisions, and employment changes can be accurately measured in over 16,000
publicly-traded firms over a 42-year time period. Our approach thus produces a panel
with substantial time-series and cross-sectional variation in relatively stationary
dependent variables that delivers ample power--even when standard errors are adjusted to
allow for correlation across firms or time--to accurately assess the impact of spending
shocks.
A key feature of our results is that they show up under a variety of specifications,
many of which offer essentially independent tests of the main result. First, firm responses
to seniority shocks in the Senate are confirmed when we look at those in the House
instead. This test gets its power from the fact that the House and Senate shocks are
nearly a non-overlapping set of state-year shocks.

Second, we find evidence that this

behavior is partially reversed when the congressman relinquishes the chairmanship.
Third, our coefficients are essentially identical whether we include state or time fixedeffects or when we include other regressors known to account for variation in firm
spending, payout, and employment decisions. Finally, and perhaps most powerfully, our
results show up when we simply take cross-state averages of within-state time-series
regression coefficients. Taken together, these results suggest a link between congressional
seniority shocks and corporate behavior that is not confined to particular points in time
or driven by observations in a handful of states.
Our findings also include a number of results that corroborate the link between
congressional spending and corporate retrenchment. First, the link grows weaker as we
broaden our definition of what constitutes a powerful committee. The results are also
generally weaker (in economic terms) in the House than the Senate, which one would
predict given the fact that a congressional representative may have less impact on federal
spending directed towards other districts within his state.

Relatedly, we show that

congressional spending has less impact on firms with more geographically diversified
operations. Since these firms are more geographically disperse, they are less affected by
spending shocks that are confined to the state of their headquarters.
The magnitude of this private sector response is nontrivial. For the period over
which we have earmark and federal transfer data (1992-2008), the median state receives
$34 million in earmarks plus $172 million in transfers as a result of a seniority shock.

Powerful Politicians — Page 25

Meanwhile, over this same time period, capex and R&D reductions in the median state
total $39 million and $34 million per year, respectively, while payout increases total $21
million per year.27 Importantly, however, these calculations should not be interpreted as a
valid estimate of the fiscal multiplier, the computation of which is a task beyond the
scope of this paper, since they ignore the effect of government spending on private (nonpublicly-traded) firms as well as on household consumption, and they ignore the impact
of other types of spending (e.g., federal grants, defense spending, etc.--hence we do not
capture "total" spending).
Our results beg the question of what mechanism causes firms to respond so
negatively to state-level federal spending increases.

What is essentially a transfer of

funds from the residents of one state (i.e., the state of the relinquishing committee chair)
to another (i.e., the state of the ascending committee chair) causes retrenchment in the
corporations that serve and employ the residents of the recipient state. Since our results
focus on reallocations of federal spending rather than increases thereof, we can rule out
the standard interest rate and tax channels that have occupied the literature to this
point. Some of our results point towards the role of competition for state-specific factors
of production, including labor and fixed assets such as real estate.

Public spending

appears to increase demand for state-specific factors of production and thereby compel
firms to downsize and invest elsewhere. In particular, our capex results are weaker for
firms with low capacity utilization, and our employment results are weaker when
employment rates are at or below their long-term state-specific averages. When slack
exists in factories or the labor market, federal dollars do not appear to be as large of a
deterrent to corporations in terms of investing or hiring. In unreported results, we also
find evidence that the effects are most pronounced in sectors that are the target of
earmark spending. The ability of our results to speak to the net impact of national-level
spending shocks on national-level economic outcomes depends critically on whether states
are similar to national economies. To the extent that states are small open economies,
any “leakage” that blunts the impact of fiscal stimulus as firms shift investment to other
states may be unique to the state-level results and limit the conclusions one can draw
27

We compute these state-level figures by calculating the average difference in scaled capex (or scaled
R&D, or scaled payouts) between shocked and non-shocked firms in a given state over all firm-years, and
multiplying that difference by the average of the yearly state-level sums of lagged assets.
Powerful Politicians — Page 26

regarding fiscal policy in a large, national economy.
However, a key feature of our data is that firm-level figures reflect capex, R&D,
payout, employment, and sales growth aggregated across all operations of the firm,
including divisions located in other states. This means that our results are calculated net
of any within-firm shifts in resources and activity that occur in response to the spending
shock. Thus, our results are only subject to leakage that occurs when investors in firms
headquartered in the target state reallocate capital through their portfolios to other firms
located in other states. To the extent that portfolio capital has greater mobility across
states than across countries, the impact of fiscal stimulus may be weaker at the state
level than the national level.

VI. Conclusion
This paper provides a new empirical approach for identifying the impact of
government spending on the private sector. Using changes in congressional committee
chairmanship as a source of exogenous variation in state-level federal expenditures, we
find that fiscal spending shocks appear to significantly dampen corporate sector
investment activity.

Specifically, we find statistically and economically significant

evidence that firms respond to government spending shocks by: i.) reducing investments
in new capital, ii.) reducing investments in R&D, and iii.) paying out more to
shareholders in the face of this reduced investment opportunity set. Further, we find
that when the spending shocks reverse (through a relinquishing of chairmanship), most all
of these behaviors reverse. Finally, we also find some evidence that firms scale back their
employment, and experience a decline in sales growth.
Our findings demonstrate that new considerations — quite apart from the standard
interest rate and tax channels — may limit the stimulative capabilities of government
spending. Whether they are sufficient to lower the multiplier on fiscal stimulus in a large
economy such as the US remains an open but important question.

Powerful Politicians — Page 27

References
Aghion, Philippe, Leah Boustan, Caroline Hoxby, and Jerome Vandenbussche, 2009, The
Causal Impact of Education on Economic Growth: Evidence from the United
States, Working paper, Harvard University.
Anderson, Gary M., and Robert D. Tollison, 1991, Congressional influence and patterns
of New Deal spending, Journal of Law and Economics 34, 161-176.
Atlas, Cary, Thomas Gilligan, Robert Hendershott, and Mark Zupan, 1995, Slicing the
Federal Government Net Spending Pie: Who Wins, Who Loses, and Why,
American Economic Review 85, 624—629.
Barnard, Ellsworth (1966). Wendell Willkie: Fighter for Freedom. Marquette, MI:
Northern Michigan University Press.
Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti, 2002, An Empirical Characterization of the
Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1329-1368.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jonas Fisher, 2004, Fiscal Shocks and their
Consequences, Journal of Economic Theory 115, 89-117.
Caldara, Dario and Christophe Kamps, 2006, What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy
Shocks? A VAR-based Comparative Analysis, Working paper, ECB.
Carvalho, Daniel, 2009, Incentives to Create or Relocate? Firm Investment and Credit
Subsidies in an Emerging Market, Working paper, Harvard Universtiy.
Cavallo, Michele, 2005, Government Employment Expenditure and the Effects of Fiscal
Policy Shocks, Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Crain, Mark, and Robert Tollison, 1977, Influence of Representation on Public Policy,
Journal of Legal Studies 6, 355—361.
Crain, Mark, Robert Tollison, 1980, Representation and Influence: A Reply, Journal of
Legal Studies 10, 215—219.
Deering, Christopher J., and Paul J. Wahlbeck, 2006, Determinants of House Committee
Chair Selection: Republicans play musical chairs in the 107th Congress, American
Politics Research 34, 1-21.
Edelberg, Wendy, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jonas Fisher, 1999, Understanding the
Effects of a Shock to Government Purchases, Review of Economic Dynamics 2,
166-206.

Edwards, Keith, and Charles Stewart III, 2006, The Value of Committee Assignments in
Congress since 1994, MIT Working Paper.
Faccio, Mara, 2006, Politically connected firms, American Economic Review 96, 369-386.
Faccio, Mara, Ronald W. Masulis, John J. McConnell, 2006, Political connections and
corporate bailouts, Journal of Finance 61, 2597-2635.
Faccio, Mara, and David Parsley, 2006, Sudden death: Taking stock of political
connections, Working paper.
Fatas, Antonio, and Ilian Mihov, 2009, The Effects of Fiscal Policy on Consumption and
Employment: Theory and Evidence, Working paper, INSEAD.
Fisman, Raymond, 2001, Estimating the value of political connections, American
Economic Review 91, 1095-1102.
Fisman, David, Raymond Fisman, Julia Galef, and Rakesh Khurana, 2007, Estimating
the value of connections to Vice-President Cheney, Working paper, Columbia
University.
Gali, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, 2007, Understanding the Effects of
Government Spending on Consumption, Journal of the European Economic
Association 5, 227-270.
Galloway, George, 1946, Congress at the Cross-roads, New York: Crowell.
Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano, 1990, Can Severe Fiscal Contractions be
Expansionary?, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Goldman, Eitan, Jorg Rocholl, and Jongil So, 2007, Do politically connected board affect
firm value, Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Goldman, Eitan, Jorg Rocholl, and Jongil So, 2008, Political connections and the
allocation of procurement contracts, Working paper, Indiana University.
Goodwin, George, 1959, The Seniority System in Congress, American Political Science
Review 53, 412-436.
Goss, Caroline, 1972, Military committee membership and defense-related benefits in the
house of representatives, Western Political Quarterly 25, 215—233.
Greene, Kenneth, and Vincent Munley, 1980, The Productivity of Legislators’ Tenure: A
Case Lacking in Evidence, Journal of Legal Studies 10, 207—214.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Daniel M. Hungerman, 2007, Faith-based charity and crowd out
during the Great Depression, Journal of Public Economics 91, 1043-1069.

Hoover, Gary, and Paul Pecorino, 2005, The Political Determinants of Federal
Expenditure at the State Level, Public Choice 123, 95—113.
Jayachandran, Seema, 2006, The Jeffords effect, Journal of Law and Economics 49, 397425.
Kiel, Lisa, and Richard McKenzie, 1983, The impact of tenure on the flow of federal
benefits to SMSAs, Public Choice 41, 285—293.
Knight, Brian G., 2005, Estimating the value of proposal power, American Economic
Review 95, 1639-1652
Knight, Brian G., 2005, Endogenous federal grants and crowd-out of state government
spending: Theory and evidence from the Federal Highway Aid Program, American
Economic Review 92, 71-92.
Levitt, Steven, and James Poterba, 1999, Congressional Distributive Politics and State
Economic Performance, Public Choice 99, 185-216.
Levitt, Steven, and James Snyder, Jr., 1997, The Impact of Federal Spending on House
Election Outcomes, Journal of Political Economy 105, 30-53.
Levitt, Steven, and James Snyder, Jr., 1995, Political Parties and the Distribution of
Federal Outlays, American Journal of Political Science 39, 958-980.
Manchester, William, 1974, The Glory and the Dream: A Narrative History of America,
1932-1972. Boston: Little & Brown.
Mountford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig, 2002, What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy
Shocks?, CEPR Discussion Paper no. 3338.
Nelson, Garrison, Committees in the U.S. Congress, 1947-1992, 80th-102nd Congresses,
2005.
Pappa, Evi, 2005, New Keynesian or RBC transmission? The Effects of Fiscal Policy in
Labor, Discussion paper, LSE.
Perotti, Roberto, 2005, Estimating the Effects of Fiscal Policy in OECD Countries,
Discussion paper, CEPR.
Polsby, Nelson , Miriam Gallaher, and Barry Rundquist, 1969, The Growth of the
Seniority System in the U. S. House of Representatives, American Political Science
Review 63, 787-807.
Ramey, Valerie, 2008, Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's All in the Timing,
Working paper, UCSD.

Ramey, Valerie, and Matthew Shapiro, 1998, Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects
of Government Spending, Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
48, 145-194.
Ray, Bruce, 1980, Congressional promotion of district interests: Does power on the hill
really make a difference? In B. Rundquist (Ed.), Political benefits: Empirical
studies of American public programs, Lexington, MA: Lexington Books 1—35.
Ray, Bruce, 1981, Military committee membership in the house of representatives and the
allocation of defense department outlays, Western Political Quarterly 34, 222—234.
Ritt, Leonard, 1976, Committee position, seniority, and the distribution of government
expenditures, Public Policy 24, 469—497.
Roberts, Brian, 1990, A dead Senator tells no lies: Seniority and the distribution of
federal benefits, American Journal of Political Science 34, 31-58.
Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford, 1992, Oligopolistic Pricing and the E®ects of
Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity, Journal of Political Economy 100, 11531207.
Rundquist, Barry, 1978, On testing a military industrial complex theory, American
Politics Quarterly 6: 29—53.
Rundquist, Barry, and David Griffith, 1976, An interrupted time-series test of the
distributive theory of military policy-making, Western Political Quarterly 29, 620—
626.
Stewart, Charles III, and Jonathan Woon, Congressional Committee Assignments, 103rd
to 110th Congresses, 1993-2007, 2009.

Figure I: Earmarks in Alabama vs. Rest of US
This figure shows the annual earmarks (in millions of dollars) for the state of Alabama and for the average state in the
United States excluding Alabama (Rest of US), from 1991-2003.

350
Pre-Appt

Shelby
Appointment

Post-Appt

300

250

Alabama

Rest of US

(AL - US)

Before Appt

$ 47.1 mil

$ 52.8 mil

$ - 5.7 mil

After Appt

$ 238.5 mil

$ 145.1 mil

$ 93.4 mil

200

150

100

50

0
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996
Alabama

1997

1998

Rest of US

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Figure II: State-Level Annual Earmarks Versus Population

450,000

Annual State-Level Earmarks (Thousands)

400,000
350,000
300,000
250,000

HI
MS
AK

200,000
WV

AL

150,000
100,000
50,000
0
0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000

State Population (Thousands)

30,000

35,000

Table I: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the sample. Seniority shocks are defined as follows: Shock Top1ChairOnly is
a dummy variable equal to 1 if the senator (or representative) of a given state becomes chairman of the Senate Finance
Committee (the House Ways and Means Committee); Shock Top1Chair&Rank is equal to 1 if a senator becomes either
chairman or the ranking minority member of the committee. The list of the top 10 most influential committees is from
Edwards and Stewart (2006); for the Senate these committees are Finance, Veterans Affairs, Appropriations, Rules,
Armed Services, Foreign Relations, Intelligence, Judiciary, Budget, and Commerce, and for the House these committees
are Ways and Means, Appropriations, Energy and Commerce, Rules, International Relations, Armed Services,
Intelligence, Judiciary, Homeland Security, and Transportation and Infrastructure. Seniority shocks begin in the year
on appointment, and are applied for 6 years. All accounting variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles of
their distributions.

Panel A: Firm-Level Annual Variables

Capital Expenditures/Assets-1
Total Payout/Assets-1
R&D/Assets-1
ChgEmployees
Cash Flow/Assets-1
Leverage-1
Tobin's Q-1
Assets ($m)
SalesGrowth
Shock_Top1ChairOnly
Shock_Top1Chair&Rank
Shock_Top3ChairOnly
Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
Shock_Top5ChairOnly
Shock_Top5Chair&Rank
Shock_Top10ChairOnly
Shock_Top10Chair&Rank
Drop_Top1ChairOnly
Drop_Top3ChairOnly
Shock_Top1ChairOnly (House)
Shock_Top1Chair&Rank (House)
Shock_Top3ChairOnly (House)
Shock_Top3Chair&Rank (House)
Shock_Top5ChairOnly (House)
Shock_Top10ChairOnly (House)

Years 1967-2008, Firms = 16,734
Mean

Median

Standard Deviation

Nonmissing
Observations

0.078
0.023
0.078
0.085
0.036
0.416
1.822
2,059
0.180
0.030
0.032
0.044
0.070
0.062
0.118
0.098
0.196
0.019
0.022
0.037
0.100
0.074
0.207
0.113
0.180

0.048
0.006
0.028
0.026
0.084
0.399
1.230
101
0.101
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.108
0.044
0.134
0.322
0.242
0.261
1.826
23,727
0.451
0.171
0.177
0.204
0.255
0.242
0.322
0.297
0.397
0.136
0.146
0.188
0.300
0.261
0.405
0.317
0.384

168,975
154,832
86,870
158,230
151,482
159,833
153,348
168,970
167,000
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975
168,975

Panel B: State-Level Annual Variables

Total Earmarks (in dollars)
Ln(Total Earmarks)
State Population
Ln(State Population)
State Area (in square miles)
Total State Govt. Transfers (in millions)
Log(Total State Govt. Transfers)

Years=1991-2008, States=50
Mean

Median

Standard Deviation

Nonmissing
Observations

115,513,520
17.94
5,327,111
15.00
72,694
3,009.1
21.37

71,513,333
18.09
3,665,228
15.11
56,276
1,834.6
21.33

126,226,177
1.30
5,811,533
1.01
87,559
3,795.6
0.91

889
889
889
889
889
800
695

Table I: Summary Statistics (ctd.)
Panel C:

Top 10 Chairman/Ranking Member Characteristics, 1967-2008
All Chair/Rank

High Inc.
States

Low Inc.
States

Democrat

Republican

Mean

Median

Std
Dev

Max

Mean

Mean

Mean

Mean

Years as Senate
Chair/Rank

7.6

6

5.7

24

5.9

9.0

9.1

6.7

Years of Senate
Chamber Seniority

21.6

21

8.5

49

20.3

22.3

23.8

19.4

Years of Senate
Comm. Seniority

18.2

17

9.2

49

17.1

18.8

21.2

15.3

Years as House
Chair/Rank

6.3

6

4.3

18

5.7

7.2

6.7

5.8

Years of House
Chamber Seniority

13.1

13

4.3

27

12.8

13.7

15.0

11.2

Years of House
Comm. Seniority

11.6

12

4.8

26

11.4

12.1

13.7

9.5

Table II: Average Annual Earmarks By State
This table reports average annual earmarks by state, for the period 1991-2008. Earmark figures are in dollars.
Population figures for each state are obtained from the 1990 and 2000 census. Total firms, average number of firms per
year, average total capital expenditures per year (in millions of $), and average total corporate employees per year (in
thousands), are from Compustat and are yearly averages by state over the full sample period (1967-2008). The shock
variables are for the Shock Top3Chair&Rank specification, and are averages by state over the full sample period (19672008).
Earmark
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
65
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

State
CA
HI
TX
MS
AK
NY
FL
PA
WV
AL
WA
VA
MO
IL
OH
MD
KY
LA
NJ
SC
GA
NM
MI
NC
AZ
NV
MA
TN
CO
IA
OR
IN
WI
OK
AR
UT
MN
MT
KS
NH
CT
ID
ND
SD
ME
VT
RI
NE
DE
WY

Annual
Earmarks
396,558,675
268,747,947
264,019,500
251,435,028
250,423,299
235,944,300
211,345,224
196,825,967
190,458,702
164,896,228
162,261,711
145,416,729
144,746,031
143,113,080
132,808,519
131,723,944
127,681,908
126,312,872
121,137,029
113,031,906
108,417,567
107,467,034
95,786,036
95,052,529
91,161,492
89,351,668
89,040,991
87,197,317
85,496,729
84,135,999
80,414,090
78,905,946
74,415,071
73,020,270
66,932,573
66,347,652
65,542,312
62,379,300
61,882,552
55,522,703
49,517,958
48,961,253
43,764,173
42,993,348
34,919,217
31,836,241
30,788,275
25,319,431
18,704,944
11,258,416

Population
31,815,835
1,159,883
18,919,165
2,708,937
588,488
18,483,456
14,460,152
12,081,349
1,800,911
4,243,844
5,380,407
6,632,937
5,356,142
11,924,948
11,100,128
5,038,977
3,863,533
4,344,475
8,072,269
3,749,358
7,332,335
1,667,058
9,616,871
7,338,975
4,354,830
1,600,045
6,182,761
5,283,234
3,797,828
2,851,540
3,131,860
5,812,322
5,127,722
3,289,147
2,502,572
1,963,000
4,647,289
850,630
2,582,996
1,176,241
3,346,341
1,150,351
640,500
725,424
1,250,043
585,793
1,024,572
1,644,824
728,338
472,503

Pop.
Rank
1
41
2
31
48
3
4
5
35
23
15
12
16
6
7
19
24
22
9
26
11
36
8
10
21
38
13
17
25
30
29
14
18
28
33
34
20
44
32
40
27
42
47
46
39
49
43
37
45
50

PerCap.
Earmarks
12.5
231.7
14.0
92.8
425.5
12.8
14.6
16.3
105.8
38.9
30.2
21.9
27.0
12.0
12.0
26.1
33.0
29.1
15.0
30.1
14.8
64.5
10.0
13.0
20.9
55.8
14.4
16.5
22.5
29.5
25.7
13.6
14.5
22.2
26.7
33.8
14.1
73.3
24.0
47.2
14.8
42.6
68.3
59.3
27.9
54.3
30.0
15.4
25.7
23.8

Total
Firms
3111
25
1643
58
8
1872
936
675
27
92
286
428
232
728
521
343
92
99
916
102
465
42
315
305
243
156
889
214
645
90
151
204
175
214
46
150
481
16
120
78
471
36
9
17
29
18
50
56
55
17

Avg
Firms
651.4
8.5
402.9
12.3
1.7
472.1
204.1
192.7
6.0
24.9
62.6
103.8
70.3
208.5
169.3
79.3
23.9
27.4
233.1
24.0
108.2
7.9
100.3
81.3
55.5
34.2
210.4
57.4
120.3
25.8
40.2
56.3
60.6
41.1
16.5
30.8
134.9
3.8
29.5
19.8
131.9
10.5
1.1
5.3
8.9
5.6
14.5
13.6
14.9
3.1

Capex
30,203.1
315.1
49,725.8
225.6
64.7
35,372.0
6,734.6
9,910.9
104.4
907.1
3,960.9
10,228.9
4,820.3
22,001.6
11,286.5
2,798.3
1,134.2
2,365.0
17,831.6
864.0
9,955.6
237.1
22,781.2
5,411.0
2,178.8
2,381.6
4,754.6
3,911.6
7,005.7
694.7
1,393.0
2,204.4
2,521.2
5,175.7
4,961.0
925.5
6,317.4
153.2
2,495.7
271.7
11,005.5
1,084.1
164.6
193.2
361.9
75.6
825.5
2,040.7
785.6
7.3

Num.
Emp.
2,445.6
21.1
2,303.5
20.0
2.3
3,525.9
707.8
1,192.7
9.2
93.9
285.5
779.9
670.2
2,837.9
1,804.9
480.8
213.5
75.2
1,618.6
157.2
742.6
8.3
2,104.6
593.3
163.2
107.0
680.6
563.0
246.2
66.4
114.0
215.5
447.8
60.6
726.6
112.3
843.5
3.9
137.8
41.4
1,135.5
99.0
4.6
16.5
20.5
4.0
174.0
164.7
191.6
0.5

Senate
Shock
0
0.0976
0.1429
0.2381
0.4103
0.1429
0.1429
0.2857
0.2439
0.1429
0.1429
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1463
0.1429
0
0.1429
0
0
0.0238
0
0
0
0
0
0.1429
0.2381
0
0.1429
0
0.1429
0.1429
0
0.1463
0.1429
0
0
0.0952
0
0
0
0.1463
0
0.1463
0.1429
0.2857

House
Shock
0.3571
0
0.3095
0.2857
0
0.4286
0.2381
0.2857
0
0
0
0.1429
0
0.2857
0.0238
0
0.1429
0.3415
0
0
0
0
0.2857
0.1429
0
0
0.1429
0.2857
0
0
0.1429
0.1429
0.1429
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table III: The Impact of Seniority Shocks on State-Level Earmarks, 1991-2008
This table reports panel regressions of earmarks on Senate seniority shocks (defined as in Table I). Year-fixed effects and state-fixed effects are included where indicated.
All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient
estimates. The dependent variable is ln(state-level annual earmarks). Control variables include ln(state-level population), the state-level average of ln(per capita income)
over the past 6 years, and lagged values of state-level ln(per-capita income growth) and state-level unemployment rates. ***Significant at 1%; **significant at 5%;
*significant at 10%.

Dependent Variable: Ln(State-Level Earmarks)

Shock_Top1ChairOnly

(1)

(2)

0.446***

0.481***

(9.42)

(8.77)

Shock_ Top3ChairOnly

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.451***
(3.30)

Shock_Top5ChairOnly

0.426***
(3.67)

Shock_Top10ChairOnly

0.224**
(2.49)

Shock_Top1Chair&Ramk

0.330***
(3.30)

Shock_ Top3Chair&Ramk

0.265***
(3.12)

Shock_Top5Chair&Ramk

0.205***
(2.76)

Shock_Top10Chair&Ramk

0.164**
(2.35)

Controls

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Fixed Effects

Year

Year

Year

Year

Year

Year

Year

Year

Year

Fixed Effects

State

State

State

State

State

State

State

State

State

Adjusted R

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.76

No. of Obs.

889

839

839

839

839

839

839

839

839

2

Table IV: The Impact of Seniority Shocks on Corporate Investment, 1967-2008
This table reports panel regressions of capital expenditures on Senate seniority shocks (defined as in Table I). All models contain firm-fixed effects and year-fixed effects.
All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state and year level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the
coefficient estimates. ***Significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.

Dependent Variable: Capital Expendituresi,t/Ai,t-1
Shock_Top1ChairOnly

(1)

(2)

-0.012***

-0.009***

(3.46)

(3.14)

Shock_Top1Chair&Rank

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-0.008***
(2.94)

Shock_Top3ChairOnly

-0.006***
(2.78)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank

-0.006***
(3.57)

Shock_Top5ChairOnly

-0.005***
(2.64)

Shock_Top10ChairOnly

-0.003*
(1.95)

Drop_Top1ChairOnly

0.007**
(2.22)

Drop_Top3ChairOnly

0.006**
(2.11)

Qi,t-1
(Cash Flowi,t/Ai,t-1)
Leveragei,t-1

0.008***

0.008***

0.008***

0.008***

0.008***

0.008***

0.008***

0.008***

(12.33)

(12.33)

(12.32)

(12.34)

(12.29)

(12.33)

(12.33)

(12.32)

0.039***

0.039***

0.039***

0.039***

0.039***

0.039***

0.039***

0.039***

(9.40)

(9.40)

(9.40)

(9.40)

(9.41)

(9.40)

(9.40)

(9.40)

-0.116***

-0.116***

-0.116***

-0.116***

-0.117***

-0.116***

-0.117***

-0.117***

(31.54)

(31.53)

(31.51)

(31.50)

(31.46)

(31.54)

(31.42)

(31.41)

Adjusted R2

0.440

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

No. of Obs.

168975

139564

139564

139564

139564

139564

139564

139563

139563

Table V: House Shocks, Committee Chair Instrument, and Alternative Specifications
This table reports panel regressions of capital expenditures on House seniority shocks (from 1967-2008), earmarks directly (1991-2008), IV predicted values of
earmarks (1991-2008), randomly assigned shocks, and various subsamples. Panel A presents the results for the House seniority shocks. In Panel B, the IV
predicted value comes from a first stage that regresses Shock Top3ChairOnly (Senate Shock) on ln(earmarks), as in Table III. The second to last row of Panel B
includes only stocks above the median lagged market capitalization in a given year in the regressions; the final row excludes all shocks where the prior chairman
lost his chair because he/she was defeated in an election/primary. All models contain firm-fixed effects and year-fixed effects, and controls for lagged Q, cash flow,
and lagged leverage defined as in Table IV are included when indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state and yearl, and t-stats using
these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. ***Significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.

Panel A: House Shocks
Shock_Top1ChairOnly

Dependent Variable: Capital Expendituresi,t/Ai,t-1
(1)

(2)

-0.006**

-0.004**

(2.51)

(2.26)

Shock_Top1Chair&Rank

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-0.005***
(3.81)

Shock_Top3ChairOnly

-0.001
(0.90)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank

-0.003***
(2.74)

Shock_Top5ChairOnly

-0.002*
(1.93)

Shock_Top10ChairOnly

-0.002***
(2.65)

Drop_Top1ChairOnly

0.006*
(1.66)

Drop_Top3ChairOnly

0.001
(0.23)

Controls

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Adjusted R2

0.439

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

0.501

No. of Obs.

168977

139564

139564

139564

139564

139564

139564

139562

139562

Panel B: Alternative
Specifications and Subsamples

Dependent Variable: Capital Expendituresi,t/Ai,t-1
(1)

Ln(Annual Earmarks)
(1991-2008)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.000
(0.55)

IV Predicted Value
(1991-2008)

-0.012**
(2.26)

Random Shock
(1967-2008)

-0.000
(0.57)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
(Only Large Stocks)

-0.005***
(3.14)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
(No Lost Elections)

-0.006***
(3.44)

Adjusted R2

0.510

0.510

0.501

0.611

0.501

No. of Obs.

88828

88828

139564

68277

139564

Table VI: The Impact of Seniority Shocks on R&D and Payouts, 1967-2008
This table reports panel regressions of firm research and development (R&D) and payouts (cash dividends plus repurchases) on seniority shocks. Panel A reports results
with firm-level R&D as the dependent variable, and Panel B reports results with firm-level payouts (cash dividends plus repurchases) as the dependent variable. All
models contain firm-fixed effects and year-fixed effects, and include controls for lagged Q, cash flow, and lagged leverage as in Table IV. All standard errors are adjusted
for clustering at the state and year level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. ***Significant at
1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.

Panel A: R&D

Dependent Variable: R&Di,t/Ai,t-1
(1)

Shock_Top1ChairOnly

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

-0.005***
(2.64)

Shock_Top1Chair&Rank

-0.003**
(1.98)

Shock_Top3ChairOnly

-0.004***
(2.63)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank

-0.003***
(3.04)

Drop_Top1ChairOnly

0.009***
(3.72)

Drop_Top3ChairOnly

0.005**
(2.13)

-0.009***

Shock_Top1ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(3.31)

-0.005***

Shock_Top1Chair&Rank
(House Shock)

(3.54)

-0.005***

Shock_Top3ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(2.61)

-0.001

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
(House Shock)
2

(1.28)

Adjusted R

0.782

0.782

0.782

0.782

0.782

0.782

0.783

0.783

0.782

0.782

No. of Obs.

74842

74842

74842

74842

74842

74842

74841

74841

74841

74841

Panel B: Payouts

Dependent Variable: Total Payouti,t/Ai,t-1
(1)

Shock_Top1ChairOnly

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(11)

(11)

0.003***
(4.15)

Shock_Top1Chair&Rank

0.002***
(3.70)

Shock_Top3ChairOnly

0.002***
(4.23)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank

0.001***
(2.85)

Drop_Top1ChairOnly

-0.001*
(1.71)

Drop_Top3ChairOnly

-0.001
(1.44)

0.001

Shock_Top1ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(0.84)

0.001**

Shock_Top1Chair&Rank
(House Shock)

(2.51)

0.002***

Shock_Top3ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(3.14)

0.001***

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
(House Shock)

(3.59)

Adjusted R2

0.392

0.392

0.392

0.392

0.392

0.392

0.392

0.392

0.392

0.392

No. of Obs.

129991

129991

129991

129991

129990

129990

129990

129990

129990

129990

Table VII: Other Firm-Level Variables: Employment and Sales Growth, 1967-2008
This table reports panel regressions of seniority shocks on firm-level changes in employment and firm-level sales growth. Panel A reports results with firm-level changes
in employment as the dependent variable, and Panel B reports results with firm-level changes in sales as the dependent variable All models contain firm-fixed effects and
year-fixed effects. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state and year level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses
below the coefficient estimates. ***Significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.

Dependent Variable: (Employi,t- Employi,t-1)/ Employi,t-1

Panel A: ChgEmployees

Full Sample (1967-2008)
(1)
Shock_Top1ChairOnly

(2)

(3)

(4)

Post-1989
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.009
(1.11)

Shock_Top3ChairOnly

-0.006
(1.05)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank

-0.011**

-0.017**

(2.41)

(2.41)

-0.027*

Shock_Top1ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(1.81)

-0.021**

Shock_Top3ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(2.32)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
(House Shock)

-0.013***

-0.024***

(2.97)

(3.12)

Adjusted R2

0.135

0.135

0.135

0.135

0.135

0.135

0.139

0.139

No. of Obs.

168267

168267

168267

168265

168265

168265

94182

94182

Dependent Variable: (Salesi,t- Salesi,t-1)/ Salesi,t-1

Panel B: SalesGrowth

Full Sample (1967-2008)
(1)
Shock_Top1ChairOnly

(2)

(3)

(4)

Post-1989
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.015
(1.30)

Shock_Top3ChairOnly

-0.009
(1.04)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank

-0.014**

-0.026***

(2.31)

(2.72)

-0.054**

Shock_Top1ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(2.09)

-0.036**

Shock_Top3ChairOnly
(House Shock)

(2.39)

Shock_Top3Chair&Rank
(House Shock)

-0.024***

-0.039***

(3.49)

(3.46)

Adjusted R2

0.181

0.181

0.181

0.182

0.182

0.182

0.186

0.186

No. of Obs.

181489

181489

181489

181487

181487

181487

101354

101353

Table VIII: Mechanism
This table reports panel regressions of a number of dependent variables on US Senate seniority shocks (defined as in Table
I). In the first column, the dependent variable is ln(total state-level federal government transfers) from the Census Bureau,
excluding category B79 (which consists of nondiscretionary spending on public welfare items, e.g., Medicaid). These
regressions are run at the state level as in Table III. The model contains both state-fixed effects and year-fixed effects,
standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in
parentheses below the coefficient estimates. In columns 2-4, the dependent variables are Capex, Employ, and Capex,
respectively, and these regressions are run at the firm level. The specifications and variable definitions are the same as in
Tables IV and VII; e.g., Capex is firm level capital expenditures divided by lagged assets, and Employ is the change in
number of employees. Low Utilization is a dummy variable equal to one if the firm in question is below the median in terms
of its capacity utilization rate. High Unemployment is a dummy equal to one if the difference between the state-level
unemployment rate (in the state the firm is headquartered in) and the national unemployment rate is greater than its
historical difference. Had Contract is a dummy variable equal to one if the firm in question received a government contract
in the past. The models in columns 2-4 contain both firm-fixed effects and year-fixed effects, standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the state and year level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the
coefficient estimates. Significance levels are denoted by: *** for the 1%; ** for the 5%; and * for the 10% level.

Federal Transfers, Factor Slack, and Procurement Contracts

Shock_Top1ChairOnly
(Sample Period: 1992-2007)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Transfers

Capex

Employ

Capex

0.094***

-0.021***

-0.016**

-0.010***

(2.85)

(3.93)

(2.27)

(6.27)

Shock_Top1ChairOnly*Low Util

0.009**

(Sample Period: 1980-2008)

(2.06)

Shock_Top1ChairOnly*High Unemp

0.024**

(Sample Period: 1977-2008)

(2.17)

Shock_Top1ChairOnly*Had Contract

0.009***

(Sample Period: 1984-2008)

(3.12)

Low Utilization

-0.006***

(Sample Period: 1980-2008)

(6.03)

High Unemployment

-0.008**

(Sample Period: 1977-2008)

(2.40)

Had Contract

-0.007***

(Sample Period: 1984-2008)

(6.28)

Fixed Effects

Year

Year

Year

Year

Fixed Effects

State

Firm

Firm

Firm

Adjusted R

0.981

0.500

0.130

0.577

No. of Obs.

800

49520

147886

97037

2

Table IX: Breadth, Scope, and Timing of Corporate Response to Seniority Shocks, 1967-2008
Panel A reports results for state-level regressions of various corporate response variables on senate seniority shocks, with firm and year fixed effects included; the
Shock_Top10Chair&Rank variable is used as the independent variable here in order to maximize the number of states receiving a shock. Regression coefficients are
averaged (equally) across the 48 states that have experienced such a shock, and t-stats computed using the standard-deviation of these coefficients across states are
reported here. The %States Predicted Sign also shows significance level (in *) of a binomial test whether the state with the predicted sign is greater than a null of 0.5. In
Panels B and C, the shock variable used is Shock_Top3Chair&Rank; Panel B provides simple firm-level averages of corporate responses by type of firm, broken down by
domestic-only firms versus global firms (classified using Compustat segment data, available since 1979); and Panel C provides simple firm-level averages for different
response periods (1 year, out to 6 years), as well as regression coefficients from firm-level regressions similar to those in Tables IV-VII but which also include a variable
called PreShock, which is a dummy variable equal to one in the six years prior to a shock.

Panel A: State-Level Cross-Sectional Average Regression Coefficients (Shock_Top10Chair&Rank)
Coeff:

t-stat

%States
Predicted
Sign

Capital
Expendituresi,t/Ai,t-1

-0.026***

3.48

73.9%***

R&Di,t/Ai,t-1

-0.003

-0.51

53.3%

AZ,CA,FL,GA,HI,ID,IL,IN,KS,KY,LA,MD,MT,ND,NH,NJ,NM,NY,OR,PA,SC,SD,TX,WA

0.004**

1.98

67.4%***

AK,AL,AZ,CO,CT,FL,IL,IN,KY,LA,MA,MO,MS,ND,NE,NH,NJ,NM,NV,NY,OK,OR,PA,
RI,SC,TN,TX,UT,VT,WA,WI

ChgEmployees

-0.091***

4.58

82.6%***

AK,AR,AZ,CA,CO,CT,FL,GA,HI,IA,IL,KS,KY,MA,MD,MI,MO,MS,MT,NC,NE,NH,NJ,
NV,NY,OK,OR,PA,RI,SD,TN,TX,UT,VA,WA,WI,WV,WY

SalesGrowth

-0.130***

4.81

78.3%***

AK,AL,AZ,CO,CT,FL,GA,Hi,IA,ID,IL,KS,KY,LA,MA,MD,MI,MO,MS,MT,NC,NE,NH,NJ,
NY,OK,OR,PA,RI,SC,TN,TX,UT,VA,WA,WY

Dependent Var:

Total Payouti,t/Ai,t-1

Individual States with Predicted Sign Coefficient
AK,AL,AZ,CO,CT,FL,GA,HI,IL,KS,MA,MD,MI,MO,MS,MT,ND,NE,NY,NJ,NV,NY,OK,
OR,PA,RI,SC,TN,TX,UT,VA,WA,WI,WY

Panel B: Firm Level Averages of Corporate Responses for Domestic-Only and Global Firms
(Classified Using Compustat Segments, Data Available 1979-2007 Only)
All Firms

Domestic-Only Firms

Global Firms

Variable:

Shock

No Shock

Diff.

Shock

No Shock

Diff

Shock

No Shock

Diff

Capital Expendituresi,t/Ai,t-1
R&Di,t/Ai,t-1

0.067
0.064

0.077
0.089

(0.010)
(0.025)

0.067
0.066

0.080
0.091

(0.013)
(0.025)

0.067
0.060

0.070
0.085

(0.003)
(0.025)

Total Payouti,t/Ai,t-1

0.025

0.024

0.001

0.024

0.022

0.002

0.026

0.029

(0.003)

ChgEmployees

0.085

0.089

(0.004)

0.089

0.095

(0.006)

0.075

0.075

(0.000)

SalesGrowth

0.160

0.185

(0.025)

0.168

0.198

(0.030)

0.133

0.152

(0.019)

Panel C: Timing of Corporate Responses (Firm-Level Averages)

Variable:
Capital Expendituresi,t/Ai,t-1
R&Di,t/Ai,t-1
Total Payouti,t/Ai,t-1
ChgEmployees
SalesGrowth

All Firms

Shocked Firms Only

(Firm-Level Averages)

(Regression Coefficients)

No Shock

Year1

Year2-6

All Shock

Shock

Pre-Shock

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.079

0.070

0.069

0.069

-0.009***

0.001

0.079
0.023
0.085
0.179

0.062
0.024
0.085
0.157

0.059
0.024
0.080
0.156

0.060
0.024
0.081
0.156

(5.75)

(0.37)

-0.003***

0.000

(2.82)

(0.12)

0.001

0.000

(1.36)

(0.34)

-0.011***

0.000

(2.67)

(0.01)

-0.017***

-0.001

(3.11)

(0.17)

