                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CORPORATE BOND DEFAULT RISK:
                                 A 150-YEAR PERSPECTIVE

                                              Kay Giesecke
                                          Francis A. Longstaff
                                           Stephen Schaefer
                                             Ilya Strebulaev

                                         Working Paper 15848
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15848


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2010




We are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions received from Navneet Arora, Vineer Bhansali,
Richard Cantor, Josh Davis, Marvin Lieberman, Hanno Lustig, Scott Richardson, and Derek Schaeffer,
and seminar participants at Blackrock, Brunel University, Copenhagen Business School, Exeter University,
the Georgia Institute of Technology, New York University, PIMCO, The University of Alaska at Fairbanks,
UCLA, and the Vienna School of Business and Finance. We are particularly grateful for extensive
research assistance provided by Priyank Gandhi, Xiaolong Cheng, Scott Cowin, Matthias Fleckenstein,
Baeho Kim, Brent Longstaff, and Scott Longstaff. Strebulaev is grateful to the London Business School's
Center for Corporate Governance (under ESRC contract number R060230004). All errors are our responsibility.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Kay Giesecke, Francis A. Longstaff, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Bond Default Risk: A 150-Year Perspective
Kay Giesecke, Francis A. Longstaff, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev
NBER Working Paper No. 15848
March 2010
JEL No. G12,G33

                                             ABSTRACT

We study corporate bond default rates using an extensive new data set spanning the 1866–2008 period.
We find that the corporate bond market has repeatedly suffered clustered default events much worse
than those experienced during the Great Depression. For example, during the railroad crisis of 1873–1875,
total defaults amounted to 36 percent of the par value of the entire corporate bond market. We examine
whether corporate default rates are best forecast by structural, reduced-form, or macroeconomic credit
models and find that variables suggested by structural models outperform the others. Default events
are only weakly correlated with business downturns. We find that over the long term, credit spreads
are roughly twice as large as default losses, resulting in an average credit risk premium of about 80
basis points. We also find that credit spreads do not adjust in response to realized default rates.


Kay Giesecke                                        Stephen Schaefer
Stanford University                                 London Business School
giesecke@stanford.edu                               Regents Park
                                                    London, NW14SA
Francis A. Longstaff                                United Kingdom
UCLA                                                sschaefer@london.edu
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481                      Ilya Strebulaev
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                          Stanford University
and NBER                                            istrebulaev@stanford.edu
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
        The longer you can look back, the farther you can look forward.

                                                   Winston S. Churchill



                               1. INTRODUCTION

This paper studies the properties of corporate bond default rates using an extensive
new data set covering the 1866−2008 period. This data set is comprised of both hand-
collected data extracted from historical ﬁnancial records such as the Commercial and
Financial Chronicle as well as tabulated data from a variety of sources including the
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), the Federal Reserve Board, Standard
and Poor’s, and Moody’s Investors Services. In this study, we focus on the value-
weighted default rates for U.S. nonﬁnancial bond issues. The reason for studying
nonﬁnancials is that while they have historically represented the majority of the bond
market, they have generally received far less attention in the literature, particularly
during the earlier part of the study period.1 Thus, the focus of this study is on “Main
Street” rather than on “Wall Street.”
      In setting out on this study, a question that immediately raises itself is: How is
historical corporate default experience dating back as far as the Civil War relevant
to current ﬁnancial research? After all, the corporate bond market of the 1860s was
composed primarily of railroad, canal, and mining issues, which is a far cry from the
current composition of the market. We believe that there are at least four compelling
reasons for studying the long-term default experience of the corporate bond market.
First, while the names of the bond issuers and the industries they represent may change
and evolve over the centuries, the applicability of ﬁnancial theory to the determinants
of default risk and the pricing of corporate bonds should not change. In other words,
if a credit model such as Merton (1974) applies to bonds in the 21st Century, it should
be equally applicable in the 19th Century (albeit to a very diﬀerent set of bonds).
Second, the NBER dates business cycles back as far as the 1850s, and the study of these

1
 For example, there is an extensive literature documenting the failures of banks, se-
curities ﬁrms, real estate trusts, and other ﬁnancials during the Great Depression.
These include Goldschmidt (1933), Galbraith (1955), Friedman and Schwartz (1963),
Bernanke (1981, 1983), Kindleberger and Aliber (2005), Easley and O’Hara (1979),
and many others. In contrast, there are relatively few sources describing failures of
nonﬁnancial ﬁrms during this period. We observe, however, that most recent cor-
porate and credit risk empirical studies exclude ﬁnancial and utility industries (for
example, see Eom, Helwege, and Huang (2004).


                                           1
cycles has provided valuable insights into fundamental economic mechanisms. Indeed,
business cycle data has been used extensively in macroeconomic research for parameter
calibration. We believe that similar insights can be obtained by studying historical
default cycles. In addition, by identifying historical default cycles over the same time
period as NBER business cycles, we hope to shed light on the interaction between
adverse credit market events and economic downturns. Third, in coming to grips with
the current ﬁnancial market situation which has been termed a “historic crisis” or “the
worst ﬁnancial crisis since the Great Depression,” nothing is so valuable as actually
having a long-term historical perspective. Fourth, there are many parallels between
the early part of the study period and recent credit market events. In particular,
the latter part of the 19th Century was a period in which massive investment in a
number of exciting new technologies (railroads, electricity, etc.) was ﬁnanced heavily
by debt. These technology booms were then followed by waves of ﬁnancial crises and
bond defaults, closely resembling patterns in the telecommunications and structured-
credit-products cycles of the past decade.
     To provide overall perspective on corporate default rates, we begin with a simple
descriptive analysis of the data. The U.S. experienced many severe clustered default
events during the study period. The worst event occurred in the 1870s when the
railroad boom of the 1860s was followed by a disastrous decade of defaults. During
the three-year period from 1873−1875, the annual default rates total to 35.90 percent
of the total par value of the corporate bond market. Several other three-year periods
in the study period experience comparable default rates. Surprisingly, the worst three-
year period during the Great Depression with default rates totaling to 12.88 percent
barely makes it into the top ﬁve credit events for nonﬁnancials.2 On average, the annual
corporate default rate during the sample period is about 1.50 percent. Corporate
defaults, however, cluster signiﬁcantly in time and the default rate is very persistent.
Curiously, the correlation between credit events and NBER business downturns is only
about 26 percent.
      Our primary focus is on understanding the determinants of corporate default
rates. Theoretical work on the valuation of corporate bonds and default prediction
falls into three broad categories: structural models, reduced-form models, and macroe-
conomic and/or accounting-based models. We explore the implications of each of these
frameworks and identify the economic factors that each suggests should drive corpo-
rate default risk. Using available historical data, we apply a regression approach to
2
 This is consistent with the evidence given in Friedman and Schwartz (1963) that the
actual ﬁnancial losses incurred by debtholders during the 1930−1933 period were rel-
atively modest as a percentage of total market capitalization. Friedman and Schwartz
also observe that “The impairment in the market values of assets held by banks . . .
was the most important source of impairment in capital leading to bank suspensions,
rather than the default of speciﬁc loans or of speciﬁc bond issues.” See Friedman and
Schwartz, pp. 351-355.


                                           2
examine which factors best forecast corporate default rates. We ﬁnd that variables
implied by the structural credit modeling framework have signiﬁcant forecasting power
for corporate default rates. In contrast, lagged corporate credit spreads have no pre-
dictive power for default rates. These results complement and extend Collin-Dufresne,
Goldstein, and Martin (2001), Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann (2001), Schaefer
and Strebulaev (2008), and others who also ﬁnd that credit spreads are signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by factors that are diﬃcult to link to credit fundamentals. Finally, we ﬁnd
that the state of the economy as measured by a recession indicator variable has little
incremental predictive ability for corporate default rates.
     Motivated by these results, we then explore the issue of how the market prices
default risk. Applying a 50-percent loss rate to the average default rate of about
1.50 percent gives a back-of-the-envelope estimate of average annual credit losses of
roughly 75 basis points. Using the available data, however, we ﬁnd that credit spreads
average about 153 basis points during the sample period. Thus, credit spreads have
been approximately twice as large as expected default losses on average, implying an
average premium of about 80 basis points for bearing default risk during the study
period. We again use a regression approach to examine whether increases in default
rates map into higher credit spreads. We ﬁnd little or no evidence that credit spreads
respond to current or lagged default rates. Taken together, these counterintuitive
results support the view that corporate credit spreads are driven largely by factors
such as illiquidity, consistent with Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001),
Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann (2001), Longstaﬀ, Mithal, and Neis (2005), and
others.
     In summary, this study provides four important results. First, we show that
the historical default experience in the United States includes periods much worse
that those during the Great Depression. Second, the historical correlation of default
cycles and economic downturns is surprisingly weak. Third, we ﬁnd that variables
suggested by structural models of credit risk have signiﬁcant forecasting power for
corporate defaults, while credit spreads and business cycle indicators do not. Fourth,
we show that over the long-run, credit spreads appear to provide investors with a
modest premium for bearing credit risk, but do not adjust to current or lagged realized
default rates. These results have many important implications for credit markets.
    This paper contributes to the extensive literature on corporate credit risk and
bond valuation. Key theoretical work in this area includes Black and Scholes (1973),
Merton (1973, 1974), Black and Cox (1976), Leland (1994), Longstaﬀ and Schwartz
(1995), Jarrow and Turnbull (1995), Jarrow, Lando, and Turnbull (1997), Duﬃe and
Singleton (1997, 1999), Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2001), Goldstein, Ju, and Le-
land (2001), Duﬃe and Lando (2001), and others. Important studies focusing on
default risk in corporate bonds include Altman (1968, 1989), Shumway (2001), Chava,
and Jarrow (2004), Duﬃe, Saita, and Wang (2007), Almeida and Philippon (2007),
and Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008). Research addressing the default premium


                                          3
and the properties of corporate credit spreads includes Fons (1987), Sarig and Warga
(1989), Kim, Ramaswamy, and Sundaresan (1993), Pedrosa and Roll (1998), Duﬀee
(1999), Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001), Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and
Mann (2001), Huang and Huang (2003), Eom, Helwege, and Huang (2004), Longstaﬀ,
Mithal, and Neis (2005), Driessen (2005), Berndt, Douglas, Duﬃe, Ferguson, and
Schranz (2005), Jarrow, Lando, and Yu (2005), Davydenko and Strebulaev (2007),
Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008), Bharath and Shumway (2008), and many others.
This paper contributes to the literature by examining default risk and its relation to
credit spreads over a time period signiﬁcantly longer than in any previous study.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data
set used in the paper and explains how it is constructed. Section 3 describes some of
the historical background for the study period. Section 4 explores the properties of
the historical corporate default rates. Section 5 studies the determinants of corporate
default risk. Section 6 examines how the market prices corporate bond default risk.
Section 7 makes concluding remarks. The Appendix provides a detailed description
of the data collection process.


                                   2. THE DATA

Our objective in this paper is to study the default rates that investors in the U.S.
corporate bond markets have experienced historically. Speciﬁcally, our focus is on the
bonds issued by U.S. ﬁrms in the nonﬁnancial sector. We limit our attention to U.S.
corporate bonds since this allows us to study the relation between default rates and a
number of key ﬁnancial and macroeconomic variables that are only available for the
U.S. markets. As discussed above, we focus on the nonﬁnancial sector since it has
received much less attention in the literature than the ﬁnancial sector. Furthermore,
the nonﬁnancial sector has historically represented a much larger fraction of the market
for long-term corporate debt than the ﬁnancial sector. For example, ﬁnancial issuers
represented zero percent of all corporate bond issuers listed in the Commercial and
Financial Chronicle in 1870, 1.2 percent of all issuers listed in 1900, 6.9 percent of all
issuers listed in 1930, and 1.8 percent of all issuers listed in 1969. Thus, the tendency
of ﬁnancial ﬁrms to raise capital through the bond markets is a relatively recent one
from a historical perspective.3
    In measuring default rates, we focus on the fraction of the total par value of the
corporate bond market (the default rate) that enters into ﬁnancial distress during
each year in the sample period. Thus, our approach diﬀers somewhat from that of
3
 Financial ﬁrms, of course, raise capital from other sources such as deposits, commer-
cial paper, or the money markets. For a description of growth in the ﬁnancial sector,
see Philippon (2008) and Gandhi and Lustig (2009).


                                            4
other surveys such as Moody’s Corporate Defaults and Recovery Rates, 1920−2008
publication that are based on the fraction of issuers that enter into ﬁnancial distress
each year.4 By studying the proportion of the total par value of bonds entering into
ﬁnancial distress, our results more closely reﬂect default rates from the perspective of
a representative investor holding the value-weighted portfolio of all corporate bonds.
For brevity, we will refer to the domestic nonﬁnancial value-weighted default rate
simply as the default rate throughout the remainder of this paper.5
     The collection of data for the study represented an extensive multi-year under-
taking involving thousands of hours of research assistance. For example, obtaining
corporate bond market data for the 19th Century required obtaining original copies of
the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, tabulating the number of corporate issuers
and the number and par value of all corporate issues, and then painstakingly reading
though the pages of this source to identify news items providing information about
issuers entering (or exiting) ﬁnancial distress. The Commercial and Financial Chron-
icle was founded in 1865 and was the ﬁrst national business newspaper in the United
States. The Commercial and Financial Chronicle published extensive lists of the cor-
porate bonds that were available in the ﬁnancial markets, including bonds traded on
the NYSE, the NYSE Curb Exchange, the AMEX, all of the regional exchanges, as
well as leading unlisted and inactive bonds.6
     Our sample period begins with 1866 since this is the ﬁrst full year that the
Commercial and Financial Chronicle was published. The year 1866, however, is a
logical starting point for a number of other reasons as well. First, 1866 is the ﬁrst full
year following the conclusion of the Civil War, thereby representing something of a
regime shift in U.S. history. Second, the 1866−2008 sample period closely parallels the
1857−2008 period covered by the NBER business-cycle-dating committee. Third, by
beginning with 1866, we are essentially matching the starting date of the classic study
of monetary history in the United States by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) which
begins with 1867 (but also provides some discussion of events in earlier periods).
     We also collected data from an extensive list of tabulated sources including the
three volumes of the Hickman (1953, 1958, 1960) NBER study of corporate bond
markets. This study was sponsored by the Works Project Administration and the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation during the 1940s and 1950s and involved at
least several dozen researchers over a number of years. We also obtained data from
the NBER-sponsored study by Atkinson (1967) essentially extending the scope of
4
 Moody’s publishes some limited data on value-weighted default rates beginning with
1994. See Table 45 in Moody’s Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920−2008.
5
  When the data allow, we also calculate equally-weighted issue and issuer default rates
and use these for a number of robustness checks.
6
  For a description of the history of the Commercial and Financial Chronicle and its
founder, see Steeples (2002).


                                            5
the Hickman project by several decades. These studies were based on original data
obtained from industry sources but were cross checked with data from sources such as
the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Interstate Commerce Commission, and
the National Industrial Conference Board.7 For the latter part of the study period
(1970-2008), we also used data provided to us by courtesy of Moody’s Default Risk
Services and extracted from their extensive data set of corporate market issuers.
     In addition to these sources, we also use data provided by the Federal Reserve
Board Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States, Standard and Poor’s Corporation,
the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA, formerly the Bond
Market Association), Macaulay (1938), Homer and Sylla (1991), Carty (1997, 2000),
and others.
     It is important to emphasize that both the focus of our study and the nature
of the data set used diﬀer signiﬁcantly from those in the well-known surveys of his-
torical corporate default experience published by industry sources such as Moody’s
Investor Services Inc. and Standard and Poor’s Corporation. In particular, we focus
on value-weighted default rates. In contrast, Moody’s Corporate Default and Recov-
ery Rates, 1920−2008 publication focuses on the percentage of issuers that default.
This distinction is an important one, however, since smaller ﬁrms tend to default
more frequently. Thus, issuer-weighted default rates can be numerically large while
not economically large during some periods (including some years during the 1930s).
Furthermore, the default rates in this Moody’s publication include defaults by global
issuers. In particular, as described by Carty and Lieberman (1997), Moody’s default
rates were elevated by global events such as the German Transfer Moratorium in 1933
in which 62 German ﬁrms were restricted from making foreign debt payments by the
newly installed Nazi government. These ﬁrms represent a large fraction of the total
number of defaulting ﬁrms during 1933 in the Moody’s sample. Carty and Lieberman
also report that similar defaults occurred through payment moratoriums in Austria,
Czechoslovakia, Rhodesia, Chile, and Uruguay. In addition, default rates published by
industry sources are typically based on rated bonds. In contrast, our default statistics
for the 1866−1969 period are based on the broader universe of all reported bonds
(rated or unrated). Also, some of the earlier years in the Moody’s sample may have
less comprehensive coverage, perhaps because relatively few bond issues were rated.
For example, Moody’s Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920−2008 publication
implies that there were about 1240 issuers in their sample in 1939.8 In contrast, there
were 2486 bond issuers listed in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle at the be-
ginning of 1939. Finally, the earliest data on default rates available from Moody’s
begins with 1920. Thus, our data set extends 54 years further into the past, covering
7
    Sadly, the original data collected by Hickman and Atkinson seems to have been lost.
8
 This follows from the number of defaults reported in Table 15 and the default per-
centage reported in Table 36 of the Moody’s publication.


                                            6
an additional 14 business cycles.
     The speciﬁc data used in calculating the default rate consists of two time series.
The ﬁrst is the total par value of a snapshot of all nonﬁnancial corporate bonds
included in the historical source at the beginning of each year. The second is the
total par amount of the subset of bonds in the annual snapshot entering into ﬁnancial
distress each year. The default rate is simply the ratio of the latter to the former.
Note that for a default to be included in the numerator of this ratio, the bond needs
to also be included in the denominator. This ensures that the estimated default rate
is economically meaningful and bounded between zero and one.
     Although we use a variety of data sources, the basic deﬁnition of ﬁnancial distress
remains fairly uniform throughout the study. In particular, ﬁnancial distress includes
events such as a ﬁrm defaulting on a coupon or principal payment, an initial account
of a bondholder committee meeting, entering into receivership, bankruptcy, reorga-
nization, etc. The Appendix provides details about the data sources, data collection
protocols, and deﬁnitions of ﬁnancial distress used in constructing these time series.


                      3. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

In this section, we provide some selected background about the major historical trends,
events, and legal environment inﬂuencing the corporate bond markets during the sam-
ple period. In doing this, we focus primarily on the earlier part of our sample period
since this is likely to be less familiar to the reader.9
3.1 The Railroad Boom and Crashes of the 19th Century
U.S. industrialization in the 19th Century was driven in large part by the transporta-
tion revolution. In 1860, the American railroad network consisted of 30,000 miles of
track in operation. By 1910, the U.S. had 351,767 miles of track, of which 266,000
miles were main track (Hughes and Cain (2007)). As Hughes and Cain argue in their
economic history,


         “Constructing America’s railroads was such a giant eﬀort that the
         story of it has become simply overpowering in its inﬂuence upon
         American history. . . . There had never before been anything like
         it.” (p. 287).

9
 There are many excellent ﬁnancial and economic histories of the United States for
the period covered by this study. Examples include Macaulay (1938), Friedman and
Schwartz (1963), Snowden (1990), Homer and Sylla (1991), Markham (2001, 2002),
and Hughes and Cain (2007).


                                           7
There were three major waves of railroad construction in the late 19th Century: 1868–
1873, 1879–1883, and 1886–1892 (Fishlow (1965)). Railroads were built mainly with
borrowed money and it should not come as a surprise perhaps that each of these booms
correspond to subsequent major crises and high default rates.
     As discussed by Friedman and Schwartz (1963), and Homer and Sylla (1991), the
late 19th Century was also characterized by an enormous expansion in the size of U.S.
debt markets, economic activity and productivity, the national banking system, as
well as the transportation system. Quoting from Friedman and Schwartz,



        “There are many other signs of rapid economic growth. This was
        a period of great railroad expansion dramatized by the linking of the
        coasts by rail in 1869. The number of miles of track operated more
        than doubled from 1867 to 1879, a rate of expansion not matched
        subsequently. . . . The political developments combined with the
        great cheapening in transportation to produce a rapid extension of
        the area under cultivation. The number of farms rose by over 50
        percent from 1870 to 1880 for the U.S. as whole. The average value
        per acre apparently increased despite the sharp decline in the price
        of farm products—clear evidence of a rise in economic productivity.”
        (Chapter 2, pg. 35).


     The growth in economic activity was accompanied by a rapid expansion in the
corporate bond market. For example, the number of bond issuers listed in the Com-
mercial and Financial Chronicle was 158 in 1866, but quickly reached 421 by 1872.
The Commercial and Financial Chronicle from this period is often ﬁlled with enthu-
siastic accounts about the promise of new technology,


        “ . . . every well-built railroad if suitably located becomes a pro-
        ductive machine which adds to the wealth of the whole country . . .
        Our new railroads increase the value of farms and open new markets
        for their products. They lessen the time and cost of travel. They
        give a value to commodities otherwise almost worthless. They con-
        centrate population, stimulate production and raise wages by making
        labor more eﬃcient. Our existing railroads are computed to create
        more wealth every year than is absorbed for the construction of new
        railroads.” (January 11, 1873).


The parallels between this period and the recent internet and dot-com era of the late

                                         8
1990s and early 2000s are indeed striking.
     However, later in the same year there was a major panic which led to a default
rate of 14.3 percent in 1873. Contrast the buoyant spirit reﬂected in the previous
quote with that evidenced by the following quote from the Commercial and Financial
Chronicle exactly one year later.


        “After such a panic as has, the past year, swept over the country, it
        becomes a kind of melancholy pleasure to look over the ﬁeld and ﬁnd
        that there are not quite so many dead and wounded lying about as
        was anticipated. It was a fearful storm while it lasted, and although
        every one of course can say now that he knew it was coming, yet the
        real truth is, its breaking was terribly sudden and unexpected. . .
        . There are few people who allow themselves to remember long the
        lessons experience would teach them. If this were not so, there would
        be many less failures in the world. . . . Almost all felt they were
        carrying too much debt; they would henceforth be out of it. There
        are now, however, very evident signs that these resolutions have been
        mostly forgotten. Overtrading, as it is called, is an evil that has ever
        existed, and pretty much the same epitaph can be written above each
        business prostration—here lies the result of an attempt to do too
        much with too little capital. Must history necessarily repeat itself?”
        (January 10, 1874).


Once again, the parallels between the leverage-related ﬁnancial crisis of the 1870s and
the recent subprime-mortgage securitized-credit crisis are clear. Unfortunately, the
storm was far from over and history immediately repeated itself. Consider the follow-
ing quote from a demoralized editorial in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle less
than three years after the previous quote and following default rates of 16.3 percent
in 1874, 5.3 percent in 1875, and 5.9 percent in 1876,


        “This marks the depth of the present disease. It has not been sim-
        ply the falling out of reckless traders—not the end of an ordinarily
        wild speculation in which the failure is usually the result of individual
        indiscretion and rashness; but it is more a result of a wrong ﬁnan-
        cial system. We have been trading on a ﬁctitious basis. The truth
        that it was not real, suddenly is forced upon every man. The houses,
        the stocks of goods, the factories we had produced and built and held
        at high values, we see could now be duplicated at about two-thirds or
        one-half their cost.” (July 15, 1876).

                                             9
Although written more than 130 years ago, both the qualitative and quantitative
sentiments expressed in this quote are mirrored eerily in discussions and debates about
the current global ﬁnancial crisis.
     Financial history repeated itself several more times during the latter part of the
19th Century. The number of issuers listed in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle
continued to increase steadily throughout this period, reﬂecting a large demand for
debt capital by the railroads and a growing need by the emerging utility and industrial
sectors (particularly the promising new technology of electricity).10 For example, in
1880, the bonds listed in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle represented 339
railroads, 12 canals, and 12 miscellaneous issuers. By 1899, the Commercial and
Financial Chronicle listed not only bonds for 404 railroads, 196 street railroads, 55
gas and electric utilities, but also 200 miscellaneous issuers (primarily industrial ﬁrms
and other types of utilities). Despite the growth in the corporate bond market (or
perhaps because of it), there were several other major default events during the 1880s
and 1890s, although these were not as severe as those experienced during the decade
of the 1870s.
3.2 Bankruptcy and Receivership
In this subsection we review the main historical developments concerning legal issues
of corporate reorganizations. The main point that emerges from this discussion is that
for most of the earlier period of our study, equity receivership rather than bankruptcy
was the mechanism under which the consequences of default on corporate bonds were
played out.
3.2.1 Bankruptcy Law
There are many in-depth reviews of the history of bankruptcy law in the United States
including Warren (1935), Tabb (1995), Skeel (2001), and Franks and Sussman (2003).
In this section, we summarize some of the key events described in these sources which
are relevant for our study.
     Tabb (1995) explains that U.S. bankruptcy law dates back to the Constitutional
Convention of 1787 which empowered Congress to “pass uniform laws on the subject
of bankruptcy.” Quoting from Tabb,


         “For over a century after the Constitution, however, the Bankruptcy
         Clause remained largely unexercised by Congress. During those peri-
         ods, many states stepped into the void and passed their own bankrupt-
         cy legislation. A Federal bankruptcy law was in existence only from
         1800 to 1803, from 1841 to 1843, and from 1867 to 1878. Permanent
10
  See Benmelech (2009) for an in-depth analysis of the debt maturity of railroads and
the marketability of railroad assets during this period.


                                           10
        Federal bankruptcy legislation did not go into eﬀect until 1898. Thus,
        states were free to act in bankruptcy matters for all but 16 of the
        ﬁrst 109 years after the Constitution was ratiﬁed. In each instance
        of Federal action, the Federal legislation followed a major ﬁnancial
        disaster: the Act of 1800 followed the Panic of 1797, the Act of 1841
        came after the Panic of 1837; the 1867 Act followed the Panic of 1857
        and the Civil War; and ﬁnally the 1898 Act was passed in the wake
        of the Panic of 1893.”


     The passage of the Act of 1898 (the Nelson Act) represented the beginning of
permanent Federal bankruptcy law. The Act was viewed as ushering in a regime char-
acterized by liberal debtor treatment, although there were many restrictions placed
on the ability of corporations to enter voluntary bankruptcy. From 1898 to the pas-
sage of the Act of 1938 (the Chandler Act), there were many amendments made to
the 1898 Act, typically in an eﬀort to mitigate its extreme pro-debtor nature. It is
important to observe, however, that the early part of the 1930s saw the passage of a
number of pro-debtor amendments and laws by Congress that favored rehabilitation
rather the liquidation of defaulting ﬁrms. A number of these amendments were struck
down by the Supreme Court, but then reworked and reenacted by Congress in a way
that survived judicial review. The Chandler Act represented a major overhaul of the
1898 Act and formalized many of the corporate reorganization mechanisms that had
been passed by Congress during the earlier part of the 1930s (such as the railroad
reorganization laws of 1933 and 1935).
     The Chandler Act eﬀectively transferred power in bankruptcy away from man-
agers and towards independent trustees. As a result, as Skeel (2001) suggests, the
1938 Act discouraged managers of large ﬁrms from ﬁling for bankruptcy (under Chap-
ter 10 designed originally for large corporations) if there was any way to avoid it. In
later decades, managers used all manner of tricks to ﬁle under Chapter 11 (designed
originally for small businesses) which left the management intact.
     Bankruptcy law in its current form was ushered in through the Bankruptcy Re-
form Act of 1978. This Act introduced many major changes to the bankruptcy process,
combined several of the earlier types of reorganization into a Chapter 11 process, and
re-introduced debtor-in-possession procedures and trustees, etc. The most recent ma-
jor revision to bankruptcy law was the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer
Protection Act of 2005 which made sweeping changes to the ability of consumers and
business to ﬁle for voluntary bankruptcy.
3.2.2 Equity Receivership
The lack of a Federal bankruptcy law during most of the latter part of the 19th
Century proved to be a challenge for corporate bondholders since most of the defaults
during this period were for railroads, almost all of which (especially the large ones)

                                          11
were interstate. As Tabb (1995) says,


         “Given the interstate nature of virtually all of the railroads, state
         remedies were entirely inadequate. The creative solution achieved was
         to invoke the power of the Federal courts to supervise the restructuring
         of the railroad. Court-supervised receiverships remained the predomi-
         nant means of corporate reorganization for about a half century, until
         Federal reorganization laws were enacted during the Depression.”

         “A receivership was commenced when a creditor petitioned the Federal
         court to exercise its equity jurisdiction to appoint a receiver to take
         control of the corporate debtor’s assets. The receiver then would be
         able to continue to run the railroad, while looking for a buyer for the
         assets. Eventually the assets would be sold in a foreclosure sale, and
         the creditors would be paid out of the proceeds of the sale. Since the
         business could be sold as a going concern, a higher price could be
         realized.”


     It is important to stress that various bankruptcy acts sporadically introduced in
the 19th Century (including the more permanent 1898 Act) were meant mainly for
small businesses rather than large corporations. For example, the 1867 Bankruptcy
Act assumed that bankrupt corporations would simply be shut down and their assets
liquidated. Such an approach did not make sense for railroads, since everyone agreed
that it was important to keep the railroads running. By the ﬁnal decades of the
19th Century the courts had developed a judicial reorganization technique known as
equity receivership, which became the basis for modern corporate reorganization. As
explained in detail in Skeel (2001), equity receivership was eﬀectively cobbled together
by various claimholders and courts from two powers that did have an established
common-law pedigree: courts’ equitable authority to appoint receivers and the right
of a mortgage holder to foreclose on a mortgaged property if the debtor defaults. The
oldest case, the Munroe Railroad and Banking Company, dates from 1848. The court
suggested that it made more sense to preserve the troubled railroad than to dismember
it. Quoting from Skeel (2001),


         “What disastrous consequences would have resulted,” the court ex-
         claimed, “if each judgement creditor had been allowed to seize and
         sell separate portions of the road, at diﬀerent sales in the six diﬀerent
         Counties through which it passed and to diﬀerent purchasers? Would
         not this valuable property have been utterly sacriﬁced?” (p. 57).

                                           12
          In another watershed case, the 1884 Wabash railroad reorganization, the
     presiding judge concluded that


         “An expenditure [must] be made for the beneﬁt of all parties in interest
         . . . in order that [the railroad] shall be made a going concern.
         Otherwise, in the expressive language of a distinguished friend, you
         have nothing else but a streak of iron-rust on the prairie.” (Skeel
         (2001), pp. 62–63).


     As Skeel further explains, by analogy to current bankruptcy law, appointing a
receiver served the same purpose as the automatic stay does now. Several important
cases further modiﬁed the equity receivership procedure. In one such case, the court
approved a “receiver’s certiﬁcate” by allowing priority to be given to investors who
contributed new funds (because railroads needed ﬁnancing to cover operating costs).
This is similar to the current practice of debtor-in-possession ﬁnancing in Chapter 11.
In the 1884 Wabash receivership equityholders (lead by Jay Gould, a robber baron)
ﬁled for receivership themselves before defaulting and were appointed the receivers.
Indeed, in a study of 150 receiverships between 1870 and 1898, Henry Swain (1898)
found that insiders were appointed as receivers in 138 of the cases. To give yet another
example, in the 1913 case of Northern Paciﬁc v. Boyd the Supreme Court announced
the “ﬁxed principle” that outlined the rights of unsecured creditors and eventually
would become bankruptcy’s absolute priority rule.
     Importantly, certain industries (such as railroads) were treated diﬀerently under
the 1938 Chandler Act. In particular, the Act had new railroad provisions (Section
77), which provided for a binding two-thirds vote by classes of creditors and for nation-
wide jurisdiction but still left the reorganization process itself entirely to the parties
themselves.
3.3 Development of Financial Markets
The massive capital investments in steam and street railroads, canals, and later utilities
in the 19th Century were ﬁnanced mainly by private means. Existing evidence suggests
that capital was raised using securities with features that are very similar to modern
ﬁnancial instruments: common and preferred equity, and secured (and later unsecured)
coupon-bearing debt.11 This gave rise to a liquid and active secondary market for
railroad and other securities, with corporate bonds actively traded on NYSE and
11
  It is unclear at present how the cross-section of corporate leverage ratios looked in
the 19th Century. Some very preliminary evidence we collected for one year (1889),
suggests that book leverage ratios were higher than observed today (on the order of
40-50 percent) and that there is a substantial cross-sectional variation with some ﬁrms
having only common equity and many others exhibiting very high leverage ratios. A

                                           13
other exchanges.
    The NYSE by the 1860s already resembled its 20th Century counterpart in many
important respects and was also quick to implement technological novelties. For ex-
ample, as early as September 1882 the NYSE introduced stock tickers (electric tickers
based on Edison’s invention). The telephone was installed in 1879 and the electric
annunciator board in 1881. These innovations led to a substantial increase in trading
volume and liquidity.
      Investors, and particularly bond investors, had access to a wide range of reputable
sources of information. The Commercial and Financial Chronicle has already been
mentioned. In addition to a weekly newspaper, subscribers received a monthly bulletin
of all the recorded prices on major exchanges and quarterly or semi-annual supplements
which listed all the major companies and gave detailed information on securities issued
by them. Henry Poor’s annual railroad manuals (which included industrial ﬁrms
as well) contained detailed information about all large companies, including balance
sheets, income statements, details on collateral for most bond issues as well as carefully
drawn railroad maps.
     A sizable industry of ﬁnancial analysts providing second-hand assessment of the
development of ﬁnancial markets and investment advice developed quickly and was
not dissimilar to what we observe today. To give one example, in his memoirs William
McAdoo, President Wilson’s Secretary of the Treasury during the First World War,
recalled the early days of his career when he started selling investment securities in
New York in 1892 (McAdoo (1931)):


         “I became a walking encyclopedia of railroad statistics . . . I could
         give the capitalization, earnings, and general characteristics of every
         well known railroad in the United States. . . . The drawers of
         my desk were crammed full of railroad maps. I studied them day
         and night. After a while I had a mental picture of every important
         railroad system; I could take a map of the United States and mark
         with a pencil the main line and principal branches of any railroad one
         might name.” (pp. 56-57).


McAdoo’s picturesque memoirs stand out, but from what we can judge, his experience
was a typical one. In a nutshell, all the evidence suggests that by the second half of
the 19th Century, the U.S. ﬁnancial markets were already highly developed.


more detailed study of leverage is beyond this paper.


                                           14
                                                             4. CORPORATE DEFAULT RATES

      As a ﬁrst step in the analysis, we begin by providing a long-term historical perspec-
      tive on corporate default experience in the United States. Table 1 reports summary
      statistics for the annual default rates for the 1866−2008 period. Figure 1 plots the
      time series of these annual default rates.


                                        18


                                        16


                                        14
Value−Weighted Default Rate (Percent)




                                        12


                                        10


                                         8


                                         6


                                         4


                                         2


                                         0
                                                  1880       1900       1920         1940     1960       1980       2000


                                             Figure 1. Historical Default Rates. This graph plots the annual value-
                                             weighted percentage default rates for bonds issued by domestic nonﬁnancial
                                             ﬁrms for the 1866−2008 period.


           As shown, the U.S. has experienced many severe default events during the study
      period. The most dramatic of these was clearly the catastrophic railroad crisis of the
      1870s that followed the enormous boom in railroad construction of the 1860s. This
      railroad crisis lasted an entire decade, and two years during this period had default

                                                                                15
rates on the order of 15 percent. In fact, default rates during the three-year 1873−1875
period totaled 35.90 percent. In contrast, default rates for the worst three-year period
during the Great Depression only totaled 12.88 percent, and this three-year period
only ranks in fourth place among the worst three-year default periods during the
study period.
     From Table 1, the long-run average default rate is 1.517 percent. Figure 1, how-
ever, shows that the distribution of defaults is far from uniform. Rather, the historical
experience is characterized by long periods with relatively few defaults following by
episodes of signiﬁcant clustering of defaults. This is also evident from the varia-
tion in summary statistics across the three subperiods, 1866−1899, 1900−1945, and
1946−2008. The result is a distribution of default rates that is highly skewed towards
large values. As a result, the median default rate of 0.545 percent is signiﬁcantly less
than the mean default rate of 1.517 percent. The standard deviation of default rates
is 2.414 percent. Figure 2 plots the histogram of annual default rates.
     The time series of default rates shows that there is wide variation in the historical
experience. The ﬁrst half of the study period is characterized by a series of severe and
prolonged credit episodes. In contrast, the second half of the study period experienced
far fewer major credit events. This pattern parallels the well-known evidence that,
from 1857 (when the NBER data begins) to today, business cycles have generally
become more infrequent and less severe.
     These similarities between default events and business cycles motivate examining
and contrasting their properties in more depth. Table 2 reports summary statistics
for the major default cycles during the study period, where a default cycle is deﬁned
as a single year or a contiguous period of more than one year during which the default
rate each year exceeds the mean rate of 1.517 percent. Table 2 shows that there were
13 of these default cycles during the study period. In contrast, the NBER identiﬁes
31 distinct recessions during the same period.12 Thus, while there are only about
40 percent as many default cycles as recessions, the fact that the economy spends
about the same amount of time in both states illustrates the more persistent nature of
default cycles. The NBER data imply that the average duration of a recession during
the sample period is about 1.5 years. In comparison, the default cycles identiﬁed in
Table 2 have an average duration of about 3.2 years, which is more than double that
for the NBER recessions.
    To explore this latter point further, we deﬁne an annual dummy variable that
takes a value of one if any part of the year includes a recession, and zero otherwise.
12
  While the deﬁnition of a default cycle is somewhat arbitrary, it has the consequence
that the total number of years identiﬁed as belonging to a default cycle (42) is al-
most precisely equal to the number of recession years (42.4) identiﬁed by the NBER
during the same period. For a more formal treatment of default cycles, see Giesecke,
Longstaﬀ, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2010).


                                           16
        70




        60




        50




        40
Count




        30




        20




        10




         0
              0        2        4        6        8          10         12   14    16
                                    Value−Weighted Default Rate (Percent)


             Figure 2. Histogram of Historical Default Rates. This ﬁgure shows
             the histogram of annual value-weighted percentage default rates for bonds
             issued by domestic nonﬁnancial ﬁrms for the 1866−2008 period.



Similarly, we deﬁne an annual dummy variable that takes a value of one if the year is
included in a default cycle as identiﬁed in Table 2, and zero otherwise. The ﬁrst order
serial correlations for these two time series are 0.267 and 0.574, respectively. Thus,
while default cycles are less common that business cycle downturns, they tend to be
signiﬁcantly more persistent. For a detailed analysis of the relation between default
cycle and business cycles using this data set, see Giesecke, Longstaﬀ, Schaefer, and
Strebulaev (2010).
     As an alternative way of looking at major default events, we tabulate total credit
losses over all three-year periods throughout the sample period. Table 3 provides

                                                  17
summary statistics for the most signiﬁcant three-year non-overlapping default events
ranked by their severity.13 As described above, the worst three-year period is the
1873−75 period in which the default rates total to 35.90 percent. The 1892−1894
and 1883−1885 periods resulted in total default rates of 18.69 and 16.06 percent,
respectively. The 1933−1935 period during the Great Depression ranks a distant
fourth with a total default rate of 12.88 percent. Thus, while the Great Depression
may have been the worst economic period during the sample period, it is actually very
far from being the worst credit event experienced in the corporate bond market. The
ﬁfth and sixth worst three-year periods have total default rates that are very similar
to that of the 1933−1935 period. Observe that the 2000−2002 period is the only
post-World-War-II period in the top twelve three-year periods listed in Table 3. We
note that the year-to-date corporate nonﬁnancial default rate for 2009 as of the end
of September is 2.46 percent (per Moody’s). Thus, however large the current ﬁnancial
crisis may appear, the 2009 default rate is unlikely to aﬀect any of the rankings of the
three-year period shown in Table 3.
     Table 3 also reports the average stock market return for each of these three-
year periods. The annual stock market return time series is given by combining the
monthly data for 1802−1929 provided by Schwert (1990) with CRSP value-weighted
data for the subsequent period (data provided by Ken French). Of the 12 periods, 8
have average stock market returns that are below the overall average of 10.33 percent.
The average return over the 12 periods is 8.66 percent. Given the volatility of stock
returns, however, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the average return for the 12
periods is not signiﬁcantly less than the overall average of 10.33 percent.
     Table 3 also reports the average fraction for each three-year period that the econ-
omy is in a downturn based on its NBER business cycle identiﬁcation. As shown, the
average fractions range from 0.08 to 1.00. Averaging over all 12 periods, the overall
average is 0.43. This is slightly higher than the unconditional average over the entire
sample period of 0.32. These results hint at the evidence documented in Giesecke,
Longstaﬀ, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2010) that business cycles and credit cycles are
only moderately correlated. For example, the simple correlation between the annual
dummy variables for business cycles and default cycles described above is only 0.263.
We will return to this issue in the next section as we study the historical determinants
of default risk in the corporate bond market.


              5. THE DETERMINANTS OF DEFAULT RISK

In this section, we use variables suggested by a number of theoretical credit models
13
 The sum over three years can include a few issuers that default more than once.
These issuers, however, represent a very small fraction of the total.


                                          18
to study the determinants of corporate default rates. In doing this, we ﬁrst review
these models and consider their empirical implications for realized default rates. We
then describe the variables we use in the empirical analysis. Finally, we report the
regression results and discuss their implications.
5.1 Modeling Corporate Default Risk
There is a large theoretical literature on modeling corporate default risk, the valuation
of corporate bonds, and default prediction that is far too extensive for us to review fully
here. In general, however, this literature can be divided into three broad categories:
structural models, reduced-form models, and macroeconomic/accounting-based mod-
els. We consider each of these three frameworks in turn below. It is important to
acknowledge, however, that these three frameworks are not necessarily mutually ex-
clusive and that speciﬁc variables may be implied by more than one framework. For
example, many of the variables suggested by the structural framework can easily be
incorporated into a reduced-form framework as well (for example, see Chava and Jar-
row (2004), Duﬃe, Saita, and Wang (2007)). Thus, our analysis should be viewed as
an exploratory investigation into the determinants of default risk, and not as a test of
any speciﬁc credit model.
5.1.1 Structural credit models
This class of models was introduced by the important early series of papers on option
pricing theory and its applications including Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton
(1973, 1974). Signiﬁcant extensions of the basic structural credit framework include
Black and Cox (1976), Geske (1977), Leland (1994, 2004), Longstaﬀ and Schwartz
(1995), Goldstein, Ju, and Leland (2001), Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2001), and
many others.
     In this class of models, corporate bonds represent contingent claims on the under-
lying assets of a ﬁrm. By modeling the asset-value dynamics and the events triggering
default, contingent claims valuation technology can be applied to the debt claims of
a ﬁrm. An important dimension of this credit framework is that it identiﬁes key
factors that may drive corporate bond values. For example, as discussed by Collin-
Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) who investigate the determinants of credit
spread changes, the structural framework implies that corporate credit spreads should
be driven by variables such as ﬁrm value, leverage, interest rates, the slope of the
term structure, and volatility. Factors driving credit spreads should also be relevant
for determining corporate default probabilities.
     In light of this, our approach will be to examine whether realized corporate default
rates can be forecast on the basis of ex ante variables suggested by structural models.
Rather than doing this at the individual ﬁrm level (which would clearly not be feasible
given the scope of the study), we adopt a macro perspective and study default rates
at the aggregate level. Speciﬁcally, we use a regression approach to test whether mar-
ketwide “structural” variables have explanatory power for subsequent realized default

                                            19
rates.
     Identifying structural variables that are available throughout the 1866−2008
study period is a very challenging task given the lack of data during the early years
of the sample. Despite this, however, we were able to extract a number of time series
from the historical record that parallel those used in Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and
Martin (2001). Speciﬁcally, we include as explanatory variables in the regression the
annual stock market return, the annual stock market return variance, the yield on
riskless government bonds, and the slope of the yield curve. The annual stock returns
are obtained from the sources described in Section 4. The annual stock return variance
is estimated by simply computing the variance of the twelve monthly returns for each
year.
     The yields on government bonds are obtained from data provided by Homer and
Sylla (1991) for 1866−1989, and from the Federal Reserve Board’s Selected Interest
Rates H.15 statistical release for the annual ten-year constant maturity Treasury rate
for the 1990−2008 period. Homer and Sylla argue that because government bonds
were distorted by gold premiums and liquidity issues, “market yields on governments
must be disregarded altogether from 1863 until 1918 as a guide to American long-term
interest rates.” Accordingly, we use the yields on high-grade New England municipal
bonds from 1866−1914, and the yield for the high-grade Bond Buyer municipal bond
index from 1915−1918 as proxies for the riskless government yield during these peri-
ods.14 For the 1919−1989 period, we use the average of long-term government bonds
provided by Homer and Sylla (which is taken from the Federal Reserve, see the sources
listed in Homer and Sylla, Table 50). The data are taken from Homer and Sylla Tables
42, 43, 45, 48, and 51.
     To estimate the slope of the credit curve, we take the diﬀerence between the yield
on high-quality long-term corporate bonds and a measure of the yield on short-term
corporate commercial paper. The yields for commercial paper for the 1866−1989
period are taken from Homer and Sylla (1991) Tables 44, 49, and 53. The yields
for commercial paper for the 1990−2008 period are taken from the Federal Reserve
Board’s Selected Interest Rates H.15 statistical release for the three-month maturity
(nonﬁnancial). As a measure of the yield on high-quality corporate bonds for the
1866−1899 period, we use the annual yields on high-grade railroad bonds given in
Tables 42 and 43 of Homer and Sylla. For the 1900−1989 period, we use the year-end
yields for prime corporate bonds given in Tables 45, 47, and 50 of Homer and Sylla.
For the 1990−2008 period, we use the annual Moody’s Aaa index as reported by the
Federal Reserve Board’s Selected Interest Rates H.15 statistical release. An important
advantage of using the high-grade railroad and prime corporate bond indexes reported
by Homer and Sylla is that they allow us to measure corporate yields annually over
more than a century while holding the deﬁnition of the index composition relatively
14
     Shiller (1989) adopts the same approach in identifying historical interest rates.


                                             20
ﬁxed over time.
5.1.2 Reduced-form credit models
Another important class of credit models approaches the valuation of corporate bonds
from the perspective of ﬁnancial distress being triggered by the realization of a jump
or Poisson process. In this framework, the intensity of the Poisson process plays a
central role and is directly linked to the credit spread of a corporate bond. Important
papers in this area include Jarrow and Turnbull (1995), Duﬃe and Singleton (1997,
1999), and many others.
    Because of the link between credit spreads and the intensity of the underlying
process triggering default, corporate credit spreads contain information about the
probability of default. Speciﬁcally, credit spreads can be expressed in terms of the
actual probabilities of default (under the objective or P -measure) plus a component
representing a risk premium compensating investors for bearing credit risk.15 A direct
implication of the reduced-form modeling framework is that corporate credit spreads
may contain information useful in forecasting future realized default rates.
    To examine this implication, we will include the spread between the yield on the
high-quality corporate bonds and the yield on riskless government bonds with similar
maturities. This data is described in the previous subsection.
5.1.3 Macroeconomic and Accounting-Based models
These studies focus primarily on the relation between business cycles and the ﬁnancial
health of bond issuers. For example, Fama and French (1993), Dichev (1998), Chava
and Jarrow (2004), Vassalou and Xing (2004), Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008),
and others consider the extent to which credit risk represents a systematic risk in the
macroeconomic environment that is priced in ﬁnancial markets (see, for example,
Bhamra, Kuhn, and Strebulaev (2010a, 2010b)). Accounting-based examples include
Beaver (1966), Altman (1968), Ohlson (1980), Beaver, McNichols, and Rhie (2005),
and others that focus on earnings and accounting ratios (which reﬂect the sales, ex-
penses, growth, liquidity, etc. of the ﬁrm, which in turn derive from the economic and
business environment the ﬁrm faces) and their ability to forecast defaults for individ-
ual ﬁrms. The common theme throughout this literature is that corporate defaults are
directly related to the broader macroeconomic environment. Speciﬁcally, the current
state of the economy should impact the likelihood that a ﬁrm will enter into ﬁnancial
distress in the near future.
     To examine the link between economic downturns and subsequent corporate de-
fault rates, we construct an annual indicator variable representing the percentage of

15
  In general, the risk premium component in a credit spread will be an increasing
but nonlinear function of the objective default probability, and so the overall relation
between credit spreads and default probabilities would also be nonlinear.


                                          21
the year that the U.S. economy is in recession as determined by the NBER (data pro-
vided on the NBER website). For example, the NBER recession beginning in January
1980 and ending in June 1980 would result in the indicator taking a value of 0.50 for
1980.
5.2 The Results for Default Rates
Table 4 provides summary statistics for all of the variables described above. In par-
ticular, we report summary statistics for the entire 1866−2008 period as well as for
the three subperiods 1866−1899, 1900−1945, and 1946−2008.
     In examining the empirical implications of these credit-modeling frameworks, our
approach will be to estimate a simple regression speciﬁcation with three lagged values
of the variables. In doing this, it is helpful to ﬁrst apply a log transform to the default
rate. The reason for this is simply that default rates are bounded between zero and
one, inclusive. This increases the likelihood that without the log transformation, the
regression residuals will not satisfy the usual normality assumption. Thus, to improve
the regression speciﬁcation, we use the natural logarithm of the default rate (plus one
basis point since some values of the default rate are zero) as the measure of realized
default rates.16
     In estimating the regressions, we use four diﬀerent speciﬁcations. In the ﬁrst, we
use only the structural variables. In the second, we use only the credit spread. In
the third, we use only the NBER recession indicator. In the fourth, we use all of the
variables. Table 5 reports the results from estimating these speciﬁcations. The ﬁrst
set of four columns in Table 5 reports the coeﬃcient estimates; the second set of four
columns reports the Newey-West t-statistics for the coeﬃcients.
     Focusing ﬁrst on the structural speciﬁcation, Table 5 shows that the ﬁrst and third
lagged default rate variables are highly signiﬁcant in all four speciﬁcations. This is
consistent with earlier results showing that default rates display signiﬁcant persistence.
The ﬁrst lagged value of the stock return is negative and highly signiﬁcant. This
negative sign is consistent with the implications of the structural framework in which
an increase in the value of the underlying assets leads to an increase in the value
of equity and a decrease in the probability of default. Similarly, the variance of
stock returns is positive and signiﬁcant. Again, this is consistent with the structural
framework which implies that as volatility increases, the risk of a default increases.17
The other structural variables are not signiﬁcant in this speciﬁcation.
16
  We reestimate the regressions using the untransformed default rate instead and
obtain results very similar to those reported.
17
   Indeed, it is the total volatility of the ﬁrm, which consists of both systematic and
idiosyncratic components, that matters for default rate prediction. Therefore, it is
likely that our measure of volatility which proxies for systematic stock volatility un-
derestimates the total volatility eﬀect.


                                            22
     The results for the reduced-form speciﬁcation again demonstrate that the ﬁrst
and third lagged default rate variables are highly signiﬁcant. In contrast, the lagged
corporate credit spreads have no incremental forecasting power for default rates and
are not signiﬁcant. This result parallels and complements the ﬁndings in Collin-
Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) who show that a considerable part of the
time variation in credit spreads does not appear to be closely related to economic
fundamentals driving default risk. Our ﬁndings suggest that the converse proposition
holds: that credit spreads have little explanatory power for default risk. One possible
interpretation of these results is that time variation in credit spreads is driven primarily
by changes in credit and liquidity risk premia, and only marginally by changes in the
actual probability of default.
     The results for the macroeconomic speciﬁcation are slightly stronger than for the
reduced-form speciﬁcation. In particular, the same lagged default rate variables are
again signiﬁcant. The ﬁrst lagged value of the NBER recession indicator variable
is positive and signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level, suggesting that experiencing a
recession during the current year weakly increases the default rate for the subsequent
year.
     Finally, by combining all of the variables into a single speciﬁcation, we can di-
rectly compare their incremental forecasting power for default rates. As shown, three
of the four structural variables are signiﬁcant in this combined speciﬁcation. In par-
ticular, the stock return is again negative in sign, consistent with the implications of
the structural framework. The variance of the stock return again has a positive and
signiﬁcant eﬀect on the default rate. In contrast, neither the lagged corporate credit
spreads nor the NBER recession indicators are signiﬁcant in the combined speciﬁca-
tion. Taken together, these results imply that the structural variables best describe
the long-run behavior of default rates in the United States.


        6. HOW DOES THE MARKET VALUE DEFAULT RISK?

Given this evidence about the determinants of corporate default risk, a logical next
step is to examine whether corporate bonds are priced in a way that is consistent
with the properties of realized default rates. In this section, we again use a regression
framework to test whether recent default experience in the market maps into higher
default spreads in the future.
6.1 Default Losses and Credit Spreads
As a preliminary to the analysis, it is interesting to ﬁrst contrast long-run corporate
default experience with historical corporate spreads. Recall that over the entire sam-
ple period, the average default rate is about 1.50 percent. Making the broad-brush
assumption that corporate defaults only result in a 50 percent loss on average, a sim-


                                            23
ple back-of-the-envelope computation suggests that average historical default losses
during the study period are on the order of 75 basis points per year.18 This esti-
mate is surprisingly similar to the average default rate of 91.3 basis points for the
1982−2008 period reported in Table 29 of Moody’s Corporate Default and Recovery
Rates, 1920−2008.19
     Ideally, we would like to compare the average default loss with the average yield
spreads for the bonds in the sample. Note that the credit spread for high-quality
bonds used in the regressions in the previous section, although providing a consis-
tent measure of the historical variation in credit spreads, may understate the average
spread for all bonds in the annual snapshot (since not all bonds are high-quality).
Although we do not have yield data for the individual bonds in the annual snapshot,
we approximate the average yield in the following way. For the 1866−1899 period,
Macaulay (1938) reports yield data for a sample of long-term high-quality railroad
bonds. Since his sample is tilted towards bonds with lower yields (although there is
considerable variation in the yields reported), we use the maximum yield for the set
of bonds included in his sample each year as the proxy for the value-weighted average
yield for all bonds. For the 1900−1918 period, we use the quadrennial information in
Table 49 of Hickman (1960) to calculate the weighted-average yield for all the bonds in
market.20 For the 1919−2008 period, we use the simple average of Moody’s Aaa and
Baa bond indexes (implicitly assuming that the average bond has a spread midway

18
   Hickman (1960) Table 152 implies that the average recovery rate of defaulted issues
during the 1900−1944 period is about 62.5 percent of par value. Table 26 of Moody’s
Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920−2008 implies an average recovery rate
of 41.4 percent for the 1982-2008 period. Thus, an assumed 50 percent recovery rate
is broadly consistent with the historical experience.
19
  It is important to acknowledge that assuming a constant loss rate of 50 percent may
not fully capture the economics of credit losses. One reason for this is that loss rates
may vary over time as bankruptcy laws change, as the industry composition of the
cross-section of issuers evolves, and as the degree of collateralization associated with
bond issues varies. In addition, Altman, Brady, Resti, and Sironi (2005) have sug-
gested that default rates are negatively correlated with recovery rates and, therefore,
calculating expected loss from the mean values of these two variables could lead to
an underestimation. Nevertheless, this assumption should provide a reasonable ﬁrst
approximation.
20
  Because of the quadrennial nature of the data, we cannot use it for purposes of
estimating the regressions as in the previous section; the high-quality corporate bond
index used in the previous section is much more appropriate for estimating the regres-
sions because of its consistent composition over time. For the purposes of estimating
the average value-weighted yield in the market, however, the Hickman data should be
more representative of the market.


                                          24
between these two indexes). As a robustness check for methodology used in obtain-
ing the 1866−1899 estimates, we apply the methodology to Macaulay’s data for 1900
and contrast it with that given by using the Hickman data. The resulting estimates
for 1900 are very similar, giving average yields of 4.19 and 4.28 percent, respectively.
Similarly, as a robustness check for the use of the average of the Moody’s indexes, we
contrast this average with the average yield implied by the Hickman data for 1920,
1924, and 1928. The average values of the yields given by the two methodologies over
this period are nearly identical. We deﬁne the yield spread as the diﬀerence between
our measure of corporate yields and the risk-free rate proxy described in Section 5.1.1.
     This time series results in an average corporate yield spread over the 1866−2008
period of 153.3 basis points. Thus, the average yield spread is about 78 basis points
higher than our back-of-the-envelope estimate of the historical default losses. This
implies that the market appears to incorporate a risk premium of roughly 80 basis
points into corporate bond prices. The standard deviation of the mean yield spread
is 4.18 basis points. Thus, the diﬀerence between the mean yield spread of 153.3 and
an expected loss rate of 75 basis points is highly statistically signiﬁcant.
     Alternatively, we can estimate the ratio of the expected risk-neutral credit losses
to actual credit losses (the ratio of Q- and P -measure expected losses) by dividing
the average yield spread of 153.3 basis points by the estimated average credit loss
of 75 basis points, giving a value of 2.04. This ratio is often used in the empirical
credit literature as a measure of the size of the credit premium (including both the
premium for the event of default or jump risk and the premium for changes in the
probability that default occurs). For example, Driessen (2005) estimates the ratio of
the risk-neutral and actual intensities for a sample of 104 U.S. ﬁrms for the 1991−2000
period. He ﬁnds that the ratio for AA-rated, A-rated, and BBB-rated ﬁrms are 1.83,
2.61, and 2.37, respectively. Similarly, Berndt, Douglas, Duﬃe, Ferguson, and Schranz
(2005) estimate the ratio for a sample of 94 U.S. ﬁrms using CDS spreads and KMV
expected default frequencies for the 2000−2004 period. The mean of their estimated
ratios is 2.8; the median of their estimated ratios is 2.0. Thus, our estimated ratio of
2.04 for the 1866−2008 period closely parallels the results in the literature based on
much shorter time periods.21
    It is important to provide a number of caveats in interpreting these results. First,
we cannot assert that the corporate credit spreads implied by the data described
above match precisely the credit spreads for the speciﬁc snapshot of bonds on which
our estimates of defaults are based. Second, as discussed previously, the historical
government bond yield data in Homer and Sylla (1991) does include data for State
rather than Federal bond issues for some periods during the late 19th and early 20th
Centuries. To the extent that these State issues carry more credit risk than Federal
21
  These results are also consistent with those implied by Almeida and Philippon
(2007).


                                          25
issues, then the estimated credit spreads could slightly underestimate the actual credit
spread. Despite these caveats, however, these results provide intriguing evidence that
the pricing of credit risk by ﬁnancial markets is remarkably consistent over time. To
investigate these results further, there is an urgent need for reliable long-run data on
corporate credit pricing.
6.2 The Results for Credit Spreads
Motivated by the results above, we again use a regression framework to examine the
extent to which corporate credit spreads respond to realized default rates and other
market and macroeconomic variables. Speciﬁcally, we test whether credit spreads
can be forecast on the basis of previous default rates, stock market returns, and
NBER recession indicators. In theory, credit spreads should reﬂect changes in expected
default rates over time, plus whatever risk/liquidity premia the market demands on
corporate bonds. Given the strong persistence in default rates as they cluster over
time, we would anticipate that the realized default rate for the current year would
be informative about expected future default rates and, therefore, reﬂected in current
and future credit spreads. In this analysis, we use the same variable deﬁnitions and
data sources as described in Section 5.
     Table 6 reports the results from four diﬀerent speciﬁcations. The ﬁrst includes
only current and lagged default rate variables. The second includes only current
and lagged stock market returns. The third includes only current and lagged NBER
recession indicators. The fourth includes all of these variables. As before, the ﬁrst
set of four columns in Table 6 reports the coeﬃcient estimates; the second set of four
columns reports the Newey-West t-statistics for the coeﬃcients.
     The ﬁrst lagged value of the credit spread is highly signiﬁcant in each of the four
speciﬁcations in Table 6. This is consistent with the highly persistent nature of credit
spreads; the ﬁrst order serial correlation coeﬃcient for the credit spread during the
sample period is 0.883.
     Table 6 shows, however, that the current and lagged values of the default rate
variables are not signiﬁcant in either the separate or combined speciﬁcations. Thus,
there is no evidence that credit spreads respond to the information in realized de-
fault rates (to the extent that such information is not already impounded into lagged
spreads).
     In contrast, Table 6 shows that there is a signiﬁcant contemporaneous relation
between credit spreads and the stock market return. The negative sign implies that
spreads tighten as the stock market increases in value. This is again broadly consistent
with the implications of the structural credit modeling framework. Finally, although
several of the lagged NBER recession indicators are signiﬁcant in the recession speci-
ﬁcation, none of these lagged values are signiﬁcant in the combined speciﬁcation.




                                          26
                                 7. CONCLUSION

We study the nature of corporate bond default risk using an extensive new data set
covering the 1866−2008 period. This data set extends by nearly a century the horizon
over which corporate bond default risk can be studied (relative to previous academic
research in the literature).
     A number of important ﬁndings emerge from this analysis. We ﬁnd that the
corporate bond markets have suﬀered many clustered default cycles, and that some of
these have been much more severe than those experienced during the Great Depression.
Default cycles tend to be less frequent but more persistent that NBER economic
downturns. This is perhaps one reason why the correlation between the two types of
cycles appears relatively weak.
     Second, we study the determinants of corporate default risk using a number of
variables suggested by theoretical models of credit risk. The results indicate that
the variables suggested by structural models have signiﬁcant forecasting power for
corporate default rates. In particular, stock market returns and stock market return
volatility have signiﬁcant predictive ability. Surprisingly, credit spreads and the state
of the economy as measured by an NBER-recession indicator do not have incremental
forecasting power.
     Finally, we consider how the market values credit risk over the long-term. We
ﬁnd that average credit spreads are roughly twice the estimated average default losses
on corporate bonds. Thus, the ratio of risk-neutral to actual default losses is roughly
two, consistent with a number of recent studies based on shorter sample periods.
Furthermore, we ﬁnd that credit spreads tend to be largely unaﬀected by recent default
experience in the corporate bond market. This evidence is consistent with recent
work by Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) showing that credit spreads
are driven by factors diﬃcult to explain by standard credit models.




                                           27
                                     APPENDIX

In measuring the default rate, we focus on the set of corporate bonds that satisfy
the following criteria. First, we include only bonds issued by U.S. corporations in the
sample. This criterion excludes bonds issued by ﬁrms domiciled in other countries.
Second, we include only bonds of nonﬁnancial corporations in the sample. Speciﬁcally,
bonds for corporations in the banking, securities, real estate, insurance, mortgage, etc.
industries are not included in the sample. This criterion also excludes the mortgage
bonds that were widely used during the ﬁrst part of the 20th Century to ﬁnance major
hotels, oﬃce buildings, etc. Third, we include only bonds issued by private for-proﬁt
corporations; bonds issued by eleemosynary entities such as religious organizations
and universities are excluded as are bonds issued by public sector entities such as
sovereigns, states, and municipalities. Note, however, that bonds issued by utilities and
street railroads are included since these issuers are in the private sector. As described
below, a few additional criteria are imposed on the set of corporate bonds included
in the sample during several of the subperiods. In each of these cases, however, the
same criteria are applied to both the numerator and denominator of the default rate
calculation. Thus, these additional restrictions likely have little eﬀect on the estimated
default rates.
A. Primary Data Sources
The data for the 1866−1899 period are extracted from the Commercial and Financial
Chronicle. This weekly newspaper was founded in 1865 and was the ﬁrst national
business newspaper in the United States. During the 1866−1899 period, the Com-
mercial and Financial Chronicle published extensive lists of the corporate bonds that
were available in the ﬁnancial markets, including bonds traded on the NYSE, all of the
regional exchanges, as well as leading unlisted and inactive bonds. Thus, the listing of
bonds in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle is far more extensive than simply
the bonds actively traded at the major exchanges. In addition to providing listings
of issuers and their bonds, the Commercial and Financial Chronicle also reported on
key news items relating to these issuers and bonds such as missed coupons, defaults,
bondholder committees, receiverships, reorganizations, bankruptcies, etc. As far as
we can determine, the coverage of these news items appears to have been relatively
comprehensive. In particular, the Commercial and Financial Chronicle reported news
about ﬁnancial distress not only for the issuers included in the annual snapshot, but
also for many much smaller ﬁrms as well. Poor’s manuals were used to cross-check
some of the data obtained from the Commercial and Financial Chronicle.
    The data for the 1900−1965 period are taken directly from two NBER sources.
The ﬁrst is a three-volume report on an extensive NBER research project during the
1940s and 1950s sponsored by the Works Project Administration and the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation. This massive project was headed by W. Braddock
Hickman and involved the eﬀorts of more than two dozen researchers and research

                                           28
assistants. The stated objectives of the project were, ﬁrst, to provide basic statistical
time series data on corporate bond ﬁnancing that might be useful to researchers and,
second, to analyze and interpret the data. As part of this research, extensive data
were collected on both the par amounts of outstanding bonds and bonds entering into
default each year. The scope, methodology, and results of this research project are
thoroughly documented in Hickman (1953, 1958, 1960). The second source is based
on a subsequent NBER project in which Hickman’s study was extended to cover the
1944−1965 period using essentially the same methodology. This research project is
extensively documented in Atkinson (1967). The Commercial and Financial Chronicle
was used to cross-check data for some years in this subperiod.
     The data for the 1966−2008 period comes from three diﬀerent sources. The ﬁrst
is data on the par amount of all domestic nonﬁnancial bonds and is tabulated by the
Federal Reserve. This data is based on industry sources and is computed by tabulating
the total amount of new corporate bond issuance and extinguishments each year. The
second source for this period is again the Commercial and Financial Chronicle which is
used in identifying ﬁrms entering into default during the 1966−1969 period. The third
source is a data set provided to us by Moody’s covering the 1970−2008 period and is
extracted from the data underlying Moody’s Corporate Default and Recovery Rates,
1920−2008 publication. Speciﬁcally, we extract default amounts for U.S. nonﬁnancial
ﬁrms from the larger Moody’s data set of bonds for all issuers (including global and
ﬁnancial issuers). The data and methodology used by Moody’s in determining these
numbers are also described in this publication.
B. The Annual Time Series
The annual default rate is computed as the ratio of the annual default amount to
the par value of all bonds in the annual snapshot. Recall that the annual snapshot
consists of all bonds listed in the historical data source at the beginning of the year.
The annual default amount is the total par amount of the subset of bonds that are
included in the annual snapshot and whose issuers enter into ﬁnancial distress during
the year.
     For the 1866−1877 period, the annual snapshot consists of all bonds included
in the ﬁrst weekly Bond List published by the Commercial and Financial Chronicle
each year. For several years, this source is missing. In these cases, we use the prior
year’s snapshot as that year’s snapshot. The annual default amounts are obtained by
totaling the par amounts of bonds for issuers entering ﬁnancial distress, where these
issuers are identiﬁed by reports provided in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle.
     For the 1878−1899 period, a comprehensive listing of corporate bonds appears
in the January supplement to the Commercial and Financial Chronicle. The listing
of corporate issuers in this supplement is titled General Quotations of Bonds and
Stocks. The Commercial and Financial Chronicle describes this listing as providing
quotations for “all securities listed on any Stock Exchange in the United States, and


                                           29
for all leading unlisted and inactive securities for which we are able to obtain reliable
prices.” In general, the number of issuers in this listing is typically several times as
large as the number of issuers with bonds that are actively traded on the NYSE.
     Although comprehensive, this listing of bonds does not provide par amounts for
the bonds for the 1878−1899 period. Thus, we use the following algorithm in estimat-
ing the default rates for this period. First, we count the number of bond issues listed
in the supplement at the beginning of each year during this period. An analysis using
data for 1876 indicates that there is a very high correlation between the par amount
of debt of a corporate issuer and the number of bond issues for that issuer. This high
correlation holds since the vast majority of bond issuers during this period are in the
railroad industry. Second, for each year, we count the number of bonds included in
that year’s snapshot that enter into ﬁnancial distress. To calculate the default rate
for these years, we then divide the total number of defaulted bond issues by the total
number of bond issues in the supplement. As a robustness check for this methodology,
we apply it to several of the years during the 1866−1878 period. We ﬁnd that this
methodology results in estimates of the default rates for these years that are very close
to those obtained based on par values.
     For the 1900−1943 period, the total par amount of the bonds in the annual
snapshot comes from the total par amounts for U.S. nonﬁnancial ﬁrms that appear
in Table A-6 of Hickman (1953). As described in Hickman, the scope of his study
does not include a 100-percent tabulation of all corporate bonds. Rather, Hickman
tabulates par values for all bond issues with aggregate par amount of $5 million or
more (the large issues sample), and then tabulates additional par values for a ten-
percent random sample of the remainder of bonds for which data are available. The
par value of the bonds included in the large issues sample, however, represents the
overwhelming majority of the estimated total par value of all corporate bonds. Thus,
there is little loss of generality from limiting our attention to the large issues sample
of bonds that is exhaustively tabulated by Hickman (as opposed to the small issues
sample that is only statistically sampled). The total par value of bonds that default
each year (and are included in the total value of all bonds at the beginning of the year)
is given as the all industries total in the large issues section of Table 136 of Hickman
(1960).
     We observe that the Hickman study focuses on straight bonds (single-maturity
obligations), and excludes several other categories of bonds such as equipment trust
bonds, income bonds, convertible bonds, and serial bonds. As discussed by Hickman,
however, these other categories of bonds represent only a small fraction of total par
value of bonds in his sample. Since both the total par value of bonds in the snapshot
and the par value of defaulted bonds are based on the same categories of bonds, there
should be little impact on the estimated default rate as a result of Hickman’s focus
on straight bonds.
    For the 1944 to 1965 period, the total par value of corporate bonds at the be-

                                           30
ginning of each year and the total par value of corporate bonds defaulting during the
year are provided in Table 21 of Atkinson (1967). As is described in Atkinson, his
study closely follows the methodology used in Hickman (1953, 1958, 1960). The key
diﬀerence between the two studies is that Atkinson broadens his focus to include most
categories of corporate bonds (rather than just straight bonds).
      As robustness checks for both the Hickman (1953, 1960) and Atkinson (1967)
data, we tabulated the total number of bond issuers at the beginning of each year
during this period as well as the number of bond issuers entering into ﬁnancial dis-
tress each year using the Commercial and Financial Chronicle and a methodology
similar to that described above for the 1866−1899 period. The default rates based on
issuers were very similar to those obtained using the Hickman and Atkinson data. In
addition, we compared the default rates implied by the Hickman and Atkinson data
with those reported in the Moody’s Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920−2008
publication. Even though the Moody’s results include both foreign issuers and ﬁnan-
cial issuers, there was generally close agreement between their results and those implied
by the Hickman and Atkinson data sets. See Carty and Lieberman (1997) for a dis-
cussion of how diﬀerences between Hickman’s results and those of Moody’s can be
reconciled. Appendix C of Hickman (1953) also conducts an in-depth comparison of
their data with a number of other contemporary sources including the Commercial
and Financial Chronicle, the Journal of Commerce, and estimates provided by the
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Interstate Commerce Commission, and the
National Industrial Conference Board.
     For the 1966−2008 period, the total par value of corporate bonds at the beginning
of each year is given from line 7 of Table L.2 Credit Market Debt Owed by Nonﬁnancial
Sectors of the Federal Reserve Board’s Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States
Z.1 statistical release (see historical statistical releases for earlier data) for the end of
the preceeding year. As a robustness check, we compared the Federal Reserve data
with that of Atkinson for the mid-1960s and found that the two estimates of the total
par value of the corporate bonds were very similar. Furthermore, we compared the
Federal Reserve estimates with those reported by the Securities Industry and Financial
Markets Association (SIFMA) for the 1995−2008 period and found close agreement
between the two sources.
     In determining the total par value of defaulted bonds for the 1966−2008 period,
we used two diﬀerent sources. For the 1966−1969 period, we again examined the
Commercial and Financial Chronicle for news reports about ﬁrms entering into ﬁnan-
cial distress. For the 1970−2008 period, we used the data set described above that
was provided to us by Moody’s and extracted the par amounts of defaulted bonds for
domestic nonﬁnancial issuers.
    During the middle to latter part of the 19th Century, the corporate bond market
consisted primarily of railroad and canal bonds. During this period, however, there
were also a number of industrial and ﬁnancial bond issues in the market. For exam-

                                             31
ple, the 1866 Commercial and Financial Chronicle lists 138 railroad bond issuers, 14
canal bond issuers, and 6 industrial bond issuers. The set of industrial bond issuers
includes Western Union, three coal and mining ﬁrms, and two bridges. Near the end
of the 19th Century, the corporate bonds included in the sample consisted of railroad
bonds, street railroad bonds, gas and other utility bonds, and numerous miscellaneous
industrial bonds. After World War I, the corporate bonds were recategorized simply
as railroad, utility, and industrial bonds. For detailed descriptions composition of
the corporate bond market by industry, see Hickman (1953), Atkinson (1967), and
Moody’s classiﬁcations of corporate bonds
C. The Deﬁnition of Financial Distress
To identify the bonds included in the snapshot that enter into ﬁnancial distress each
year, we use the following procedure. For each year from 1866 to 1899, we examined
each weekly issue of the Commercial and Financial Chronicle. Whenever a news item
is reported relating to the ﬁnancial distress of an issuer, we check whether bonds of
that issuer are included in the sample for that year. As is standard in the literature
on estimating default rates, a parent ﬁrm is assumed to enter ﬁnancial distress when
any of its subsidiaries enter ﬁnancial distress. Typical reports include such events
as missed coupon payments, defaults, bondholder committee meetings, entering into
receivership, bankruptcy, reorganization, etc. If the issuer is represented in the sample,
then we determine whether the report represents the initial indication of ﬁnancial
distress for that issuer. For example, imagine that an issuer is ﬁrst reported in 1873
as defaulting on a bond issue. Then subsequent reports of entering into receivership in
1874, of the scheduling of a bondholders committee meeting in 1875, and a bankruptcy
or reorganization in 1876 would not be included as initial events of ﬁnancial distress.
     To provide a uniform standard for identifying initial events of ﬁnancial distress for
the 1866−1899 period, we use the following algorithm. If there have been no previous
reports of ﬁnancial distress for the issuer, then the report is viewed as an initial event.
If more than ﬁve years have elapsed since a previous report for the issuer appeared,
then the new report is identiﬁed as an initial event, unless the previous report clearly
indicates that the ﬁrm has exiting ﬁnancial distress (bankruptcy, reorganization, or
reaching an accord with the bondholders). For each year, we total the par value of
bonds (or the number of bond issues) of distinct issuers entering into ﬁnancial distress
based on this algorithm and use this number as the numerator in determining the
percentage of defaults for that year. We follow the same procedure for the 1966−1969
period.
     The deﬁnition of ﬁnancial distress used by Hickman is described in Chapter 5 of
Hickman (1953). Atkinson (1967) uses a similar deﬁnition of ﬁnancial distress in his
extension of Hickman’s study. Moody’s deﬁnition of ﬁnancial distress is documented
in the Appendix to Moody’s Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920−2008 pub-
lication.


                                            32
                                    REFERENCES

Almeida, Hector, and Thomas Philippon, 2007, The Risk-Adjusted Cost of Financial
   Distress, Journal of Finance 62, 2557-2586.

Altman, Edward I., 1968, Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis, and the Prediction
   of Corporate Bankruptcy, Journal of Finance 23, 589-609.
Altman, Edward I., 1989, Measuring Corporate Bond Mortality and Performance, Jour-
   nal of Finance 44, 909-922.

Altman, Edward I., Brooks Brady, Andrea Resti, and Andrea Sironi, 2005, The Link
   Between Default and Recovery Rates: Theory, Empirical Evidence, and Implications,
   Journal of Business 78, 2203-2227.

Atkinson, Thomas R., 1967, Trends in Corporate Bond Quality, National Bureau of
   Economic Research, Studies in Corporate Bond Financing, Columbia University
   Press, New York, NY.

Beaver, William H., 1966, Financial Ratios as Predictors of Failure, Journal of Account-
   ing Research 4, 71-111.
Beaver, William H., Maureen F. McNichols, and Jung-Wu Rhie, 2005, Have Financial
   Statements Become Less Informative? Evidence from the Ability of Financial Ratios
   to Predict Bankruptcy, Review of Accounting Studies 10, 93-122.

Benmelech, Efraim, 2009, Asset Salability and Debt Maturity: Evidence from Nine-
   teenth-Century American Railroads, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545-1584.

Berndt, Antje, Rohan Douglas, Darrell Duﬃe, Mark Ferguson, and David Schranz,
   2005, Measuring Default Risk Premia from Default Swap Rates and EDFs, Working
   paper, Stanford University.
Bhamra, Hajoat S., Lars-Alexander Kuhn, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2010a, The Aggre-
  gate Dynamics of Capital Structure and Macroeconomic Risk, Review of Financial
  Studies, forthcoming.
Bhamra, Hajoat S., Lars-Alexander Kuhn, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2010b, The Lev-
  ered Equity Risk Premium and Credit Spreads: A Uniﬁed Framework, Review of
  Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Bharath, Sreedhar, and Tyler Shumway, 2008, Forecasting Default with the Merton
  Distance to Default Model, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1339-1369.

Black, Fischer, and John C. Cox, 1976, Valuing Corporate Securities: Some Eﬀects of
   Bond Indenture Provisions, The Journal of Finance 31, 351-367.


                                            33
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes, 1973, The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabil-
   ities, The Journal of Political Economy 81, 637-654.
Bernanke, Ben S., 1981, Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession, American Economic
   Review Proceedings 71, 155-159.

Bernanke, Ben S., 1983, Nonmonetary Eﬀects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
   of the Great Depression, American Economic Review 73, 257-275.

Campbell, John, Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In Search of Distress Risk,
  Journal of Finance 63, 2899-2939.
Carty, Lea V., 1997, Three Essays on Capital Market Imperfections, Ph.D. dissertation,
   Columbia University.

Carty, Lea V., 2000, Corporate Credit-Risk Dynamics, Financial Analysts Journal
   July/August, 67-81.
Carty, Lea V., and Dana Lieberman, 1997, Corporate Bond Defaults and Default Rates,
   1938-1996, Moody’s Special Comment, January.

Chava, Sudheer, and Robert Jarrow, 2004, Bankruptcy Prediction With Industry Ef-
  fects, Review of Finance 8, 537-569.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Robert S. Goldstein, 2001, Do Credit Spreads Reﬂect Sta-
   tionary Leverage Ratios? The Journal of Finance 56, 1929-1957.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, The Deter-
   minants of Credit Spread Changes, Journal of Finance 56, 2177-2208.

Davydenko, Sergei, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2007, Strategic Actions and Credit Spreads:
  An Empirical Investigation, Journal of Finance 62, 2633-2671.
Dichev, Ilia, 1998, Is the Risk of Bankruptcy a Systematic Risk?, Journal of Finance
   53, 1141-1148.

Driessen, Joost, 2005, Is Default Event Risk Priced in Corporate Bonds? Review of
   Financial Studies 18, 165-195.

Duﬀee, Gregory, 1999, Estimating the Price of Default Risk, Review of Financial Studies
  12, 197-226.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and David Lando, 2001, Term Structures of Credit Spread With Incom-
  plete Accounting Information, Econometrica 69, 633-664.

Duﬃe, Darrell, Leandro Saita, and Ke Wang, 2007, Multi-period Corporate Default
  Prediction with Stochastic Covariates, Journal of Financial Economics 83, 635-665.


                                            34
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the Term
  Structure of Interest Rate Swap Yields, Journal of Finance 52, 1287-1323.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1999, Modeling Term Structures of Default-
  able Bonds, The Review of Financial Studies 12, 687-720.

Easley, David, and Maureen O’Hara, 1979, The Postal System in the Depression, Journal
   of Economic History 39, 741-753.

Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber, Deepak Agrawal, and Christopher Mann, 2001, Explain-
   ing the Rate Spread on Corporate Bonds, Journal of Finance 56, 247-277.
Eom, Young Ho, Jean Helwege, and Jing-Zhi Huang, 2004, Structural Models of Corpo-
  rate Bond Pricing: An Empirical Analysis, Review of Financial Studies 17, 499-544.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns
  on Stocks and Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fishlow, Albert, 1965, American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-Bellum
   Economy, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Fons, Jerome, 1987, The Default Premium and Corporate Bond Experience, Journal of
   Finance 42, 81-97.

Franks, Julian, and Loren Sussman, 2005, Financial Innovations and Corporate Bank-
   ruptcy, Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 283-317.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz, 1963, A Monetary History of the United
    States, 1867-1960, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Gandhi, Priyank, and Hanno Lustig, 2009, Size Anomalies in US Bank Stock Returns:
  Your Tax Dollars at Work?, Working paper, UCLA.
Galbraith, John K., 1955, The Great Crash, 1929, Houghton Miﬄin, Boston, MA.,

Geske, Robert, 1977, The Valuation of Corporate Liabilities as Compound Options,
   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 12, 541-552.
Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2010, Busi-
   ness Cycles and Credit Cycles: A 150-Year Perspective, Working paper, UCLA.

Goldschmidt, Robert W., 1933, The Changing Structure of American Banking, Rout-
   ledge, London, UK.

Goldstein, Robert, Nengjiu Ju, and Hayne E. Leland, 2001, An EBIT-Based Model of
   Dynamic Capital Structure, Journal of Business, 76, 483-512.
Hickman, W. Braddock, 1953, The Volume of Corporate Bond Financing Since 1900,

                                           35
   National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Corporate Bond Financing,
   Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Hickman, W. Braddock, 1958, Corporate Bond Quality and Investor Experience, Na-
   tional Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Corporate Bond Financing, Prince-
   ton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Hickman, W. Braddock, 1960, Statistical Measures of Corporate Bond Financing Since
   1900, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Corporate Bond Financing,
   Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Homer, Sidney, and Richard Sylla, 1991, A History of Interest Rates, Rutgers University
  Press, New Brunswick, NJ.

Huang, Jay, and Ming Huang, 2003, How Much of the Corporate-Treasury Yield Spread
  is Due to Credit Risk? Working paper, Cornell University.
Hughes, Jonathan, and Louis P. Cain, 2007, American Economic History, 7th. Ed.,
  Pearson, New York, NY.

Jarrow, Robert A., David Lando, and Stuart M. Turnbull, 1997, A Markov Model for
   the Term Structure of Credit Risk Spreads, The Review of Financial Studies 10,
   481-523.

Jarrow, Robert A., David Lando, and Fan Yu, 2005, Default Risk and Diversiﬁcation:
   Theory and Empirical Implications, Mathematical Finance 15, 1-26.
Jarrow, Robert A., and Stuart M. Turnbull, 1995, Pricing Derivatives on Financial
   Securities Subject to Credit Risk, The Journal of Finance 50, 53-85.

Kindleberger, Charles P., and Robert Aliber, 2005, Manias, Panics, and Crashes, 5th
   edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ.
Kim, In Joon, Krishna Ramaswamy, and Suresh Sundaresan, 1993, Does Default Risk
   in Coupons Aﬀect the Valuation of Corporate Bonds?, Financial Management 22,
   117-131.
Leland, Hayne E., 1994, Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital
   Structure, The Journal of Finance 49, 1213-1252.

Leland, Hayne E., 2004, Predictions of Default Probabilities in Structural Models of
   Debt, Journal of Investment Management 2, 5-20.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., and Eduardo S. Schwarz, 1995, A Simple Approach to Valuing
   Risky Fixed and Floating Rate Debt, Journal of Finance 50, 789-819.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yields Spreads:


                                            36
   Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market,
   Journal of Finance 60, 2213-2253.
Macaulay, Frederick, 1938, Some Theoretical Problems Suggested by the Movements
  of Interest Rates, Bond Yields, and Stock Prices in the United States since 1856,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Markham, Jerry W., 2001, A Financial History of the United States, Vol. I, M. E.
  Sharpe, Inc., Armonk, New York.

Markham, Jerry W., 2002, A Financial History of the United States, Vol. II, M. E.
  Sharpe, Inc., Armonk, New York.
McAdoo, William G., 1931, Crowded Years, Houghton-Miﬄin, Boston, MA.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, The Theory of Rational Option Pricing, Bell Journal of
  Economics and Management Science 4, 141-183.
Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of
  Interest Rates, Journal of Finance 29, 449-470.

Moody’s Investors Services, 2009, Corporate Default and Recovery Rates, 1920-2008.
  Moody’s Global Credit Policy Special Comment, Annual update.

Ohlson, James A., 1980, Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bank-
   ruptcy, Journal of Accounting Research 18, 109-131.
Pedrosa, Monica, and Richard Roll, 1998, Systematic Risk in Corporate Bond Credit
   Spreads, Journal of Fixed Income 8, 7-26.

Philippon, Thomas, 2008, The Evolution of the U. S. Financial Industry for 1860 to
   2007: Theory and Evidence, Working paper, New York University.
Sarig, Oded and Arthur Warga, 1989, Some Empirical Estimates of the Risk Structure
   of Interest Rates, Journal of Finance 44, 1351-1360

Schaefer, Stephen, M. and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2008, Structural Models of Credit Risk
   are Useful: Evidence from Hedge Ratios on Corporate Bonds, Journal of Financial
   Economics 90, 1-19.

Schwert, G. William, 1990, Indexes of U.S. Stock Prices from 1802 to 1987, The Journal
   of Business 63, 399-426.
Shiller, Robert J., 1989, Market Volatility, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Shumway, Tyler, 2001, Forecasting Bankruptcy More Accurately: A Simple Hazard
   Model, Journal of Business 74, 101-124.


                                           37
Skeel, David A., 2001, Debt’s Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America,
   Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Snowden, Kenneth A., 1990, Historical Returns and Security Market Development,
   1872-1925, Explorations in Economic History 27, 381-420.

Steeples, Douglas, 2002, Advocate for American Enterprise: William Buck Dana and
   the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 1865-1910, Greenwood, Westport, CT.

Swaine, Henry H., 1898, Economic Aspects of Railroad Receiverships, Proceedings of
  the American Economic Association 3.
Tabb, Charles J., 1995, A Brief History of Bankruptcy Law, American Bankruptcy
   Institute Law Review 3, 5-51.

Vassalou, Maria, and Yuhang Xing, 2004, Default Risk in Equity Returns, Journal of
   Finance 59, 831-868.
Warren, Charles, 1935, Bankruptcy in United States History, President and Fellows of
  Harvard College, Cambridge, MA.




                                          38
                                                         Table 1



Summary Statistics for Annual Corporate Bond Default Rates from 1866 to 2008. This table reports the indicated summary statistics
for the annual percentage default rates of U.S. nonfinancial corporate bonds for the 1866-2008 period and the indicated subperiods.




        Summary Statistic                       1866-1899          1900-1945         1946-2008                  1866-2008


        Mean                                         3.998             1.345             0.304                      1.517
        Standard Deviation                           3.571             1.383             0.530                      2.414
        Skewness                                     2.012             1.853             3.233                      3.307
        Kurtosis                                     4.725             4.127            12.783                     14.686

        Minimum                                      0.000             0.107             0.000                      0.000
        25th Percentile                              1.978             0.347             0.009                      0.131
        Median                                       3.022             0.903             0.098                      0.545
        75th Percentile                              5.195             1.957             0.380                      2.096
        Maximum                                     16.255             6.725             3.071                     16.255

        Serial Correlation                           0.388             0.450             0.680                      0.628
        Number of Observations                          34                46                63                        143
                                                                  Table 2



Default Cycles. This table lists the dates for the default cycles during the 1866-2008 sample period, where a default cycle is defined as a contiguous
period during which annual default rates exceed the unconditional mean default rate of 1.517 percent. The length of the default cycle is measured in
years. Default rates are expressed as percentages.




          Date of                  Length of              Average             Maximum                     Historical
           Cycle                      Cycle           Default Rate          Default Rate                  Background


        1866-1866                           1                  2.54                  2.54                 Post Civil War adjustment
        1869-1869                           1                  7.13                  7.13                 Linking of coasts by railroad
        1871-1880                          10                  6.04                 16.25                 Railroad boom and crash
        1883-1889                           7                  3.68                  6.37                 Major bank panic of 1884
        1891-1898                           8                  4.36                  9.32                 Major bank panic of 1893
        1904-1904                           1                  2.97                  2.97                 Roosevelt, Panama Canal
        1908-1908                           1                  2.10                  2.10                 Stock market panic
        1914-1915                           2                  4.19                  4.48                 First World War
        1919-1919                           1                  2.23                  2.23                 Post First World War adjustment
        1931-1935                           5                  3.67                  6.73                 Great Depression
        1938-1939                           2                  2.67                  2.84                 Great Depression
        1990-1990                           1                  1.56                  1.56                 Junk bond defaults
        2001-2002                           2                  2.54                  3.07                 Dot-com crisis
                                                                Table 3



The Most-Severe Three-Year Default Periods. This table lists the dates for the 12 top three-year default periods during the 1866-2008 sample
period. Total default is the sum of the annual default rates during each three-year period. Stock return is the sum of the annual stock market returns
for each three-year period. NBER Fraction is the proportion of time during each three-year period that the economy was in an NBER-designated
business downturn. Default rates are expressed as percentages.




                                                      Total               Maximum                            Stock               NBER
            Rank                 Period              Default                Default                         Return              Fraction


            1                 1873-1875                35.90                  16.25                           1.50                  0.72
            2                 1892-1894                18.69                   9.32                          −5.46                  0.47
            3                 1883-1885                16.06                   6.38                           5.36                  0.81
            4                 1933-1935                12.88                   6.73                          35.54                  0.08
            5                 1876-1878                12.51                   5.94                          −1.29                  1.00
            6                 1869-1871                11.41                   4.14                          10.06                  0.50
            7                 1914-1916                 9.59                   4.48                          15.98                  0.33
            8                 1896-1898                 8.91                   3.73                          18.74                  0.50
            9                 1887-1889                 7.71                   2.91                           5.17                  0.36
            10                1938-1940                 6.67                   2.84                           7.61                  0.17
            11                1879-1881                 6.16                   3.14                          26.14                  0.08
            12                2000-2002                 6.15                   3.07                         −14.40                  0.22
                                                                  Table 4

Summary Statistics for the Explanatory Variables. This table reports the indicated summary statistics for the explanatory variables. Stock
Return is the annual return on the U.S. stock market. Volatility is the annualized standard deviation of monthly stock returns for each year. Riskfree
rate is the yield on government bonds. Slope is the diﬀerence between the yield on high-quality corporate bonds and the short-term commercial
paper rate. Spread is the diﬀerence between the yield on high-quality corporate bonds and the yield on government bonds with the same maturity.
Recession is the fraction of each year that the economy is in a NBER-designated business downturn.



       Variable               Statistic                           1866-1899          1900-1945          1946-2008                  1866-2008

       Stock Return           Mean                                     0.078              0.104              0.117                     0.103
                              Median                                   0.074              0.117              0.142                     0.107
                              Standard Deviation                       0.138              0.234              0.178                     0.190
                              Serial Correlation                       0.169              0.033             -0.049                     0.019
       Volatility             Mean                                     0.132              0.178              0.136                     0.149
                              Median                                   0.119              0.144              0.124                     0.136
                              Standard Deviation                       0.051              0.115              0.053                     0.080
                              Serial Correlation                       0.142              0.717              0.234                     0.593
       Riskfree Rate          Mean                                     4.190              3.532              5.802                     4.688
                              Median                                   3.700              3.525              5.620                     4.060
                              Standard Deviation                       0.837              0.790              2.601                     2.087
                              Serial Correlation                       0.979              0.949              0.949                     0.963
       Slope                  Mean                                    -1.002              0.260              1.529                     0.519
                              Median                                  -0.890              0.010              1.310                     0.470
                              Standard Deviation                       1.096              1.476              1.351                     1.672
                              Serial Correlation                       0.068              0.844              0.558                     0.744
       Spread                 Mean                                     0.447              0.285              0.919                     0.603
                              Median                                   0.440              0.200              0.910                     0.470
                              Standard Deviation                       0.368              0.360              0.527                     0.526
                              Serial Correlation                       0.924              0.775              0.830                     0.883
       Recession              Mean                                     0.512              0.384              0.153                     0.313
                              Median                                   0.500              0.250              0.000                     0.000
                              Standard Deviation                       0.418              0.398              0.287                     0.386
                              Serial Correlation                       0.186              0.173              0.030                     0.264

       Number of Observations                                             34                 46                 63                       143
                                                                    Table 5

Regression Results for Corporate Default Rates. This table reports the coeﬃcient estimates and their Newey-West t-statistics from the
indicated regression speciﬁcations. In each speciﬁcation, the log of the annual default rate is the dependent variable, and the independent variables
are as shown. Stock Return is the annual return on the U.S. stock market. Variance is the annualized variance of monthly stock returns for each
year. Riskfree rate is the yield on government bonds. Slope is the diﬀerence between the yield on high-quality corporate bonds and the short-term
commercial paper rate. Spread is the diﬀerence between the yield on high-quality corporate bonds and the yield on government bonds with the same
maturity. Recession is the fraction of each year that the economy is in a NBER-designated business downturn.


                                                     Coeﬃcients                                                  t-Statistics

   Variable          Lag         Structural     Reduced         Macro     Combined          Structural      Reduced         Macro       Combined

   Default Rate        1             0.351         0.483          0.445        0.346              4.08          6.23             5.66       3.93
                       2             0.153         0.144          0.143        0.163              1.50          1.57             1.45       1.65
                       3             0.351         0.292          0.282        0.342              3.30          3.01             2.96       3.34
   Stock Return        1            −1.551                                    −1.807             −3.08                                     −3.07
                       2             0.091                                     0.270              0.16                                      0.46
                       3            −0.143                                     0.128             −0.27                                      0.22
   Variance            1             5.355                                     5.704              2.84                                      2.86
                       2            −0.629                                    −0.731             −0.28                                     −0.32
                       3             0.205                                     0.301              0.09                                      0.13
   Riskfree Rate       1            −0.139                                    −0.238             −0.83                                     −1.54
                       2             0.234                                     0.352              1.27                                      1.96
                       3             0.033                                    −0.003              0.29                                     −0.03
   Slope               1            −0.106                                    −0.148             −1.05                                     −1.43
                       2            −0.181                                    −0.178             −1.72                                     −1.49
                       3             0.092                                     0.093              1.47                                      1.10
   Spread              1                          0.215                       −0.406                           0.62                        −1.21
                       2                          0.037                        0.503                           0.07                         1.08
                       3                         −0.094                        0.037                          −0.29                         0.11
   Recession           1                                        0.538         −0.260                                             1.81      −0.67
                       2                                        0.077          0.341                                             0.27       1.31
                       3                                       −0.043         −0.181                                            −0.19      −0.53

   Adj. R2                            0.752        0.699          0.708        0.747                 −            −                −          −
                                                                   Table 6

Regression Results for Corporate Credit Spreads. This table reports the coeﬃcient estimates and their Newey-West t-statistics from the
indicated regression speciﬁcations. In each speciﬁcation, the credit spread is the dependent variable, and the independent variables are as shown.
Spread is the diﬀerence between the yield on high-quality corporate bonds and the yield on government bonds with the same maturity. Default rate
is the log of the annual default rate. Stock Return is the annual return on the U.S. stock market. Recession is the fraction of each year that the
economy is in a NBER-designated business downturn.


                                                    Coeﬃcients                                                 t-Statistics

   Variable          Lag          Default       Return     Recession     Combined           Default       Return      Recession    Combined

   Credit Spread
                        1           0.786        0.781         0.787          0.753            8.04         7.77           7.78         7.05
                        2           0.122        0.205         0.168          0.212            1.30         1.80           1.72         1.78
                        3          −0.020       −0.073        −0.055         −0.066           −0.28        −1.03          −0.81        −0.92
   Default Rate         0           0.010                                     0.010            0.46                                     0.48
                        1          −0.014                                    −0.010           −0.73                                    −0.51
                        2          −0.010                                    −0.007           −0.72                                    −0.45
                        3          −0.007                                    −0.008           −0.46                                    −0.45
   Stock Return         0                       −0.333                       −0.282                        −2.42                       −2.13
                        1                        0.135                        0.187                         1.31                        1.68
                        2                        0.108                        0.095                         1.15                        0.68
                        3                        0.201                        0.154                         1.93                        1.18
   Recession            0                                      0.137          0.111                                        1.63         1.28
                        1                                     −0.133         −0.048                                       −2.37        −0.61
                        2                                      0.010          0.039                                        0.21         0.66
                        3                                     −0.130         −0.109                                       −1.88        −1.58

   Adj. R2                          0.775         0.792          0.787        0.792               −            −              −            −
