                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             VALUING ECOSYSTEM SERVICES IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM

                                         Jared C. Carbone
                                          V. Kerry Smith

                                       Working Paper 15844
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15844


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Partial support for this project was provided by EPA STAR
grant #RD-83092301-0.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jared C. Carbone and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Valuing ecosystem services in general equilibrium
Jared C. Carbone and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 15844
March 2010
JEL No. D58,H23,Q51

                                            ABSTRACT

We explore the consequences of treating the multiple, non-market benefits associated with improvements
in ecosystem health and the market economy from which damage to these ecosystems stems as an
integrated system. We find that willingness to pay measures of use-based ecosystem services are impacted
by the changes in demand for complementary market goods. Demand for these goods shifts due to
the introduction of pollution regulations that deliver improvements in ecosystem services. As a result,
partial equilibrium estimates of these use values may be measured with substantial error if they fail
to account for the general equilibrium adjustments caused by the regulation. We also find that the basic
physical/biological connections between the resources underlying use and non-use values for ecosystems
may have important implications for the measurement of these values.


Jared C. Carbone
University of Calgary
jccarbon@ucalgary.ca

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 873806
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu
1      Introduction

In this paper, we report on the results of experiments designed to explore the consequences


of treating the multiple, non-market benets associated with improvements in ecosystem


health and the market economy from which damage to these ecosystems stems as an


integrated system.


    Forty years ago Ayres and Kneese (1969) launched the transformation of the modern


economic perspective on environmental externalities.     At that time, economists treated


externalities as exceptional cases that could be adequately addressed through simple    ad
hoc   arrangements. Today, there is a much greater appreciation of the pervasive nature of


some externalities. The debate about climate change and policies to control greenhouse


gases has helped to provide a tangible, widely recognized, example of the implications


of materials and energy balances for widespread externalities resulting from production


and consumption activities that Ayres and Kneese highlighted. Nevertheless, it would be


a mistake to conclude that economists fully appreciate the implications of the general


equilibrium perspective Ayres and Kneese advocated or the quantitative tools needed to


act on their insights.


    Two years earlier, Krutilla's (1967) call for a revision of the economic criteria used


to evaluate preservation versus development decisions broadened the scope for evaluating


environmental externalities in a dierent way. His paper challenged the conventional view


of how consumption should be represented in preferences.        He identied a distinction


between consumption as use and services that contribute to utility but do not require


any type of use. His discussion was quite general and he argued that some people might


have preferences for protecting unique natural environments, species, or ecosystems simply


to assure they would exist.   This led to considerable literature aimed at reconciling the




                                              2
practical and conceptual challenges implied by existence values with methods for measuring


the benets of improving environmental quality that continues to this day.


   What is sometimes overlooked in these discussions is that the services involved need


not be limited to unique natural environments or cute critters. In the context of climate


change or biodiversity loss, the science suggests that the integrity of fundamental, back-


ground services delivered by large-scale physical and biological systems may be at stake.


Without raising the specter of disaster, changes to these systems could result in important


changes to the level of resources required to maintain market and non-market services at


a level consistent with current living standards. At the same time, the values that people


place on these background services are not easily captured using the standard techniques


employed by environmental economists to measure changes in environmental quality.


   In particular, existence values need not have any observable demand signal in the market


economy to document the fact that people would be willing to sacrice resources to


protect or enhance these services. As a result, we cannot rely solely on revealed preference


techniques for assessing these trade os. Modeling how these services contribute to utility


in formal preference structures requires the use of separability restrictions to specify how


the trade os between market goods and services (including the uses of environmental


resources) are aected by non-use or existence consumption.


   As an illustration of the issues that are at the center of our analysis, suppose an


individual derives utility   U   from a vector of marketed consumption goods,        x,   leisure,   l,

and a vector of services derived from an ecosystem,        q.   If the individual has both use and


non-use values for the ecosystem then      q   enters the utility function in at least two places:




                                    U = V (c(Q(q), x, l), h(q))                                  (1)




                                                 3
q   enters here in a subfunction                c(Q(q), x, l)   where services associated with the ecosystem


are combined with market goods and leisure time to create use-based values.                           q   also enters


as a weakly separable element,                  h(q), which captures the non-use components of ecosystem

value.
         1

     Two aspects of any analysis of the role of ecosystem services in economic activity


become clear when use and non-use values are viewed in this way. First, the value of some


ecosystems to the individual will, in general, depend on the prices of market goods and


the labor/leisure choice.               When a pollution regulation is put in place, for example, the


increase in prices of pollution-intensive goods and the corresponding decrease in the real


compensation for labor implies a lower demand for these market goods and higher demand


for leisure. To the extent that non-market goods exhibit special relationships with these


goods or the overall cost of living is aected in important ways by these price changes,


the value of non-market services will also be aected.


     Second, the two components of ecosystem value will be related to each other. While


changes to the level of non-use services,                h(q), will have no impact on the observed pattern

of consumption, they will aect the value of other market and non-market services.
                                                                                                                        2

When the two sets of services are derived from the same ecosystem,                              changes in their
levels are physically related to each other through the basic physical/biological functions
of the ecosystem.                This last feature of ecosystem values parallels the logic set out by

    1 Hanemann          (1988) rst proposed a variation on this denition.    Originally, non-use value was dened

by including an additively separable term to preferences, where           U = V (c(Q, x, l)) + h(q)   (with   Q   and   q
unrelated).          This format implies that a composite of market goods and non-market, use-related services

are perfect substitutes for the non-use contribution to well-being.           Yet another alternative, implying that

there are average substitutes for non-use services would be the same as equation (1) but exclude the links

between      Q   and   q.   Our formulation in equation (1) maintains the essential idea in non-use value  revealed

preference information alone will not provide all the information necessary to understand the importance of

changes in       q   for people's well-being.
    2 The    exception to this statement is the special case in which non-use value is a perfect substitute for all

other consumption.




                                                                4
Ayres and Kneese in which the physics of materials and energy balances makes the assets


associated with the ultimate deposition of byproducts of production and consumption and


its relationship to the various capacities of the environment to assimilate residuals from


these activities so important to the performance of the joint economic/environmental


system.


    In a general equilibrium, these relationships inuence how the non-market consequences


of production and consumption choices feed back to alter individuals' demands (and sup-


plies) for all goods and services.           To the extent that non-market goods aect leisure


demand, for example, they may have inuence throughout the market economy through


changes to labor supply.         To the extent that changes in pollution-intensive activities are


aected by these changes, they may also feed back to determine the equilibrium level of


pollution and services delivered by the ecosystem.


    In short, a general equilibrium framework is needed to evaluate the connections between


ecosystem services and related market activities. Moreover, it must jointly represent the


connections between the relevant parts of the market economy as well as reecting the


role that ecosystem services play in contributing simultaneously to the use and non-use


components of preferences.
                                   3

    In this paper, we propose to begin the process developing a new generation of general


equilibrium models that incorporate these insights. We illustrate our ideas with an appli-


cation to the impacts of acidic deposition on ecosystem services in the Adirondacks. The


purpose of the application is to demonstrate the challenges associated with calibrating


such a model to non-market valuation information and assessing the quantitative signi-

   3 Ayres   and Kneese emphasized the rst part of these relationships  the physical linkages in production

and consumption to residuals and the physical properties of natural systems. They overlooked the potential

for these linkages to produce feedback eects via consumer preferences.      This is where Krutilla's analysis

contributes to the overall structure of our argument.




                                                        5
cance of representing the benets of environmental regulations as an integrated part of a


general equilibrium system.


   The specic example we use is acidic deposition from nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide.


Three ecosystem services are assumed to be aected  freshwater sh populations, scenic


vistas and tree cover, and a composite impact that is intended to reect existence service


stemming from concerns about the damages to the habitat for the other two, use-related,


environmental resources (i.e. the sh and trees) as well as other related species without


direct uses from acidic deposition.   Our characterization of the concentration/response


functions and measures of economic values for these services are loosely based on the


existing literature. As a result, our model is not intended to be a serious policy evaluation


of acidic deposition. Rather, our objective is to describe how multiple feedbacks can arise


from non-market services and inuence the demands and supplies of market goods.


   We have another objective as well. The connections that ecologists describe linking the


functions of ecosystems to the services economists identify as important to people depend


on the spatial scale. The scale for their analysis often does not match the scales for most


economic analyses.   This issue of scale relates to both geography (or the spatial scale)


and the denitions for what are exogenous inuences and endogenous responses as we


discuss below. Both are important and inuence our ability to use the existing literature in


environmental economics to calibrate a general equilibrium model that includes ecosystem


services.


   Section 2 develops the background for our research. It discusses how the early public


economics literature made assumptions that precluded the inclusion of important feedback


eects from externalities. This perspective has dominated much of the literature on general


equilibrium evaluations of environmental policy.   We close this background by describing


how the composite of Ayres and Kneese and Krutilla's contributions identied the issues



                                             6
central to the importance of non-market feedbacks for general equilibrium policy evaluation.


Section 3 shows how existing market and non-market information can be used to calibrate a


computable general equilibrium (CGE) model with multiple non-market resources. Section


4 describes our model and 5 discusses the results for a representative policy scenario 


reducing emissions of nitrogen oxide and sulfur dioxide by 43%. Our primary objectives are


to demonstrate how partial equilibrium welfare measures for non-market services might


be modied by a general equilibrium approach and to describe how virtual prices signal


the importance of strategic modeling assumptions for non-market feedbacks. Finally the


last section discusses the implications of our analysis for developing more complete CGE


models with the types of extensive non-market interactions called for in Ayres and Kneese's


seminal paper.




2     Background


2.1    Early Literature


At the time they were writing, Ayres and Kneese noted that externalities were an inevitable


consequence of consumption and production activities because the eects of alternative


residuals management policies were largely ignored. They illustrated this point diagram-


matically (see Figure 1 in their paper) and analytically, noting in their framework that




      there are three classes of physical exchange for which there exist no counterpart


      economic transactions.   These are:   (1) private use for production inputs of


      common property resources, notably air, streams, lakes, and the ocean; (2)


      private use of the assimilative capacity of the environment to dispose of  or


      dilute wastes and residuals, and (3) inadvertent or unwanted material inputs to




                                             7
       productive processes  diluents and pollutants. All these goods (or bads) are


       physically transferred at zero price. . . because there exists no social institutions


       that permit the resources in question to be owned and exchanged in the


       market (p. 291)




    They suggest that the inuence of a market might be simulated using shadow or virtual


prices for the services and that the monetization of these services would provide a type


of virtual income. However, when they introduced them into the model they placed them


as arguments that give rise to incremental social costs             on the supply side of the economy
(represented by their equation (7)).             Ayres and Kneese are specic in suggesting that


demands for private goods carry over unchanged. This specication implies the feedback


eects of changes in the quality of the environment on the demands for private goods are


not reected in consumers' behavior.


    Shortly afterwards, Diamond and Mirrlees (1973) also argued for restrictions on these


feedback eects to avoid anomalous outcomes.                   The issue in their case arises because


aggregate demand in a market exhibiting an externality might change in what they con-


sidered to be counterintuitive ways with a move from an unregulated equilibrium to an


ecient allocation.        The anomalous case is problematic because, as Diamond and Mir-


rlees suggested, it seems to imply an upward-sloping demand function. However, Cornes


(1980) clearly dispels this case, noting that their concerns were due to a failure to properly


decompose the responses leading to the ecient outcome.
                                                                         4   He notes that:

   4 All   of the literature describes this issue as arising from a consumption externality.   One individual's

consumption aects others and those others aect that person. This characterization is misleading. Pollution

from production arises because some agents consumed the production involved. The real issue here is non-

separability and what we have identied as feedback eects, not the fact that one agent's consumption adds

or detracts from the well-being of others. Pollution from production activities could be described in these

terms as well. Our point is simply that the labeling of these cases has distracted attention from the more

fundamental point exposed by the Buchanan-Kafoglis example.




                                                       8
             In the absence of real income or welfare eects, aggregate demand may vary


             positively with prices.     This is because in addition to the conventional com-


             pensated price responses, there are compensated responses once thought to


             be perverse or anomalous, once the role of compensated quality responses is


             isolated and clearly understood (p. 317, emphasis added)



     The explanation lies in dierent patterns of complementarity and substitution between


a private consumption good and the external eect among agents.                             These interactions


lead to adjustment in each agent's Hicksian demands for the consumption good such that


aggregate demand changes in unanticipated ways. The basic insight is that the structure


of non-separabilities across agents can lead to unanticipated changes in the demands for


market goods and their corresponding non-market outcomes.


     To illustrate this point, consider a simple adaptation to the Diamond-Mirrlees struc-


ture.        We have added a second private consumption good.                   Each of the two individuals'


preferences are separable in the two private goods but not in the externality, and one


of each person's private consumption choices has an own contribution to the externality


as well as a pure external eect. Equations (2) and (3) state the amended Diamond-


Mirrlees preference functions                u()   for individual one and     v ()   for individual two  with


µ1   and       µ2   the numeraire goods,      x1 = x11 + x12      and   x2 = x21 + x22   the two private goods


 x
( ij ,   i   = good,   j   = individual), and   β   and   α the external eects arising from the individuals'

consumption. These relationships are dened in (2) through (5).




                                u(x11 , x21 , µ1 , β) = A1 (x11 , β) + A2 (x21 , β) + µ1                   (2)



                               v (x12 , x22 , µ2 , α) = B1 (x12 , α) + B2 (x22 , α) + µ2                   (3)



                                                    β = β(x11 , x12 )                                      (4)



                                                             9
                                                  α = α(x21 , x22 )                                              (5)



     The characterization of the externality creates the appearance of a non-separability in


individual one's choices even though his preferences are specied as separable. For example,


in the case of individual one, these eects arise through the inuence of                       x21    on the second


individual (via       α)    which in turn feeds back.        The link causes a separable consumption


           x
choice ( 21 ) by individual one to have an eect on his consumption of                        x11 .   This link takes


place because         x11   has an external aect on individual two and that individual's choices


 x
( 12 ) inuence individual one's trade os. Thus, even though                     x11   and   x21     are specied to


be separable consumption choices for individual one, feedbacks outside the market make


them non-separable.


     Of course, as Sandmo (1980) noted in his commentary on Diamond and Mirrlees, the


signicance of these relationships for policy is an empirical matter.
                                                                                          5   To evaluate them,


we must make decisions about how to represent economic activities in a model, how to


account for the natural systems receiving the residuals identied in Ayres and Kneese,


and how to link the physical responses of these systems to the services people want from


the environment. The latter eectively denes the points of contact between these two


systems.




2.2       General Equilibrium Analysis with One Non-Market Good


The task of introducing non-separable externalities into a CGE model is more challenging


than one might initially expect.              Carbone and Smith (2008) describe the challenges in


calibrating a model with a single non-market good and we base our discussion here on

     5 While   this literature seemed to recognize that the plausibility of separability restrictions in this context

was an empirical issue, the literature in public economics continues to focus on its power as an analytical

simplication rather than on its relevance for real problems. See Gauthier and Laroque (2010).




                                                          10
that study. Three factors contribute. First, the conventional practice calibrating constant


elasticity of substitution (CES) or nested CES functions to describe preferences and pro-


duction functions becomes signicantly more dicult, because the externalities take the


form of quasi-xed goods in the preference structures.
                                                                   6   This result arises because the


arguments used to represent them must be treated as outside the control of individual


agents.    Once this change is made, the CES formulation no longer leads to convenient


closed-form expressions for demand and supply.


    Second, the available information to recover the parameters inuencing how these


services contribute to preferences (or production) is not what we encounter for private


goods and services. As Ayres and Kneese noted, there are no market exchanges in these


services. As a result, we do not have access to a price measuring the marginal willingness


to pay for the last unit consumed of ecosystem services.


    The literature on non-market valuation of environmental services must make one of


two types of assumptions about preferences. With revealed preference strategies specic


restrictions to preferences (i.e.       weak complementarity) allow the information provided


by observing records for private actions, such as trips to recreation sites or purchases of


homes, to be used to measure trade-os for the non-market services. Stated preference


methods also make assumptions about preferences along with the presumption that stated


choices authentically measure the actual choices an individual would make when faced with


the same situation.


    Beyond this, the results from these types of applied studies, measuring the economic


values for environmental services, usually provide estimates of willingness to pay or Mar-

   6 We   could also introduce them as non-separable eects on production. The classic case of the laundry

and the polluting steel plant is one example.   Here we focus on feedbacks due to linkages in preferences.

Analogous problems would arise in the case of production-side linkages. See Finno and Tschirhart (2003)

for a sheries example with production-side ecological feedback eects.




                                                     11
shallian consumer surplus for specic,          discrete,   changes in the services involved, not an


estimate for the marginal willingness to pay or virtual price. In addition, these are usually


measures for local situations such as a specic recreation site or housing market. Because


the environmental services are not traded on markets, we should expect the marginal will-


ingness to pay values to be quite dierent in dierent areas.                  Nonetheless, we need to


include measures of these virtual prices at a scale that is consistent with the scale of the


general equilibrium model. This issue is one aspect of the eects of scale that we raised


earlier.   We return to the challenges posed by the heterogeneity in virtual prices with a


general equilibrium model that uses a representative agent format at the close of the paper


in discussing the implications and next steps in this line of research.


    Finally, non-separability implies that calibration must match both the social accounting


matrix (SAM) representing the ows of private goods and services as nal consumption,


intermediate goods and factor inputs in the baseline year,            and   the ows of residuals arising


from consumption and production.              This alignment needs to also include the transfer


functions linking residuals to the use and existence services as they are represented in


preferences.
               7   We develop a new method to calibrate these types of models which we


describe in more detail below.


    Ultimately, the answer to the Sandmo question about the empirical importance of these


non-separabilities depends on the share of virtual income (i.e.                 private income plus the


endowed environmental services valued at virtual prices in the benchmark year) accounted


for by environmental services      and   the relationship between these services and private goods


in preferences. As a point of reference, Carbone and Smith (2008) estimated the share

   7A   parallel development would be required in a model that recognized how ecosystem services contribute

to production. A ski resort is aected by snow, a beach resort by marine debris, water quality and congestion.

To the extent that we model the services of these resorts in ways that include quality then these eects

would be in production.




                                                     12
of virtual income associated with particulate-matter air pollution at 1.53% and found that


non-separability between an air quality good and leisure demand led models that failed


to incorporate these connections to either underestimate (in the case of complements) or


overestimate (substitutes) the excess burden associated with a new 5% tax (in the presence


of a pre-existing 40% tax on labor income) on either the energy or the transportation


services sector.   The errors ranged from 20% to 50% of the true excess burden of the


taxes.


   Carbone and Smith used elasticities of substitution between leisure and air quality that


were multiples of two and one half the elasticity of substitution between other consumption


goods in the preferences structure. We have no empirical basis for judging what elasticity


values would be reasonable or unreasonable in this context, and we are unlikely to nd


answers in the existing literature.   The revealed preference studies routinely assume, as


a maintained condition, a specic substitution or complementarity restriction in order to


estimate the trade-os an individual would make to increase a specic non-market resource.


This is the link that allows the choices of private goods to reveal the marginal values for


changes in non-market goods that are assumed to be connected through preferences or


technology to them.     Stated preference studies focus on discrete changes in a specic


resource and reveal little about the responses to small changes (and the responses in private


goods associated with them) that are needed to estimate substitution relationships. Thus,


we are left with an assessment that in this simple case, with one non-market resource and


the relatively small share of income attributed to air quality, that the feedbacks could be


important with large enough linkages between the non-market services and the marketed


goods and services.




                                             13
2.3    Krutilla and Feedbacks


Krutilla's paper is usually credited with dening existence or non-use values as relevant


components of the economic gains realized from protecting or enhancing environmental


services. By drawing a distinction between on-site use or use of environmental services


with another private good his paper focused attention on how those services should enter


preferences and whether the contributions observed through private goods' demands fully


captured all of the reasons a person would be willing to trade o resources to protect


a non-market resource as we noted. Hanemann's (1988) characterization of non-use or


existence values is now widely accepted as the most general. He suggests the equivalent


of a nested structure of eects (as described in equation (1)), with some inuences to


a consumer's well-being that arise in combination with private goods and some without.


Thus, in his description of Krutilla's concepts we would observe the eects of non-market


services with private goods' demands but these inuences need not reect everything.


   Thus, combining Krutilla's arguments for re-specifying preferences with Ayres and


Kneese's demonstration that a focus on general equilibrium was essential to the task


of understanding externalities yields our primary conclusions; a transformation to general


equilibrium analysis is required to fully acknowledge environmental feedbacks. Interactions


outside markets are important within the ambient environment but so also is the structure


in preferences (and production). This structure is what serves to dene the full extent of


non-market environmental feedbacks. Thus, to appreciate their potential importance we


need multiple resources with dierent types of contributions to preferences (or production)


relationships. We turn to that task in our model after describing the transformations to


conventional CGE calibration to incorporate consistently these types of eects.




                                            14
3           Calibrating Multiple Non-Market Resources

Typically, a subset of the parameters required to specify a numerical general equilibrium


model are selected based on the literature and judgment, and the remainder are set to


match a benchmark equilibrium.
                                            8   As noted earlier, with homogenous-of-degree-one func-


tions and market goods, this task is readily accomplished using Rutherford's (2002) cali-


brated share form of the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function as in equation


(6).




                                                     hP           ρ i1/ρ
                                                        K          di
                                                U=      i=1 θi     d̄i
                                                                                                               (6)

                                                     PK
                                                        i=1 θi   =1


where        d¯i   is the benchmark level of consumption of good              i,   and   ρ = 1 − 1/σ ,    where   σ

is the Allen elasticity of substitution.             Under these circumstances            θi   corresponds to the


benchmark expenditure share for commodity                   i    relative to the total for all    K        9
                                                                                                      goods.


      Introducing non-market goods into this framework and treating them as quasi-xed


implies that preferences and production functions will no longer be homothetic and that


                                                                    θ
the simple interpretation of the allocation terms ( i ) as expenditure shares no longer holds


(Perroni 1992, Carbone and Smith 2008). Carbone and Smith dened new shares in terms


of virtual income using exogenously set virtual prices for air quality based on hedonic


property value estimates of marginal willingness to pay. Here we propose a more general


strategy. Let          d   designate a vector of goods that can be decomposed into two components,


dM    and      dq ,   for market ( M)                       q
                                        and quasi-xed ( ) goods so          U(d) = Ū(dM , dq ).
     8 For    discussion of this process see Mansur and Whalley (1984) and Rutherford (2002).
     9 If   the function is nested, the same result holds and the shares correspond to the fraction of expenditures

on goods (or factors) in a nest.



                                                          15
     To write the budget constraint in general terms, assume production can be represented


with an activity analysis framework, with           A now describing a matrix with each element the

net output of commodity          i   per unit of sector      j   (i.e. output minus input);   y   a vector of


inputs available to each sector;           E   a matrix of initial endowments of the         K    goods to     H

households and         D   a matrix of demands for the           K   goods by the   H   households, with   l   a


vector of ones.


     When there is only one household, the general equilibrium conditions correspond to the


rst order conditions for a constrained optimization problem  maximizing utility subject


to a budget constraint. The budget constraint is given in equation (7).




                                               Ay − (Dl − El) ≥ 0                                          (7)



or


                                                   d ≤ Ay + e

where   d   and   e   correspond to vectors of demands and initial endowments (i.e.               d = Dl   and


e = El   for the multiple household case).


     Now for the problem distinguishing market and quasi-xed goods, the budget constraint


becomes equation (8).


                                                                      
                                      dM   AM      eM 
                                         =    y +                                                    (8)
                                       dq     Aq        eq

     We can separate these sets of constraints with the Lagrangian multipliers for the rst


group continuing to serve as market prices. In this setting the objective is to frame the


problem so that it mimics Walras law (i.e. if            z(p)     is the representative consumer's vector


of excess demands at price            p,   then the fact that income balances total expenditures




                                                        16
implies     p T z(p) = 0).      Equilibrium excess demand will exhibit complementary slackness


with market prices.         When we introduce non-market goods we need to augment income


and structure prices so that the same condition continues to be satised for market and


non-market goods. Dividing prices into market determined ( M ) and virtual ( p                   p q (pM , dq ))

for calibration, using Rutherford's calibrated-shares logic we simply set                 p q (pM , dq )   to an


exogenously determined vector of constants,                 p0,   and augment endowments so that the


designation of the share parameters in terms of virtual income reproduces the equilibrium.


This logic relies on estimates of the marginal willingness to pay                 at the benchmark         values


of the vector       d.

      If we can develop a set of marginal willingness to pay estimates from the literature


(and treat them as constants), then these can be easily incorporated in the Rutherford


calibrated share framework as described above.                    If we observe the willingness to pay for


a discrete change in some dimension of environmental quality, as is often the case in


non-market valuation studies, then the calibration technique must derive the implied value


for   p0.   These values need to be consistent with market and non-market conditions in the


benchmark equilibrium and to yield the correct area under the inverse demand curve for the


non-market good. The logic associated with the process will, in principle, accommodate


any form of non-market valuation information.
                                                            10    For example, structures commonly used


in travel cost demand or averting behavior models could be accommodated. One needs


only to dene the relationship between the results available from the revealed preference


model and the parameters of the CGE preference specication.
                                                                                 11

  10 For    example, the early example developed by Espinosa and Smith (1995) did not recognize the feasibility

of building in calibrating constraints into the optimization problem that denes the benchmark. Instead they

assume air quality had a perfect substitute as an ane transformation of consumer services. Their strategy

allowed calibration to a benchmark without the explicit denition of the willingness to pay expressions in

terms of preferences.     Perfect substitution in their case implies a simple function of expenditures on that

private good should equal the benchmark willingness to pay.
  11 The    logic parallels the arguments developed in Smith, Pattanayak and Van Houtven (2002) for using




                                                       17
4        A Stylized Model with Multiple Non-Market Goods

Our model is deliberately simple, allowing the two key elements inuencing the nature and


importance of the feedbacks between the non-market services and the demands for private


market goods to be easily identied.             These two features are:         (a) the specic ways in


which non-market services enter preference functions as non-separable inuences on the


trade-os that agents would be prepared to make among marketed goods and services; and


(b) the transformations that dene the relationship between physical/biological responses


of the model ecosystem in our application and the recognizable changes in the services


that agents attribute to these activities or resources.


    Our example uses an illustrative model of the U.S. economy proposed by Goulder and


Williams (2003) in the context of evaluating the deadweight loss of energy taxes. It has


ve nal consumption goods as well as leisure, four intermediate goods, and one input


(labor). The model was designed to illustrate the performance of alternative measures of


excess burden losses arising from adding dierent new taxes in a system with a pre-existing

preference calibration to develop consistent, partial equilibrium benet transfers. In another context it is the

logic Bullock and Minot (2006) used to demonstrate weak complementarity could be used to numerically

derive Hicksian welfare measures without requiring the Willig (1978) condition. However,one aspect of these

parallels deserves further discussion. Non-market valuation estimates for the willingness to pay (WTP) for

discrete increments in a non-market service are partial equilibrium measures that take prices and income as

given.   The benchmark for estimates of the WTP need not correspond to the prices and income for the

market conditions represented by a given CGE model. As a result, adjustment to match those conditions

is likely to be required.   In most policy contexts this has been somewhat ad hoc, with adjustments using

the consumer price indexes and/or arbitrary scaling based on real income growth. Ideally one would start

the process by constructing a SAM for the benchmark associated with the timing (and the location) of

the WTP estimate and then use that to estimate a starting point for the new calibration.          The strategy

used will depend on the assumptions made by the analyst about the interpretation of the representative

agent's preferences  e.g. as a local approximation. This issue was discussed in formal terms for the partial

equilibrium case by Smith et al. (2002). It was also raised indirectly in Eiswerth and Shaw (1997). Our point

is not that individuals recognize the general equilibrium implications of a change in a non-market good but

that consistency implies WTP estimates be treated as derived from what has been described as a variation

function (McConnell 1990).      As a result, they will be functions of the prices and income associated with

the individuals used to estimate them. Because these values need not correspond to the benchmark for the

market data in an applied problem, consistency requires a consistent reference point for calibration.




                                                      18
tax on labor income. We add to it the United States Environmental Protection Agency


(1996) estimates for emission rates in 1995 (the year of the market data used to calibrate


the model) for sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides for each sector.     Our objective is to


link these emissions to acidic deposition rates and, in turn, to three interdependent ways


acidic deposition is assumed to inuence households. Details on the numerical model are


presented in the appendices at the end of the paper.


   Figure 1 provides a schematic description of the preferences we assume for the rep-


resentative agent.   Our primary channel through which reduced acid rain contributes to


individual well-being is through its eect on outdoor recreational activities. We selected


two types of recreational eects that have been documented in the literature (see Rowe,


Lang, Chestnut, Latimer, Rae, Bernow and White (1995)).         The rst of these impacts


arises in recreational shing through the eect of acidity on sh stocks in the lakes in the


Northeast. We use the experience in the Adirondacks to provide a tangible example of the


impacts. The second interaction with recreational activities arises through the eects of


acidic deposition on the quality and diversity of tree cover. These changes are assumed to


inuence the trade-os people would make to undertake recreation that involves hiking to


enjoy scenic vistas as part of their recreational experiences. We expect that both of these


eects would be closely linked to consumption of market-based consumer services as well


as to the allocation of leisure time. These linkages are reected in the nesting structure


of the representative agent's preferences in gure 1.


   The other mechanism for an eect due to acidic deposition arises through what we


described as the existence/habitat composite.    These services make a weakly separable


contribution to well being at the top level of the nesting structure. While our specication


is somewhat arbitrary, the interconnection is consistent with the logical development we




                                            19
described with non-market services making non-separable contributions to preferences.
                                                                                                        12

It also is consistent with the general logic used to describe what might be treated as the


bundled services of an ecosystem with the background descriptions given in contingent


valuation scenarios (see Banzhaf, Burtraw, Evans and Krupnick (2006) as an example).
                                                                                                        13

Specic types of use are not identied.




4.1        Measures of Values for Non-Market Services


Our specication of the links between sulfur and nitrogen emissions and the non-market


services relies on simple algebraic relationships. For forest views we use the model in the


United States Environmental Protection Agency (1999) Prospective Analysis describing


how emissions aect deciviews of visibility to compute a unit value in 1995 dollars for


emissions reduction in kg/hectare.           The eects of acidic deposition on sh populations


are based on a survey of 1,469 lakes during 1984 to 1987 reported in Driscoll, Lawrence,


Bulger, Butler, Cronan, Eagar, Lambert, Likens, Stoddard and Weathers (2001).                          We


obtained these data from the online database cited by the authors. For the records with


complete data, we estimated a simple regression model relating the number of sh species


in each lake relative to the maximum number of sh species in any of the lakes to a


quadratic in the measured Ph level in each lake as well as controls for the size of the lake


and the size of the watershed associated with each lake. The estimated equation is given

  12 See   Smith (2004) for a discussion of this formulation in comparison to others that have been used in

decomposing use and non-use values.
  13 Banzhaf   et al. (2006) describe a scenario in which a long term (10 year) program is proposed to

reduce the eects of acidication for a specic set of ecosystem services. In the Banzhaf application the

scenario describes the Adirondack Park as having a total of 3,000 lakes. 1,500 of these lakes are described

as experiencing injuries due to acidic deposition.   These lakes of concern have sh populations that are

impacted. Forests and bird populations are experiencing some injuries. In the base case 90% of forests are

described as healthy and 80% of bird populations at their historic level. The plan decreases the lakes of

concern by 600 to 900 and makes small improvements in the population of the bird species and one tree

species in the areas with the improved lakes. We treat this as a composite improvement, measured with a

CES aggregate function, bundling the lakes (sh), birds, and trees into one arbitrary unit.



                                                      20
below.




    ln(#    sh species / max # sh species)         =

    −6.91 + 1.47P h − .097P h2 + .007          Surface Area    + .012x10−4      Watershed Area
                                                                                                        (9)
    n = 1, 121

    R2 = .367


    Setting the surface area and watershed area at the mean values we derived a quadratic


relationship between the relative number of species supported by a lake and acidic levels,


as displayed in gure 2. It is important to acknowledge that this is a stylized description


intended to illustrate the importance of baseline conditions for the response to eorts to


control emission.


    The last component of our analysis is the composite or habitat services that are included


to represent eects of non-use services.           Here we use the number of lakes improved in


the Banzhaf et al. (2006) contingent valuation study of the benets of reducing acidic


deposition in the Adirondacks. Using the Kopp and Smith (1997) proposed CES index we


derive the marginal willingness to pay for the habitat / non-use services, calibrated so the


elasticity of substitution in the Kopp-Smith function is consistent with the estimates for


the willingness to pay to improve 600 lakes. The scenario identies a total of 3,000 lakes


in the Adirondacks Park. 1,500 of these are described as being of concern due to acidic


deposition. Thus, the improvement is for 600 of the 1500 lakes that are aected by the


air pollution leading to acidic deposition (see Banzhaf et al. (2006)).


    Table 1 summarizes the assumptions and data sources used for each non-market com-


ponent of the model.
                          14   Linking the damages (per household) to a national model of the

  14 The   market components are taken from Goulder and Williams (2003), which is a model of the entire

U.S. Hence, the input intensities in the model will reect this assumption and to the extent that the local

economy of the Adirondack region diers from national averages, this assumption will introduce inaccuracies.




                                                    21
U.S. economy (in 1995) we assume the problem is national in scope  at the level of


importance represented by the measures available for the Adirondacks. All estimates for


deposition and willingness to pay measures are transformed to 1995 dollars.




4.2      Design of Policy Scenarios


The policy scenarios are designed to examine the general equilibrium consequences of


introducing a set of least-cost output taxes to achieve a 43% reduction in both             SO2   and


NOx     emissions, a reduction roughly consistent with estimates of the eect of the Clean


Air Act amendments of 1990 over the period 1990-2010. The implied vector of tax rates


for the sectors of the numerical model is: Primary Energy = 9.4%, Manufacturing = 0.4%,


Transportation = 55.5%, Utilities = 42.5%.


      These tax rates are derived in two steps. First, the model is calibrated to describe the


1995 level of market activity, pollution conditions (i.e. deposition rates), and non-market


preferences for ecosystem services, based on estimates for the willingness to pay for reduc-


tions in pollution that reect all three ecosystem contributions to individual well-being (i.e.


recreational shing, scenic vistas and recreational hiking, and composite species/habitat


service). With preference parameters set at this level we consider the equilibrium prices


for   SO2   and   NOx   permits that would yield at least a 43% reduction in emissions.           The


equivalent sectoral tax rates are what we label here as the least-cost output taxes. Be-


cause emissions are assumed to be a xed fraction of output in each polluting sector of


the economy, these taxes simply reect the pollution intensity of these sectors implied by


the calibration of the model.      The equilibrium prices and quantities that result from the


introduction of the output taxes (or, equivalently, pollution permits dened in units con-

In principle, a SAM could be developed for the states contributing to the acidic deposition problem in

Adirondack.




                                                 22
sistent with output) are calculated under the assumption that tax revenues are transferred


in lump sum to consumers.        Because the model involves feedback mechanisms, the tax


rates to achieve the 43% reduction will depend on the preference specication linking the


non-market services to the market goods. We calibrated taxes for the central case de-


scribed below. The actual reduction in emissions will not be exactly 43% as the preference


specication changes due to the eects of these changes on the both the extent and the


impacts of feedbacks.


   Implementing this policy of new taxes designed to reduce emissions results in changes


in market prices, changes in the levels of sh, tree cover and scenic vistas, as well as to the


composite species/habitat service. There are also changes in the virtual prices associated


with these non-market services.


   We have selected two aspects of our computations of the dierent general equilibrium


solutions to illustrate the potential for feedback eects. The rst considers how the degree


of complementarity between the two use-based non-market services, market-based con-


sumer services and leisure inuence the benets we attribute to the same policy changes.


Three alternatives are evaluated: a central case with a baseline calibration of the elastic-


ities in the model, a high complementarity case in which the degree of complementarity


between the use-based services and their complementary market goods is twice as strong


as in the central case, and a low complementarity case where this complementarity is


half as strong as in the central case.


   For each of the general equilibrium benet computations, the actual general equilib-


rium response to policy is held constant.     What is varied is the denition of the benet


measure used to reect how important general equilibrium eects are. To accomplish this


objective, we vary how the market and non-market environment are related the benets


of a change in the level of   one individual amenity.   The way the levels of market prices and



                                               23
other environmental amenities inuence our benet measures illustrates the importance of


treating the valuation problem in a general equilibrium framework.


   To dene the experiment more precisely, let                  e(p, q, u)     designate the Hicksian expen-


diture function with     p   the vector of market prices,             q   the vector of quasi-xed (from the


individual's perspective) non-market services, and               u    the level of well-being. Equations (10)


through (13) dene the alternative measures. The total willingness to pay for a discrete


change in one non-market service is simply the change in the expenditure level required to


maintain utility level   u0.   We adopt the notation splitting out               qi   and   qj6=i   to distinguish our


focus on the change in one non-market service versus the simultaneous changes in other


subsets of non-market services that actually take place in a general equilibrium response


to the tax policy.


   At one end of the spectrum, the change in                     qi    could be measured before the other


arguments in the expenditure function change (equation (10)). At the other end of the


spectrum, all other changes could be assumed to have taken place at the outset (equation


(13)). Our strategy for understanding how the general equilibrium eects change the value


of the improvement in one non-market service is to compute a range of such measures as


a decomposing the inuence of the dierent eects of the general equilibrium change on


the value of such an improvement. Specically, we compare:



   •   The eect of a change in         qi   alone:




                                W T P qi = e(p 0 , qj60=i , qi1 , u 0 ) − e(p 0 , q 0 , u 0 )                    (10)




   •   The eect of the general equilibrium level of non-market services:




                                W T P q = e(p 0 , q 1 , u 0 ) − e(p 0 , qj61=i , qi0 , u 0 )                     (11)



                                                        24
   •   The eect of the general equilibrium level of prices:




                                W T P p = e(p 1 , qj60=i , qi1 , u 0 ) − e(p 1 , q 0 , u 0 )              (12)




   •   The eect of the levels of the general equilibrium quantities and prices:




                               W T P GE = e(p 1 , q 1 , u 0 ) − e(p 1 , qj61=i , qi0 , u 0 )              (13)




   One might argue that the value of simultaneous changes in the levels of multiple


amenities could be measured using a summation of standard, partial equilibrium values. Our


analysis demonstrates that even the WTP measures for                   individual amenities are interrelated
in a way that makes them non-separable from other non-market changes and market


changes. Therefore, these measurements must be made jointly using a general equilibrium


approach like the one described in this paper.


   The comparisons developed in equations (10-13) parallel the distinctions between con-


sumer surplus for a price change measured along a partial versus a general equilibrium


demand function (see Just, Hueth and Schmitz (2004), pp. 327-330). The general equi-


librium demand function for a particular good measures the consumer surplus due to an


intervention  say a new commodity tax on that good  by evaluating that good's de-


mand at the general equilibrium prices for all goods (i.e. reecting the general equilibrium


eects of the new tax in these markets). In our case, we consider separately the evaluation


of a change in a single   qi   evaluated at general equilibrium values for all other           q 's,   all gen-


eral equilibrium prices for marketed goods or at general equilibrium values for both. The


distinctions highlight the importance of the interconnections associated with feedbacks.


   There is a separate issue that also relates to feedback eects between the non-market




                                                        25
components of a general equilibrium model and the markets. The easiest way to describe it


is to recognize that in a general equilibrium setting a policy causes many changes simulat-


neously. Thus, while our least-cost output taxes might have been intended to improve the


abundance of sh by reducing acidic deposition, reductions in emissions also aect the tree


cover and the services we described as being associated with non-use or existence motives.


In addition, the relative prices of the goods and services change. All of these eects are


associated with the policy. This description of the general equilibrium consequences has


been the traditional focus describing the dierence between partial equilibrium and general


equilibrium measures of the willingness to pay for a policy, considering                      all   of its eects.


Such a general equilibrium measure would be dened by equation (14).




                            W T PT otal   GE   = e(p 1 , q 1 , u 0 ) − e(p 0 , q 0 , u 0 )                   (14)




In this context, eorts to distinguish primary versus ancillary benets of the policy would


separate the eects of the changes in             qi   versus the changes in the other          q 's   in dierent


ways.


    Our focus here is on how the treatment of the feedback eects inuences the willingness


to pay for a change in a single service. To illustrate this in a general equilibrium setting, we


must dene the way it would be accomplished in order to generate the general equilibrium


eects.     Our model abstracts from pollution abatement procedures and simplies the


transmission mechanism from emissions to eects.                      As a result, there are no options to


adjust control responses and the policy is exceptionally costly.                        It would never pass a


benet-cost review.       That is not our point.
                                                         15   Rather, our objective is to highlight how

  15 The   conventional general equilibrium willingness to pay for the taxes as a policy that changes both

the vector of non-market services and the relative prices of market goods is negative, as expected.           The

specication of the degree of complementarity in the case also has an eect on the size of the loss. This

impact is small. The larger story is the one we have highlighted that parallels the distinction between partial




                                                        26
preference linkages change the impact of the general equilibrium point of evaluation for


the willingness to pay measures used to evaluate a single change in an environmental


service.


    We illustrate this by performing a sensitivity analysis with respect to all of the elas-


ticities that control the relationships between the market and non-market goods  both


for the use values and for the composite/habitat existence value included in the model.


As we noted earlier, we do not know the nature of the substitution or complementary


relationships between the non-market services and market goods. Revealed preference es-


timation methods treat this as a maintained assumption. Our calibration strategy assumes


some degree of complementarity between the use-based non-market goods, leisure and key


complementary market services. For existence value, however, any degree of substitution


with the other components of preferences is potentially consistent with the idea of non-use


value as long as the good is weakly separable.


    In this part of the analysis, we focus on the virtual prices of the non-market goods as a


way to evaluate the important relationships to look for. Large changes in virtual prices for


the same set of taxes with changes in the preference structure signal important impacts


on the relationships between non-market and market goods.

equilibrium and general equilibrium demand functions (and supply when there is not constant returns to

scale).



                            Degree of         W T PT otal   GE     % dierence

                         Complementarity                         from Central case



                         High                       -2540.7                     1.3

                         Central                    -2508.6                      

                         Low                        -2503.7                     -0.2

                         NOTES: WTP measured in 100-millions of 1995 dollars.




                                                    27
4.3    Scenario Calibration


Two basic types of information are required for calibration of a conventional CGE model


 expenditure levels for the benchmark equilibrium of the economy and prior information


on the rst-order responsiveness of the model, typically in the form of price or substitution


elasticities. With these data and assumptions about the representative agent's preference


function and all production technologies, the calibrated-shares logic calibrates the free


parameters to replicate equilibrium output levels at the benchmark prices.


   The inclusion of non-market commodities into this framework requires an extension of


this logic  assigning (or computing based on the available non-market valuation mea-


sures) virtual prices consistent with the benchmark levels of   SO2 and NOx .   The description


underlying these virtual prices must be consistent with a description of the non-market ser-


vices aected by the pollutants. It must also incorporate the connections between these


services and the non-market activities people undertake. Thus, the denitions of the role


of non-market services in preference function, as well as the role assumed for pollution in


constructing the services that enter these virtual prices, contribute to the nature of the


interactions between choices and responses outside markets that aect non-market ser-


vices. If there is information on the marginal willingness to pay for the non-market services


aected by pollution (and we are prepared to assume that these values are relevant to


the levels of services implied by the benchmark equilibrium), then these estimates can be


used to construct the virtual prices for the benchmark solution. If one has estimates of


willingness to pay for discrete changes in non-market services, then one must calibrate to


the benchmark virtual price that implies the correct total willingness to pay. This is the


situation we illustrate with the current model.


   We calibrate to match Hicksian and Marshallian labor supply elasticities because the




                                             28
leisure-labor choice is likely to be one important determinant of the feedback eects in


the model. This task is complicated by the fact that the use-based non-market services


are non-separable arguments in the agent's preference function, hence the labor supply re-


sponse depends on the non-market services level changes implied by a change in the market


wage. Because the emissions that determine those service levels are generated through-


out the economy, closed-form solutions for these elasticity responses are not available.


Numerical techniques are required to solve the implied system of nonlinear equations 


one equation for each elasticity value to be matched in the calibration of the model. This


process along with solution for the virtual prices of the non-market services associated with


the pollutants will be jointly determined. Thus, our numerical calibration strategy requires


the simultaneous solution of:
                                   16


    •   Zero-prot, market-clearance and budget balance conditions to dene the general


        equilibrium response of non-market service levels to a wage change and the resulting


        labor supply change.



    •   Conditions which dene the parameters used to control the elasticity relationships


        we wish to calibrate.



    •   Conditions which dene the willingness-to-pay relationship which determine the bench-


        mark virtual prices for non-market goods.



    •   Conditions which dene the parameters used to ensure that the benchmark equilib-


        rium in the model replicates output and price levels in the calibration data.



    The algebraic form of the nested CES preference specication corresponding to gure


1 for the representative agent is given in equation (15).

  16 The   GAMS computer code responsible for performing the model calibration and computing the coun-

terfactual scenarios described in our results are available upon request.



                                                     29
                  
                      Pn C  Ci ψ ξ/ψ             κ
   U=           h
               θ θ u
                          θ C0i
                       i=1 i
                                        + (1 − θ ) θr l ll0
                                                u

                                                                                                                               #1/ρ
                                     %                %                         % κ/% ξ/κ ρ/ξ                  ρ
                                         f                t                   CCSV                                       h
            +(1 − θr l ) θfr             f0     + θtr    t0
                                                                    r
                                                                 + θcsv       CCSV0                       + (1 − θh )    h0

                                                                                                                                (15)


                θ
where the   terms are dened as value shares of benchmark expenditures in the parenthe-


sized bundles of commodities that they modify.
                                                                          17    This expression is given in Rutherford's


calibrated share form as described earlier. The exponent parameters (                                        ρ, ξ, κ, %, ψ )   dene


the elasticities of substitution between the various nests within the function.


    ξ and the value share of leisure, θr l , are chosen to match the specic Hicksian and Mar-

shallian labor supply elasticity estimates supplied as prior information (0.25 and 0.05 re-


spectively).     θh , θfr    and   θtr   are the value share parameters for the composite species/habitat,


the shing, and the scenic vista services, respectively. They are chosen to match our data


on the willingness to pay for changes in the levels of these non-market services in the


Adirondack study area (see table 1).


    ρ, κ   and      %   are the parameters that determine the substitution relationships between


                         l
leisure demand ( ), non-market services (                          f , t, h),   and consumer services (           CCSV 0 ).    In the


policy scenarios, we vary the values these parameters take on                                       relative to the calibrated
value of ξ      in order to achieve specic patterns of substitution between the market and


non-market components of the preferences structure. This exercise is the strategy we use


to vary the substitution and complementarity between market and non-market goods that


determine the relative strength and character of the feedback eects in the economy.

  17 The   top level terms (       θh    and   (1 − θh ))     dene shares of the total expenditures our of virtual income

(market income plus the benchmark value of the non-market services and leisure, whereas the super-scripted

instances within the various nests of the function are dened relative to the total expenditures within the

nest.




                                                                    30
      We choose     ρ, κ and % take on values that give the associated Allen elasticity parameters

 σ , σr l , σr ) specic relationships to the value of σu , the substitution elasticity that controls
( h


the labor supply elasticity.             ρ = 1 − 1/σh , κ = 1 − 1/σr l , % = 1 − 1/σr .        In our central case,


σh = σu     and    σr l = σr = σu /4.          The eect of this specication is to assure that the cross-


elasticities between the arguments within the nests governed by these parameters are one-


fourth as substitutable with each other as any one of them is with the commodities in the


bundle of consumption goods described in the bottom line of equation (15). The rationale


for this calibration is that the use-based non-market services (sh and tree values) should


exhibit strong relative complementarity with leisure time and the market-based consumer


services that are required to enjoy visits to the Adirondacks.
                                                                              18   A typical value for    σu   implied


by matching the labor supply elasticities that we calibrate to is around 2.
                                                                                                 19   This makes the


value for       σh = 2   and   σr l = σr = 0.5.        In the low complementarity case,          σr l = σr = 1    and


in the high complementarity case                    σr l = σr = 0.25.   In the sensitivity analysis, we look at


all combinations of         σh , σ r l   and   σr   that are equal to the values they take on in the central


as well as twice and half these values.


      To assure compatibility each variation in the model corresponds to a new calibration


to benchmark conditions  altering the restrictions imposed as part of calibration in the


substitution elasticities. Thus each calibrated version of the model reproduces the same


willingness to pay measures for the non-market services                    and     the same ecient output tax


rates. The slopes of the virtual price function for each non-market service are dierent.


Figure 3 illustrates the point for one non-market service.                    A    and   B   can be interpreted as

  18 We    dene commodities as complements based on the cross-price elasticities that would be implied by

these substitution elasticities using the virtual prices. Smaller values for the    σ   terms imply smaller cross-price

elasticities.
  19 The   exact value of   σu   that matches our labor supply estimates will depend on the values of the other

elasticity parameters in our preference structure. The range of values over all of calibrations we consider in

the sensitivity analysis are between 1.75 and 2.7.




                                                             31
reecting two alternative restrictions linking the substitution elasticities that might involve


this non-market service. Changes in the elasticity together with the restriction to reproduce


our benchmark values for willingness to pay and the implied restrictions linking the non-


market services to market goods must alter the slopes and positions of the willingness to


pay functions.        Calibration assures that the total willingness to pay function for a xed


change in that non-market service will be reproduced under benchmark conditions. The


functions are assumed in this case to be set to reproduce the WTP for the change from


A0   to   A1 .   Thus the triangle represented by   K    must be equal to   L   so the areas under the


two curves will be the same.




5         Results

Table 2 describes the eects of our policy scenario, a 43% reduction in                SO2   and   NOx

pollution, on the prices and quantities represented in the model. The dierent market and


non-market activities represented in the model are described on the rows of the table. The


three horizontal sections of the table, labeled High, Central and Low describe results under


the dierence assumptions about the degree of complementarity between the use-based


non-market services in the model and leisure and market-based consumer services.                   For


each of these scenarios, we report the percentage change in the price (or virtual price) of


the activity and the percentage change in the quantity supplied from benchmark levels.


     Naturally, the largest eects of the pollution taxes are on market prices are in those


sectors that are most pollution intensive in the benchmark data  transportation, utilities


and primary energy production.         All of these sectors experience large increases in cost


and corresponding reductions in quantities produced and consumed after the taxes are


implemented. Prices in other market sectors are relatively unaected.




                                                    32
   The virtual prices of the three non-market services go down signicantly  between


18 and 75 percent depending on the service and the complementarity scenario we are


considering. The marginal willingness to pay for these services goes down as the amounts


provided by the ecosystem go up under the policy scenario. The extent of the reduction


of the virtual prices depends on the degree of complementarity between the market and


non-market goods in the preference structure. As the use-based services (sh and tree)


become less complementary to leisure and consumer services, their values are less aected


by the policy change. We can see by comparing the price changes for these goods in the


High, Central and Low complementarity scenarios described in the table.


   Demand for consumer services and leisure both increase between 9 and 15 percent as a


result of the pollution taxes. This is due to the fact that these activities are not pollution


intensive and therefore become cheaper relative to market activities like transportation and


energy. It is also due to the fact that the complementarity with the use-based non-market


services increases demand for these goods as the ecosystem improves under the new policy.


   Notice that even the virtual price of the good we associate with the existence of non-use


services is aected by the policy change and varies across the complementarity scenarios.


While the eect is not as strong as for the use-based values, the table illustrates how the


services attributed to existence values cannot be regarded as unaected by changes to the


other parts of the economy because they enter in a weakly separable form in preferences.


Connections throughout the natural system as well as market-based feedbacks in other


goods and services contribute to these changes.


   To consider in more specic terms the connections between the dierent market and


non-market goods interact, we now evaluate how the measures of total willingness to pay


for the improvement in one individual non-market service (the sh service) delivered by


the policy is aected by the other changes to the general equilibrium system. This is the



                                             33
qi   in our denitions of WTP in section 4.2. Table 3 reports on this topic. The dierent


welfare measures described in section 4.2 are listed in the rows of the table. The column


labeled Before describes the WTP calculation that an analyst would make if the other


changes to the general equilibrium system were ignored in setting the baseline point for


evaluating the change in   qi .   The column labeled After describes the WTP calculation


that incorporates some or all of the general equilibrium changes in setting the baselines for


evaluation. The column labeled % Di is the percentage dierence between the Before


and After column values. The WTP measures are in 100-millions of 1995 US dollars. The


three vertical sections of the table, labeled High, Central and Low describe results


under the dierence assumptions about the degree of complementarity between the use-


based non-market services and leisure and market-based consumer services, as in Table


2.


     The improvement in the use-based sh services implied by the policy change are valued


at between 560 and 890 million dollars depending on the complementarity scenario and


the specic welfare measure used to evaluate the policy. With the exception of one case,


the value of the sh services improvement is more valuable when some or all of the other


general equilibrium adjustments are taken into account. The eect of introducing the other


improvements in the ecosystem values (tree and existence services) in the calculation does


not appear to have a large eect on the value of the improvement in the sh services.


This is indicated in the table by the dierence the values in the Before and After columns


for the   WTPq   measure. In the High complementarity scenario, where this eect is most


strongly felt, it only results in a 2.7% dierence in the willingness to pay for sh services.


     Introducing the price changes in the market economy induced by the policy intervention


to the baseline used of evaluating the change in sh services (indicated in the   WTPp    row


of the table) has substantially larger eects however. In the Central case, failing take these



                                              34
inuences into account would underestimate the value of the improvement in sh services


by approximately 25%.        In the High complementarity case, this error more than doubles


(53%) and in the Low complementarity case it is approximately one half (12.5%). These


changes are similar in magnitude to the changes in the values of the elasticity parameters


in the nest of use-based services that we have assumed across these scenarios.


   There is a strong intuition for these results. The higher the degree of complementarity


between use-based services and leisure and the consumer services good, the more depen-


dent is the value of an improvement in sh or tree services on matching increases in these


market goods. As we noted earlier, a major eect of the policy intervention is to cause con-


sumers to substitute our of pollution-intensive consumption and into activities like leisure


and services. Thus, the price changes due to the policy add value to the increases in the


ecosystem services by encouraging demand for complementary market goods.


   The results described in table 4 explore the consequences of the dierent possible forms


that non-separability of the non-market services might take in the preference structure for


the equilibrium outcomes and the values placed by the consumer on these dierent ser-


vices. The rst three columns of the table indicate the value that each of the substitution


elasticity parameters takes on in each scenario relative to the value assumed in the central


cases. Recall that   σh   controls the degree to which the existence/habitat services is substi-


tutable with other all other forms of consumption.       σr l   controls the substitution between


leisure and the bundle of use-based ecosystem services and the consumer services good,


and   σr   controls the substitution within that bundle. The three horizontal sections of the


table, labeled Fish, Tree and Existence/Habitat refer to the three non-market services in


the model. For each non-market service, we report the percentage change in the virtual


price and quantity supplied from benchmark levels that is implied by the policy intervention.


   Two conclusions emerge from the analysis of these alternative model specications.



                                                35
First, the equilibrium quantities of the dierent ecosystem services are less aected by


the changes to the preference structure than the equilibrium virtual prices of the services.


Nevertheless, the quantities do vary across the scenarios described here by as much as ten


percentage points.       This is a reection of the feedback eects between the non-market


goods and the market eects of the tax policy.             Most of the action, however, is the


changes in the virtual prices. The elasticities that control the use-based nest in preferences


 σ
( r and   σr l )   have natural eects on the magnitude of the virtual price decreases for the


use-based services. For example, the percentage drop in the virtual price on sh services


changes is upwards of 80% when         σr   is half of the value it takes on in the central case and


around 30% when it is twice the central value. This is, again, due to the fact that the


value is more closely aligned to the use of consumer services when this elasticity value is


small.


     However, there are also more indirect eects.       σh   (the existence value elasticity) aects


the virtual prices of the other services by more than ten percentage points over the range


of values we consider.       Thus, even in a model were the non-market services represent a


somewhat small share of virtual income (the existence value and the tree value represents


approximately 0.4% of virtual income each and the sh value is approximately 0.03%


in our calibration), the presence of multiple services linked through the ecosystem and


through their relationships to market goods can have a marked eect on the value of


any one improvement in an ecosystem service.             These eects simply reect the pattern


of equilibrium adjustments across the economy due to non-market and market feedback


eects.




                                                   36
6     Implications

The early papers by Ayres and Kneese (1969) and Krutilla (1967) provided the conceptual


basis for re-considering how economic assessments of environmental policy are undertaken.


Ayres and Kneese argued that environmental externalities were not exceptional and minor


but pervasive.   Partial equilibrium strategies would be incomplete because they failed to


account for the linkages between sectors through the non-market consequences of residuals


management. Their focus was primarily on the supply side of general equilibrium models.


Krutilla's arguments can be used to suggest that the services attributed to modications


in the natural landscape, including the decisions about how to dispose of the residuals


prominent in the Ayres and Kneese framework, entered preferences in several distinct


ways. In his framework, these dierent contributions were associated with use and non-


use motives for protecting ecosystems. The subsequent literature on non-market valuation


has focused primarily on the challenges in measuring the use and non-use trade-os. There


is another challenge that follows from his framework. It arises once we recognize that, in a


general equilibrium setting, non-market feedbacks change when we acknowledge existence


values as a component of preferences.


    The implications of these early papers have not been fully appreciated. Modern treat-


ments of applied welfare economics (see Just et al. (2004) for example) focus attention


on the market interactions that distinguish partial equilibrium and general equilibrium mea-


sures of consumer surplus (and deadweight loss).     They fail to recognize the important


feedbacks from the non-market consequences of policy. Sometimes policy is intended to


improve some aspect of environmental quality. In other situations the objective is some-


thing else such as improving transportation or energy infrastructure and there are indirect


eects on environmental services. In both cases there are feedbacks that can inuence the




                                            37
prices and quantities of market related goods and services in a general equilibrium. Ayres


and Kneese conjectured correctly in our view that  . . . the partial equilibrium approach is


probably not convergent to the general equilibrium solution. . .  (p. 296).


   We have demonstrated in a simple case with multiple environmental services that they


were correct.   Even in a situation where the share of virtual income (i.e.    the economic


value of market and non-market services assessed at equilibrium prices and virtual prices)


is small the errors from ignoring them can be large. We have also illustrated the sensitivity


of these feedbacks to the structure of the substitution or complementarity relationships


between market goods and non-market services.


   Unfortunately we know little about the nature of these linkages.      Eorts to measure


the trade-os people would make to increase non-market services (or to enhance their


quality) have routinely assumed a preference linkage such as weak complementarity or


perfect substitution to derive estimates (see Ebert (1998) and Herriges, Kling and Phaneuf


(2004) for examples of these restrictions).        To complete the work Ayres and Kneese


and Krutilla, stated-preference research needs to be re-directed to measuring the nature


of these connections.    Our analysis has proposed a basis for how this task might be


accomplished.   The changes in virtual prices for non-market services signaled important


feedbacks in our general equilibrium model.


   As we noted earlier, a key element in most CGE models is the use of a representative


agent to characterize all consumers. While it is possible to allow for more agents to reect


distributional eects, the degree of heterogeneity in the prices dierent consumers face


is minimal due to the law of one price. With non-market goods, the virtual prices facing


dierent groups would be dierent. This eect could be accommodated by having dierent


agents, but the dierences would arise from their hypothesized spatial location. It is also


possible to reconsider aggregation relationships that might inuence the specication for a



                                              38
single representative agent's preferences from those facing dierent prices (see Bergstrom


and Cornes (1981)). In either case, these changes would likely enhance concerns about


the complementarity/substitution relationships we have focused on in this analysis.


   A rst step in this research would be eorts to develop tests for the spatial and temporal


scales people perceive as the extent of the market for use and non-use related services.


Such tests could be considered in a framework that is comparable to the scope test. A


scope test asks how total willingness to pay changes with a change in the size of the


change in a non-market good or service.     The analysis we propose would consider how


the marginal willingness to pay changes with modications in the availability or quantity


of related market and non-market goods and services over dierent spatial and temporal


scales.




                                            39
References

Ayres, Robert U. and Allen V. Kneese,              Production, Consumption and Externalities,

    American Economic Review,          June 1969,       59.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Dallas Burtraw, David Evans, and Alan Krupnick,                             Valuation

    of Natural Resource Improvements in the Adirondacks,                  Land Economics,        2006,   82,
    445464.


Bergstrom, Theodore C. and Richard C. Cornes, Gorman and Musgrave are Dual:                              An

    Antipodean Theorem on Public Goods,                Economic Letters,     1981,     7,   3718.


Bullock, David S. and Nicholas Minot,              On Measuring the Volume of a Non-Market

    Good Using Market Data,           American Journal of Agricultural Economics,                2006,   88,
    61973.


Carbone, Jared C. and V. Kerry Smith,              Evaluating Policy Interventions with General

    Equilibrium Externalities,     Journal of Public Economics,          2008,   92,   12541274.


Cornes, Richard,      External Eects:     An Alternative Formulation,           European Economic
    Review,   1980,   14,   307321.


Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees, Aggregate Production with Consumption
    Externalities,   Quarterly Journal of Economics,            February 1973,   87,    124.


Driscoll, C. T., G. B. Lawrence, A. J. Bulger, T. J. Butler, C. S. Cronan, C. Eagar,
    K. F. Lambert, G. E. Likens, J. L. Stoddard, and K. C. Weathers, Acidic Depo-
    sition in the Northeastern United States: Sources and Inputs, Ecosystem Eects and

    Management Strategies,         Bioscience,   March 2001,       51,   180198.


Ebert, Udo, Evaluation of Non-Market Goods:              Recovering Preferences,           American Jour-
    nal of Agricultural Economics,       1998,    80,   241254.


Eiswerth, Mark E. and W. Douglass Shaw,                       Adjusting Benets Transfer Values for

    Ination,   Water Resources Research,         October 1997,       33,   23812385.


Englin, J.E., T.A. Cameron, R.E. Mendelsohn, G.A. Parsons, and S.A. Shankle,
    Valuation of Damages to Recreational Trout Fishing in the Upper Northeast Due

    to Acidic Deposition, Technical Report, National Acidic Precipitation Assessment

    Program, Pacic Northwest Laboartory March 1991.


Espinosa, J. Andrés and V. Kerry Smith, Measuring the Environmental Consequences
    of Trade Policy: A Nonmarket CGE Analysis,                 American Journal of Agricultural Eco-
    nomics,   August 1995,     77   (3), 7727.




                                                   40
Finno, David and John Tschirhart, Harvesting in an eight-species ecosystem, Journal
    of Environmental Economics and Management,               2003,    45,   589611.


Gauthier, Stephane and Guy Laroque,                Separability and Public Finance,      Journal of
    Public Economics,      2010,   in press.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Roberton C. Williams III,                  The Substantial Bias from Ig-

    noring General Equilibrium Eects in Estimating Excess Burden, and a Practical So-

    lution,   Journal of Political Economy,       2003,   111   (4), 898927.


Hanemann, Michael,         Three Approaches to Dening "Existence" or "Non-Use" Value

    under Certainty, Unpublished paper, Department of Agricultural and Resource Eco-

    nomics, University of California, Berkeley 1988.


Herriges, Joseph A., Catherine L. Kling, and Daniel J. Phaneuf,                     What's the Use?

    Welfare Estimates from Revealed Preference Models When Weak Complementarity

    Does Not Hold,        Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,                January

    2004,   47,   5570.


Just, Richard E., Darrell L. Hueth, and Andrew Schmitz, The Welfare Economics of
    Public Policy: A Practical Approach to Project And Policy Evaluation, Edward Elgar,
    2004.


Kopp, R. J. and V. Kerry Smith, Constructing Measures of Economic Value,                   in R. J.

    Kopp, W. Pommerhne, and N. Schwarz, eds., Determining the Value of Non-Marketed
    Goods, Economic, Psychological and Policy Relevant Aspects of Contingent Valua-
    tion, Boston: Kluwer Nijho, 1997.
Krutilla, John V,    Conservation Reconsidered,          American Economic Review,       1967,   57,
    777786.


Mansur, Ahsan and John Whalley, Numerical Specication of Applied General Equilib-
    rium Models: Estimations, Calibrations, and Data, in Herbert E. Scarf and John B.

    Shoven, eds.,    Applied General Equilibrium Analysis, Cambridge:            Cambridge University

    Press, 1984.


McConnell, Kenneth E., Models for Referendum Data:                The Structure of Discrete Choice

    Models for Contingent Valuation,           Journal of Environmental Economics and Manage-
    ment,   1990,   18   (1), 1934.


Perroni, Carlo, Homothetic representations of regular non-homothetic preferences, Eco-
    nomics Letters,      1992,   40,   1922.




                                                   41
Rowe, R.D., C.M. Lang, L.G. Chestnut, D.A. Latimer, D.A. Rae, S.M. Bernow,
   and D.E. White, The New York Electricity Externality Study Volume I: Introduction
    and Methods, Technical Report, Empire State Electric Energy Research Corporation,

    New York 1995.


Rutherford, Thomas F., Lecture Notes on Constant Elasticity Forms,       unpublished pa-

    per, University of Colorado, Boulder November 2002.


Sandmo, Agnar, Anomaly and Stability in the Theory of Externalities, Quarterly Journal
    of Economics,   June 1980,   94,   799808.


Smith, V. Kerry, Krutilla's Legacy:     Twenty First Century Challenges for Environmental

    Economics,   American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2004, 86 (5), 11671178.
    , Subhrendu K. Pattanayak, and George Van Houtven, Benet Transfer via Pref-
    erence Calibration: `Prudential Algebra' for Policy,   Land Economics,   2002,   78   (1),

    132152.


United States Environmental Protection Agency, National Air Quality and Emissions
    Trends Report, 1995   1996. EPA 454/R-96-05.


    ,The Benets and Costs of the Clean Air Act of 1990 to 2010, EPA Report to
    Congress November 1999.
Willig, Robert D, Incremental Consumer's Surplus and Hedonic Price Adjustment, Jour-
    nal of Economic Theory,   1978,     17,   22753.




                                                42
Figures and Tables

                           Figure 1: Nesting in Household Consumption


                                                          Utility (U )

                                                     CES (σh )
                     CES (σu )
                                                                         existence/habitat (h)
                                     CES (σr l )

                                                     Leisure (l )
                             CES (σr )

                            sh     tree       csv
      CES (σC )

  fda        tbc · · · utl
    Consumption Goods (Ci6= CSV )


       Figure 2: Relative Number of Species Supported by a Lake and Ph Levels




                                                           43
Figure 3: Eects of Substitution on Calibrated Virtual Price Functions




                                 44
            Table 1: Non-Market Components of the Acidic Deposition Model



 Model Component                   Transformation/Adjustment                                   Source



Emission Rates
SO2 , NOx             Reported in thousands of short tons per year for full       United    States   Environmental

                      consumption; industrial processes, transportation and       Protection Agency (1996)

                      (where relevant) agricultural and forestry and natu-

                      ral sources; sectors aggregated to conform to Goulder

                      and Williams (2003)



Deposition Rates
SO2 , NOx             Reported in kg/ha in Prospective Analysis; used 1990        United    States   Environmental

                      base scenario to estimate the conversion from tons          Protection Agency (1999)

                      of emissions to kg/hectare/ton; for    SO2 deposition
                      rate is 22 kg/ha; for composite of   SO2 and NOx it is
                      assumed to be 23 kg/ha



Willingness to Pay Measures
 Willingness to Pay   $1.33 for a 50% reduction per kg/ha in     SO2 deposition   Englin,   Cameron,    Mendelsohn,

 per Household        rate; based on random utility recreation model com-         Parsons and Shankle (1991) is

 per Year             puted for season for the quality improvement's impact       reported in New York State Envi-

                      on catch rates (1995 dollars)                               ronmental Cost study (Rowe et

                                                                                  al. 1995) p.526



 Willingness to Pay   $2.56 per household for a 5% reduction in kg/ha that        New York State Environmental

 per Household for    leads to improved forestry views; based on analysis         Cost study (Rowe et al. 1995)

 Forestry Views       of visibility and integral vistas from acidication for     p.478

                      Adirondacks (1995 dollars)



 Willingness to Pay   Redene the increment based on Kopp and Smith               Banzhaf et al. (2006)

 for Program          (1997) characterization of index of stock of resources:

 Leading to Base      L = total stock of lakes
 Improvement          l = lakes of concern
                      (Lρ − l ρ )1/ρ = index of eective lakes
                      Changes in l give rise to the eects of    the plan (1995

                      dollars)

                      WTP = $48.04 for 50.8% increment




                                                 45
Table 2: % Changes in Equilibrium Prices and Quantities for 43% reduction in                                    SO2     and

NOx    by Level of Use-Based Complementarity


                                                   High                    Central                   Low
                                 (σ , σ = σ /8)
                                              rl   r      u        (σ , σ = σ /4)
                                                                      rl    r        u       (σ , σ = σ /2)
                                                                                                rl   r      u


                                 %∆P %∆Q                           %∆P %∆Q                 %∆P %∆Q
      Energy                       24.8 -23.6                        24.8 -22.7              24.8       -21.3
      Services                      0.8 -1.9                          0.8 -1.5                0.8        -1.0
      Agriculture                   2.6 -3.4                          2.6 -2.7                2.6        -1.6
      Manufacturing                 2.1 -4.8                          2.1 -3.7                2.1        -2.1
      Food and Alcohol              1.4 -5.4                          1.4 -3.9                1.4        -1.4
      Consumer Manufactures         1.7 -5.7                          1.7 -4.2                1.7        -1.7
      Transportation              145.2 -55.4                       145.2 -54.6            145.2        -53.5
      Utilities                    91.7 -45.0                        91.7 -44.1              91.7       -42.6
      Consumer Services             0.9 14.2                          0.9 12.5                0.9         9.2
      Leisure                       0.0 14.5                          0.0 13.1                0.0        10.1
      Fish Services               -74.5 74.9                        -52.9 73.5              -38.7        71.2
      Tree Services               -77.9 82.8                        -55.9 80.1              -40.5        75.9
      Existence/Habitat Services -17.6 82.8                         -18.7 80.1              -22.9        75.9
      NOTES: The dierent market and nonmarket activities represented in the model are described on the rows of
      the table. The three horizontal sections of the table, labeled High, Central and Low describe results under the
      dierence assumptions about the degree of complementarity between the use-based nonmarket services in the
      model and leisure and market-based consumer services. For each of these scenarios, we report the percentage
      change in the price (or virtual price) of the activity and the percentage change in the quantity supplied from
      benchmark levels.




                                                              46
Table 3: Decomposition of Willingness to Pay Measures for Improvements in Fish Services

by GE Adjustment Type


                                        Before      After % Di
                                                      High
                          W T P GE         5.6        8.9    58.7
                          WTPP             5.6        8.6    53.1
                          WTPq             5.6        5.8     2.7
                          W T P qi         5.6        5.6      
                                                       Central
                          W T P GE          7.0        8.8            25.9
                          WTPP              7.0        8.7            25.2
                          WTPq              7.0        7.0             0.5
                          W T P qi          7.0        7.0              
                                                        Low
                          W T P GE          7.6        8.6            12.2
                          WTPP              7.6        8.6            12.5
                          WTPq              7.6        7.6            -0.2
                          W T P qi          7.6        7.6              
                          NOTES: Before: WTP for improvement in sh ser-
                          vices before other GE adjustments have taken place
                          (100-millions of 1995 dollars). After: WTP for im-
                          provement in sh services after other GE adjust-
                          ments indicated in the rst row of the table have
                          taken place (100-millions of 1995 dollars). % Di:
                          Perecentage dierence between the Before and Af-
                          ter column values. The three vertical sections of
                          the table, labeled High, Central and Low describe
                          results under the dierence assumptions about the
                          degree of complementarity between the use-based
                          nonmarket services in the model and leisure and
                          market-based consumer services.




                                                  47
Table 4:   Elasticity Sensitivity Analysis:               % Changes in Virtual Prices and Quantities of

Nonmarket Services


           Elasticity Scenario                 Fish                     Tree              Existence/Habitat
                                       %∆P %∆Q %∆P %∆Q %∆P %∆Q
           1/2 1/2 1/2                  -69.3 74.5 -73.2 81.8 -35.9 81.9
            σh     σ  r  σ     rl


            1 1/2 1/2                   -74.5 74.9 -77.9 82.8 -17.6 82.8
            2 1/2 1/2                   -82.7 75.8 -85.1 84.7 -6.7 84.6
           1/2 1 1/2                    -41.1 74.6 -44.7 82.1 -33.6 82.2
            1 1 1/2                     -47.0 75.1 -50.5 83.0 -16.2 83.1
            2 1 1/2                     -57.3 75.8 -60.3 84.7 -5.9 84.6
           1/2 2 1/2                    -21.9 74.6 -24.3 82.0 -32.5 82.1
            1 2 1/2                     -26.2 75.0 -28.6 82.8 -15.5 82.9
            2 2 1/2                     -34.3 75.7 -36.5 84.4 -5.5 84.3
           1/2 1/2 1                    -75.0 73.2 -78.1 79.4 -39.3 79.5
            1 1/2 1                     -79.4 73.6 -82.0 80.1 -19.8 80.1
            2 1/2 1                     -86.2 74.2 -88.1 81.5 -7.9 81.4
           1/2 1 1                      -47.6 73.2 -50.8 79.4 -37.5 79.4
            1 1 1                       -52.9 73.5 -55.9 80.1 -18.7 80.1
            2 1 1                       -62.2 74.2 -64.8 81.3 -7.3 81.3
           1/2 2 1                      -26.6 73.1 -28.8 79.1 -36.5 79.2
            1 2 1                       -30.7 73.4 -32.8 79.8 -18.0 79.8
            2 2 1                       -38.3 73.9 -40.4 80.9 -6.9 80.9
           1/2 1/2 2                    -82.8 71.5 -84.8 76.3 -45.0 76.3
            1 1/2 2                     -86.1 71.7 -87.7 76.7 -23.8 76.7
            2 1/2 2                     -91.0 72.1 -92.1 77.5 -10.3 77.4
           1/2 1 2                      -58.2 71.3 -60.6 75.9 -44.3 75.9
            1 1 2                       -62.5 71.5 -64.8 76.3 -23.3 76.3
            2 1 2                       -70.1 71.9 -72.0 77.1 -10.0 77.1
           1/2 2 2                      -35.1 71.1 -36.9 75.5 -43.8 75.5
            1 2 2                       -38.7 71.3 -40.5 75.9 -22.9 75.9
            2 2 2                       -45.5 71.7 -47.2 76.7 -9.7 76.6
           NOTES: The rst three columns of the table indicate the value that each of the substitution
           elasticity parameters takes on in each scenario relative to the value assumed in the central cases.
           The three horizontal sections of the table, labeled Fish, Tree and Existence/Habitat refer to the
           three nonmarket services in the model. For each nonmarket service, we report the percentage
           change in the virtual price and quantity supplied from benchmark levels.




                                                             48
A       Elements of the Numerical Model

Table 5 lists the dimensions of the economic model.          The model describes a general

equilibrium in sectors of the economy and primary factors.



                               Table 5: Elements of the Model




                                         Primary Factors
                              lab     Labor



                                      Intermediate Sectors
                              ene     Energy

                              svc     Services

                              agr     Agriculture

                              mnf     Manufactures



                                    Final Consumption Sectors
                              fda     Food and Alcohol

                              csv     Consumer Services

                              cmn     Consumer Manufactures

                              trn     Transportation

                              utl     Utilities




    Benchmark data on quantities, prices, and elasticities provide the calibration point for

the production and utility functions that describe the economy.

    Key assumptions and notation:


    •   The model is identical to that used in Goulder and Williams [2003] except in the form

        of the utility function and the absence of a pre-existing labor income tax. Whenever

        possible we maintain the same calibration as Goulder and Williams [2003].


    •   All goods are produced via constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production func-

        tions. This implies constant returns to scale technology in all sectors.


    •   The representative agent's welfare is produced through the consumption of consumer

        goods, leisure, and environmental amenities, subject to time endowment and income

        constraints. The utility function is a nested CES function.




                                                  49
                    Table 6: Intermediate Production Benchmark Values


                                energy           services   agriculture    manufactures



         energy            253,800.3            35,748.4     12,135.2          83,751.8

         services             55,608.3    1,182,177.2        48,378.1         753,981.8

         agriculture             174.6        109,776.9     353,617.4          32,591.6

         manufactures      108,723.6          537,487.8      58,516.9        2,017,510.8

         labor                79,221.2    2,239,303.1        55,472.4        1,143,765.5



         total             497,528.0      4,104,493.4       528,120.0        4,031,601.6

         source  Reproduced from Table B2 in Goulder and Williams [2003].

         note  All gures in millions of US 1995 $.




                 Table 7: Final Consumption Production Benchmark Values


                       food       consumer          consumer       transportation      utilities

                    & alcohol      services       manufactures



energy                  297.6            34.6            5,571.4           50,320.6    55,868.1

services            480,375.7     835,116.3            571,872.7           92,237.5    84,745.9

agriculture          24,721.9          105.5             7,131.1                0.5          0.5

manufactures        315,431.3      75,867.5            917,510.0                0.5        553.2



total               820,826.4     911,123.9        1,502,085.1            142,559.1   141,167.7

source  Reproduced from Table B3 in Goulder and Williams [2003].

note  All gures in millions of US 1995 $.




                                                 50
                        Table 8: Model Notation and Parameter Values



                                                     Sets
C    Final Consumption Goods                                                         {fda,csv,cmn,trn,utl}

I    Intermediate Goods                                                              {ene, svc, agr, mnf }



                                                 Parameters
T    Aggregate time endowment                                                        ∼ ηlab = 0.05, ηlab
                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                         = 0.25

σj    Substitution between inputs in intermediate and nal sectors               ∼ ene = 0.9
σu Substitution between leisure-nonmarket bundle and market goods                ∼ ηlab = 0.05, ηlab   h
                                                                                                         = 0.25
σC Substitution between consumer goods in consumption nest                       0.85

σh Substitution between existence/habitat service and all other consumption = 12 σu , σu , 2σu
σr l Substitution between leisure and use-based nonmarket service bundle         = 18 σu , 14 σu , 21 σu
σr Substitution between use-based nonmarket goods                                = 18 σu , 14 σu , 21 σu
∼ reads calibrated to imply.
          h
ηlab and ηlab denote the uncompensated and compensated labor supply elasticities, respectively.

ene denotes the own-price demand elasticity of energy.




                                                    51
B   Production Structures


                          Figure 4: Intermediate Goods


                               Output (Ii )           Air Quality (a)

                                                                  Leontief

                                              CES (σI )
             Labor (T   − l)                                  ene         svc · · · mnf
                                                               Intermediate inputs (Iji )




                                 Figure 5: Final Goods


                               Output (Ci )           Air Quality (a)

                                                                  Leontief
                                                                  CES (σF )
                                   ene        svc · · · mnf
                                     Intermediate inputs (Iji )




                                                52
