NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC CRISIS AND MEDICAL CARE USAGE
Annamaria Lusardi
Daniel J. Schneider
Peter Tufano
Working Paper 15843
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15843

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

This work was done in conjunction with the global market research firm, TNS and, we would like
to thank Bertina Bus, Maria Eugenia Garcia-Neder, Ellen Sills-Levy, and Bob Neuhaus. The views
expressed herein do not necessarily reflect those of TNS or the NBER. Lusardi gratefully acknowledges
financial support from Netspar. Schneider thanks the National Science Foundation and the Princeton
Fellowship of Woodrow Wilson Scholars for financial support. Tufano thanks the HBS Division of
Research and Faculty Development for financial support for this work.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Annamaria Lusardi, Daniel J. Schneider, and Peter Tufano. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The economic crisis and medical care usage
Annamaria Lusardi, Daniel J. Schneider, and Peter Tufano
NBER Working Paper No. 15843
March 2010
JEL No. G01
ABSTRACT
We use a unique, nationally representative cross-national dataset to document the reduction in individuals’
usage of routine non-emergency medical care in the midst of the economic crisis. A substantially larger
fraction of Americans have reduced medical care than have individuals in Great Britain, Canada, France,
and Germany, all countries with universal health care systems. At the national level, reductions in
medical care are related to the degree to which individuals must pay for it, and within countries are
strongly associated with exogenous shocks to wealth and employment

Annamaria Lusardi
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
a.lusardi@dartmouth.edu
Daniel J. Schneider
Department of Sociology
Office of Population Research
Princeton, NJ 08544
djschnei@princeton.edu

Peter Tufano
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
ptufano@hbs.edu

The global economic crisis, beginning roughly in July of 2007, took an historic toll
on national economies and household finances around the world. Stock markets plummeted
and unemployment rates rose markedly. What is the impact of such large shocks on
individuals and their behavior? In this research, we examine the relationship between the
crisis and medical care usage and show that the economic crisis had lead to reductions in
individuals seeking care.
Economic distress’ impact on medical care usage is mediated by its impact on
individuals’ health and their resources to pay for care.

Previous research suggests that

economic distress, especially unemployment, can have severe negative effects on health.1 In
addition, individuals’ willingness to seek care may decline with reduced financial resources to
pay for it, as evidenced by a voluminous literature documenting a negative association
between economic circumstances and health status and medical care usage.2 Evidence from
developing countries also finds that individuals reduce their usage of medical care following
economic crises.3 However, some recent studies find that health conditions may improve
rather than decline in economic downturns,4 in part attributable to the additional time that
reduced work hours or unemployment create for seeking routine medical care.5
Whether medical care increases or decreases in the face of the economic crisis is
ultimately an empirical question. Our paper draws on new unique cross-national survey data
to assess how the economic shocks brought on by the global economic crises affected the
use of medical care in five developed economies: the United States, Great Britain, Canada,
France, and Germany. We focus on changes in the utilization of routine medical care. This
focus on routine medical care allows us to separate out the contrasting predictions of (a)
reductions in care due to tighter resource constraints, (b) increases in care due to more time
availability, and (c) increases in care due to severe deterioration in health. While the former
3

two processes should be related to changes in routine care usage, the latter process should
instead impact hospitalizations and other forms of acute care.1
If the primary barrier to not seeking routine care is having time to do so, we would
expect to find that (1) the use of routine care should have increased since the economic
crisis, (2) reductions in the usage of routine care should be negatively associated with
unemployment, (3) but have no association with wealth loss, and (4) not vary substantially
across countries. If instead the decision whether to seek care is constrained by financial
resources, then (1) the use of routine care should have declined overall since the economic
crisis, (2) reductions in the usage of routine care should be positively associated with
unemployment and (3) have a positive association with wealth loss, and finally, (4) there
should be differences across countries depending on the privately borne portion of the cost
of care.
This last factor merits some additional explanation. While there is some cost to
routine care in most of the countries under study, the amount of that cost varies
considerably. While all individuals in Great Britain, Canada, France, and Germany are
covered by national health care systems, only 85.3% of individuals in the United States are
covered by health insurance.6

But, even in countries with universal coverage, individuals

pay some medical care costs out of pocket. Using economy-wide data, in 2007 these
payments accounted for 0.8% of GDP in France, 1.0% in Great Britain, 1.4% in Germany,
1.5% in Canada, and 2.0% in the United States.6 Among counties with national health care
systems, France has the highest level of cost sharing for routine care; patients generally pay a
30% coinsurance for outpatient physician services and a 35% coinsurance for prescription
drugs.7

In Germany, co-payments of 5 to 10 Euros are required for physician visits and

outpatient medications.8 There is no cost sharing in Great Britain and Canada for routine

4

care; however, prescriptions are not covered by the Canadian system. 9 In the United States,
the 15% of the population that is uninsured is fully responsible for the cost of routine care,
and those who are covered still face copayments and coinsurance costs. Even in countries
that provide ―universal‖ health care, we might expect to find reductions in routine medical
care usage following the economic crisis and to observe associations between such
reductions and wealth losses and unemployment. As a general principal, we expect to find
greater reductions in routine medical care usage in the countries where seeking medical care
has a greater economic cost, e.g., the United States.

Study Data ad Methods:
Data Source: To assess how shocks to family resources affect medical care usage,
we analyze a new data source, the TNS Global Economic Crisis survey, which we helped
design and which was administered in June and July of 2009 in the United States, Great
Britain, Canada, France, and Germany. The global market research firm TNS fielded the
survey using an online questionnaire. In total 6,485 respondents were interviewed, including
2,148 in the United States, 1,001 in Great Britain, 1,132 in Canada, 1,097 in France, and
1,107 in Germany. The samples were designed to be nationally representative of each
country’s population 18–65 years of age and were subsequently weighted to reflect each
nation’s population. Nevertheless, it remains likely that our sample under-represents the
most vulnerable groups of the population, including migrant workers and homeless people.
This sampling will work against finding a result if the economic crisis has had the most
severe effects on these individuals.
Medical Care Usage: Our survey assessed how respondents in each of the five
countries changed their routine medical care usage. Respondents were asked, ―Since the

5

economic crisis have you increased, decreased, or kept the same trips to the doctor for
routine medical and non-emergency treatment?‖ We chose this wording as opposed to
asking about ―preventive‖ care so as not to bias respondents toward selecting the socially
acceptable answer. Self-reported measures of medical care usage are widely employed in the
literature and have been shown to have good association with measures of care based on
administrative and medical records.10
Economic Distress: To explore how changes in household economic conditions
relate to changes in routine medical care usage, we use two other variables in the survey.
First, we asked respondents to report any changes in the value of their financial assets since
the onset of the crisis, indicating whether their assets increased in value (by 0–10% or greater
than 10%), stayed the same, or fell in value (by 0–10%, 10–29%, 30–50%, or greater than
50%). Respondents could also state that they did not know the answer or could refuse to
answer. If these self-reported metrics are noisy, measurement error will bias against finding
a relationship between shocks to wealth and reductions in routine medical care usage.
Second, we collect information on employment status, using a variable that is set equal to 1
if the respondent is unemployed and looking for work and 0 otherwise.

Data on

unemployment were not collected for the Canadian sample, so analyses that include this
variable are restricted to a sample of 4,405 respondents in the United States, Great Britain,
France, and Germany.
Empirical analysis: We begin by presenting descriptive cross-country analyses of
respondents’ reports of changes in medical care usage and respondents’ reports of wealth
loss and unemployment. Next, we show the bi-variate association between our measure of
reduction

in

routine

medical

care

usage

and

our

measure

of

change

in

wealth/unemployment. Finally, we estimate a set of multivariate regression models to

6

examine whether the link between shocks to resources and changes in routine medical care
usage persists after controlling for additional demographic characteristics (age, gender, and
education), income, and wealth. In addition, we test whether the changes in usage are more
pronounced in the United States, which does not have a national health care system and in
which out-of-pocket health costs at the national level are the highest among the countries
considered in this work.
We limit the sample to respondents who had complete data on our dependent
variable as well as information on education, age, and gender, variables that we include in
our multivariate regression model. We include dummy variables for respondents missing
data on two key independent variables, our measure of income, and our measure of postcrisis wealth. This leaves us with a sample of 5,347 respondents. To test for robustness, we
used alternative estimates that used multiple imputation to construct data for those reporting
missing values or where we simply deleted the cases with missing data (Exhibit T1). These
robustness tests yielded substantively similar results.

Study Results:
Reductions in Usage of Routine Care: Tabulating results by country shows
substantial cross-national variation in post-crisis changes in routine medical care usage. Of
American respondents, 26.5% reported reducing their use of routine medical care since the
economic crisis (Exhibit 1). This proportion dwarfs the 5.6% of Canadian, 7.6% of British,
10.3% of German, and 12% of French respondents reporting such reductions.

This

ordering tracks with the level of privately-borne out-of-pocket routine medical costs across
countries. Both absolutely and comparatively, Americans, who face higher out-of-pocket

7

health care costs, reduced their routine medical care more than respondents in the other four
countries.
Small minorities of respondents also reported increasing care, with between 5.4%
and 7.9% of respondents giving that response. The fraction increasing care did not vary
substantially across countries. We subtract the share increasing care from the share reporting
decreasing care to generate a measure of net change in care. For most countries, we observe
a net decrease in medical care. Specifically, on net, 19.5% of Americans reduced their use of
routine care (Exhibit 1).

In Canada and Great Britain, where few copayments or

coinsurance payments are required, there is essentially no change in aggregate country-level
routine medical care usage (-0.04% and -0.31%, respectively). In France and Germany,
where larger copayments are required, we observe intermediate levels of net reductions in
routine medical care usage, 6.6% and 3.6%, respectively. This exercise further highlights the
disparity in routine medical care reductions between the United States and the four
comparison countries.
Changes in Wealth and Unemployment: Wealth losses were pervasive among
households in the United States, with nearly 55% of American respondents reporting some
decline in their wealth since the start of the economic crisis and one-fifth reporting a decline
of 30% or larger (Exhibit 2). Losses were smaller in Great Britain, Canada, France, and
Germany, with between 45% and 34% of respondents reporting any loss of wealth and
between 13% and 9% reporting losses in excess of 30%.
Unemployment increased sharply during the crisis. The share of respondents who
reported being unemployed and looking for work was largest in Germany (14.4%) and the
United States (13.8%), somewhat less in France (10.1%), and lower still in Great Britain
(6.6%). These figures indicate that the economic crisis took a greater immediate economic

8

toll on Americans than on individuals living in France, Canada, and Great Britain.
Economic Distress and Medical Care Usage: These negative shocks to wealth
and employment are strongly associated with reductions in routine medical care (Exhibit 3).
The greater the reported loss in wealth, the larger the net reductions in routine care across all
countries. Similarly, net care reductions were more pronounced among the unemployed.
Exhibit 4 presents selected marginal effects from a multivarite probit regression
model run on the pooled cross-national sample (the complete model specification is
presented in Exhibit T2). Even after controlling for post-crisis wealth, income, education,
age, and other characteristics, wealth loss is significantly associated with reductions in routine
medical care usage (Model 1). As compared with respondents who reported no change in
their wealth since the crisis, surveyed individuals who lost between 30% and 50% of their
wealth are 23.3 percentage points more likely to have reduced routine medical care usage,
and those who lost at least 50% of their wealth are 24.9 percentage points more likely to
have reduced care. Unemployed respondents looking for work are 6.7 percentage points
more likely to have reduced routine care than others (Model 2). In other words, we see
substantial reductions in routine medical care usage as a result of shocks resulting from the
economic crisis, even after accounting for many household characteristics.
We also find that reductions in routine medical care were higher for the young and
for those with lower incomes. In particular, relative to those aged 50 to 65, respondents
aged 16-24, 25-34 and 35-49 were 11.7, 6.8 and 4.6 percentage points more likely to reduce
care respectively. Relative to individuals in the top income quartile, those in the bottom
quartile, 26-50th percentile, and 51 to 75th percentile were 5.7, 5.9, and 2.0 percentage points
more likely to reduce medical care respectively.11

9

Exhibit 5 reports selected results from a multi-nomial probit regression that jointly
analyzes the determinants of those who decreased, kept the same, and increased routine
medical care usage (the complete model specification is presented in Exhibit T3). While
there are few statistically significant associations between changes in wealth or
unemployment and increases in care (relative to no change in care), we continue to find large
and statistically significant associations between reductions in care and wealth loss and
unemployment. Focusing on wealth loss, respondents who lost between 30% and 50% of
their wealth are 22.8 percentage points more likely to have reduced routine medical care
usage, and those who lost at least 50% of their wealth are 23.1 percentage points more likely
to have reduced care as opposed to keeping care the same relative to those whose wealth is
unchanged. Unemployed respondents 6.7 percentage points more likely to reduce care than
those who are not unemployed. These estimates of the marginal effects of wealth loss and
unemployment are quite similar to those from the simpler bi-variate model discussed above.
Exhibit 4 also reports country fixed effects that capture the levels of reduction in
routine medical care use by country, after holding household factors constant. Reductions in
care were far greater in the United States than elsewhere, even after controlling for
household characteristics. Compared with Great Britain, Americans were 16 percentage
points more likely to reduce care. In contrast, French and German respondents were only
4.5 and 3.8 percentage points more likely, respectively, to reduce care than British
respondents, while Canadian respondents were actually 3 percentage points less likely to
reduce care. As with the descriptive statistics reported in Exhibit 1, the magnitude of these
country effects aligns with the size of the required coinsurance and copayments for routine
care.
Finally, we tested whether the strength of the relationships between our markers of

10

economic distress (wealth loss and unemployment) and reductions in care varied by country.
We first re-estimated our models separately by country and found strong relationships
between wealth loss and unemployment and reductions in medical care usage in each
country, with the exception of Great Britain (Exhibit T4). To test whether the relationship
between routine heath care usage and wealth loss and unemployment varies among
countries, we also re-estimated our models to include interaction terms between country
dummies and each of the two variables measuring economic shocks.

Generally, the

relationship between wealth loss and reduction in routine medical care levels is statistically
indistinguishable in the United States as compared to the other four countries. Similarly,
there is no variation in the relationship between unemployment and reduction in use of
routine care in the United States as compared with the other four countries (Exhibit T5).
This result aligns with previous research that finds similar income gradients in access to care
in the United States and Canada.12

Discussion:
We find strong evidence that the economic crisis—manifested in job and wealth
losses—has led to reductions in the use of routine medical care. More than a quarter of
Americans reported reducing their use of such care as did between 5% and 12% of
Canadian, French, Germany, and British respondents. These cross-national differences align
with differences in the out-of-pocket costs of care across countries. Moreover, reductions in
routine care are strongly related to wealth and job losses, showing that households in
economic distress were more likely to reduce medical care usage. In contrast, we find that
relatively few households reported increasing medical care and that there was no significant
relationship between unemployment and increased use of medical care.

11

This research confirms that resource constraints have large impacts on the usage of
routine medical care. Further, the across-the-board reduction in medical care usage by
Americans may speak to behavioral changes that reflect the national psyche broadly. The
economic crisis in the United States—deeper and more widespread than elsewhere—may
have touched the population at large, perhaps via negative expectations about the future.
Furthermore, the cutbacks in health care usage by people losing wealth or jobs, even in
countries with ―universal‖ systems, may reflect that seeking care entails not only out-ofpocket expenses, but also costs of time away from work or job hunting.
President Obama has embarked on twin efforts to bring the United States out of the
severe economic crisis and make reforms to the American health care system. We show that
these are by no means separate areas of policy; the economic distress brought on by the
crisis is related to large reductions in routine medical care usage. Historical demography and
economics has shown that famines and epidemics that have short-run effects on health and
well-being often have long-term consequences.13 While we cannot observe long-term
consequences of the reductions in use of routine medical care that survey participants
reported to us, today’s penny-pinching might well lead to tomorrow’s undetected illness and
the more-distant future’s reduced individual health and well-being.

12

ENDNOTES
1. Catalano R. Health, Medical Care, and Economic Crisis. N Engl J Med. 2009 Feb 19;
360(8): 749-751; and Eliason M, Storrie D. Lasting or Latent Scars? Swedish Evidence
on the Long-Term Effects of Job Displacement. Journal of Labor Economics. 2006
Oct 1; 24(4): 831-856; and Eliason M, Storrie D. Job loss is bad for your health Swedish evidence on cause-specific hospitalization following involuntary job loss. Social
Science & Medicine. 2009 Apr; 68(8): 1396-1406; and Eliason M, Storrie D. Does Job
Loss Shorten Life? J. Human Resources. 2009 Apr 1; 44(2): 277-302; and Sullivan D,
Wachter TV. Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using Administrative Data.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2009; 124(3): 1265-1306.
2. Williams DR, Collins C. US Socioeconomic and Racial Differences in Health: Patterns
and Explanations. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 1995 8; 21(1): 349-386; and Feinstein JS. The
Relationship between Socioeconomic Status and Health: A Review of the Literature. The
Milbank Quarterly. 1993; 71(2): 279-322.
3. Musgrove P. The economic crisis and its impact on health and health care in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Int J Health Serv. 1987; 17(3): 411-441; and Waters H,
Saadah F, Pradhan M. The impact of the 1997-98 East Asian economic crisis on health
and health care in Indonesia. Health Policy Plan. 2003 Jun 1; 18(2): 172-181; and Yang
B, Prescott N, Bae E. The impact of economic crisis on health-care consumption in
Korea. Health Policy Plan. 2001 Dec 1; 16(4): 372-385.
4. Ruhm CJ. Are Recessions Good for Your Health?. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2000
May 1;115(2):617-650; and Ruhm CJ. A healthy economy can break your heart.
Demography. 2007 Nov; 44(4): 829-848.
5. Neumayer E. Recessions lower (some) mortality rates:: evidence from Germany. Social
Science & Medicine. 2004 Mar; 58(6): 1037-1047.
6. Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development, OECD Health Data 2009
[Computer Software and File]. Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development/Institute for Research and Information in Health Economics [Producers],
Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development [Distributor], 2009.
URL: http://new.sourceoecd.org.
7. Lundy, J., B. Finder, "Cost Sharing for Health Care: France, Germany, and Switzerland.‖
(Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2009)
8. Commonwealth Fund, Descriptions Of Health Care Systems: Denmark, France, Germany, The
Netherlands, Sweden, And The United Kingdom (2008).
9. Schoen C, Doty MM. Inequities in access to medical care in five countries: findings from
the 2001 Commonwealth Fund International Health Policy Survey. Health Policy. 2004
Mar;67(3):309-322.

13

10. Bhandari A, Wagner T. Self-Reported Utilization of Health Care Services: Improving
Measurement and Accuracy. Med Care Res Rev. 2006 Apr 1; 63(2): 217-235.
11. Based on results from a probit regression model with controls for changes in wealth,
unemployment, wealth, gender, education and country-fixed effects. Full model results
are reported in Model 1 of Exhibit 2 of the technical appendix.
12. Lasser KE, Himmelstein DU, Woolhandler S. Access to Care, Health Status, and Health
Disparities in the United States and Canada: Results of a Cross-National PopulationBased Survey. Am J Public Health. 2006 Jul 1;96(7):1300-1307; and Katz SJ, Hofer TP.
Socioeconomic Disparities in Preventive Care Persist Despite Universal Coverage:
Breast and Cervical Cancer Screening in Ontario and the United States. JAMA. 1994
Aug 17; 272(7): 530-534.
13. e.g. Almond D. Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long Term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population. Journal of Political Economy.
2006; 114(4): 672-712.

14

EXHIBITS:
Exhibit 1: Changes in the Utilization of Routine Medical Care Since the Economic
Crisis, United States, Great Britain, Canada, France, and Germany (Percent of
Respondents) (Authors’ calculations from the TNS Global Economic Crisis Survey,
2009)

	  

15	  

Exhibit 2. Economic Characteristics of Respondents, United States, Great Britain,
Canada, France, and Germany (Percent of Respondents) (Authors’ calculations from
the TNS Global Economic Crisis Survey, 2009)

	  

16	  

Exhibit 3: Economic Loss and Reductions in Medical Care. Bi-variate Association
between Changes in Wealth and Reductions in Routine Medical Care and between
Unemployment and Reductions in Medical Care (Authors’ calculations from the
TNS Global Economic Crisis Survey, 2009)

	  

17	  

Exhibit 4: Relationship Between Reduction in Routine Medical Care Following the
Crisis and Changes in Wealth and Unemployment, Marginal Effects (standard
errors) from Probit Regression, United States, Great Britain, Canada, France, and
Germany (Authors’ calculations from the TNS Global Economic Crisis Survey, 2009)

	  

18	  

Exhibit 5: Relationship Between Reductions in Routine Medical Care (Relative to
Same) and Increases in Routine Medical Care (Relative to Same) and Changes in
Wealth and Unemployment, Marginal Effects from Multinomial Probit Regression,
United States, France, Germany, and Great Britain (Authors’ calculations from the
TNS Global Economic Crisis Survey, 2009)

	  

	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

19	  

TECHNICAL APPENDIX:
Exhibit T1: Robustness of Regression Results to Alternative Treatments of Missing
Data, Coefficients from Probit Regressions, United States, France, Germany, and
Great Britain (Authors’ calculations from the TNS Global Economic Crisis Survey,
2009)

	  

20	  

Exhibit T2: Complete Model Results of Relationship Between Reduction in Routine
Medical Care Following the Crisis and Changes in Wealth and Unemployment,
Marginal Effects from Probit Regression, United States, Great Britain, Canada,
France, and Germany (Authors’ calculations from the TNS Global Economic Crisis
Survey, 2009)

	  

21	  

Exhibit T3: Complete Models Results of Relationship Between Reductions in
Routine Medical Care (Relative to Same) and Increases in Routine Medical Care
(Relative to Same) and Changes in Wealth and Unemployment, Marginal Effects
from Multinomial Probit Regression, United States, France, Germany, and Great
Britain (Authors’ calculations from the TNS Global Economic Crisis Survey, 2009)

	  

22	  

Exhibit T4: Relationship Between Reductions in Routine Medical Care Since the
Economic Crisis and Changes in Wealth (Models 1-5) and Unemployment (Models
6-9), by Country for the United States, France, Germany, Canada, and Great Britain,
Coefficients from Probit Regression (Authors’ calculations from the TNS Global
Economic Crisis Survey, 2009)

	  

23	  

Exhibit T5: Relationship Between Reductions in Routine Since the Economic Crisis
and Changes in Wealth and Unemployment, Including Interactions between USA
and Key Covariates, Coefficients from Probit Regression, United States, France,
Germany, and Great Britain (Authors’ calculations from the TNS Global Economic
Crisis Survey, 2009)

	  
	  
	  

	  

24	  

