                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   EDUCATION, KNOWLEDGE AND THE EVOLUTION OF DISPARITIES IN HEALTH

                                                Anna Aizer
                                               Laura Stroud

                                          Working Paper 15840
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w15840


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2010




This work is supported in part by NSF grant # SES 0752755, NIH grant AG023397 and the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation. We thank Ken Chay, Donna Gilleskie, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Jody Sindelar
and seminar participants at Cornell, UCLA and AHEC/Emory for useful comments and Tianran Dai
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Anna Aizer and Laura Stroud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Education, Knowledge and the Evolution of Disparities in Health
Anna Aizer and Laura Stroud
NBER Working Paper No. 15840
March 2010
JEL No. I12,I18,J13,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We study how advances in scientific knowledge affect the evolution of disparities in health. Our focus
is the 1964 Surgeon General Report on Smoking and Health – the first widely publicized report of
the negative effects of smoking on health. Using an historical dataset that includes the smoking habits
of pregnant women 1959-1966, we find that immediately after the 1964 Report, more educated mothers
immediately reduced their smoking as measured by both self-reports and serum cotinine levels, while
the less educated did not, and that the relative health of their newborns likewise increased. We also
find strong peer effects in the response to information: after the 1964 report, educated women surrounded
by other educated women were more likely to reduce smoking relative to those surrounded by less
educated women. Over time, the education gradient in both smoking and newborn health continued
to increase, peaking in the 1980s and then shrinking, eventually returning to initial levels. These results
can explain why in an era of great advancements in medical knowledge, health disparities may actually
increase, at least initially.


Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu

Laura Stroud
Centers for Behavioral and Preventive Medicine
Brown Medical School and The Miriam Hospital
Coro West, Suite 500, 1 Hoppin Street
Providence R,
lstroudri@gmail.com
   I.      Introduction


   Health disparities by education in the US are large. Males without a HS degree have a death

rate double those with a college degree (Elo and Preston, 1996). Not only are health disparities

large, they are persistent, often originating in childhood or even earlier, in the newborn period

(Case, Lubotsky and Paxson, 2002; Currie and Stabile, 2003). A number of theories have been

put forth to explain the observed education disparities in health. We focus on one: that education

is related to one’s ability to obtain, process and/or act upon medical knowledge, consistent with

the theory of the production of health developed by Grossman (1972). If true, one implication is

that advances in medical knowledge will lead to improvements in health among the most

educated first, followed by eventual improvements among the less educated as knowledge

diffuses. Thus advances in medical knowledge can lead to an initial increase in health inequality

that declines over time as the knowledge diffuses.

        To examine this empirically, we focus on how the first major advance in medical

knowledge regarding the effects of smoking on health affected both the smoking decisions of

pregnant women and the health of their newborns. Our analysis is comprised of three parts.

First, using an historical dataset of pregnant women 1959-1966 that, to our knowledge, is the

only dataset containing prospective information on smoking habits prior to 1964, we estimate the

immediate impact of the first massive dissemination of information on the health effects of

smoking (the 1964 Surgeon General Report on Smoking and Health) on the decision to smoke

and newborn health. Previous work analyzing aggregate administrative data on cigarette sales

found no decline associated with the 1964 Report (Sloan, Smith and Taylor, 2002). We too find

that aggregate cigarette consumption remained constant after the 1964 Report, but that this

masked important heterogeneity as the most educated women reduced their smoking


                                                 2
immediately after the 1964 Report while the least educated actually increased their smoking.

Moreover, the differential declines in smoking by education do not simply reflect differences in

reporting, as serum cotinine levels follow the same pattern. Nor do they reflect differential

declines by income or cognitive ability. Consistent with a negative relationship between smoking

and newborn health, we find that the education gradient in newborn health, as measured by birth

weight and fetal death, also increases immediately after publication of the report.1

        We also explore the possibility that peers serve as a ―social multiplier‖ - exacerbating the

impact of information on the education gradient in smoking. We hypothesize that the education

level of peers affects one’s own response to the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report via two potential

channels. First, more educated peers may serve as an additional, indirect source of information

about the health effects of smoking (an information channel). Second, if one’s ability to quit is a

function, in part, of the smoking behavior of one’s peers, as in the cue-theory of consumption,

having more educated peers who are themselves less likely to smoke after publication of the

report increases one’s own probability of quitting (a behavioral channel). We find that the

education gradient in smoking increases three times as quickly after the 1964 Surgeon General’s

report among those most segregated by education. In other words, educated women surrounded

by other educated women are more likely to reduce their smoking after the report relative to

educated women surrounded by less educated women.

        We follow the analysis of the short term effect of the 1964 Surgeon General Report on

disparities in smoking and newborn health with an exploration of how these disparities evolve

over time. We find that over time information appears to ―diffuse‖ to the less educated, as

evidenced by an eventual convergence in both knowledge of the negative effect of smoking on


1
  There is some debate over whether the relationship between smoking and birth weight is causal which we discuss
later (see, for example, Almond, Chay and Lee, 2005).

                                                        3
health (as measured in public opinion surveys) and smoking behavior. And when it does, the

education gradient in newborn health likewise declines. These two trends in the education

gradient in smoking and newborn health mirror each other closely: increasing until the mid

1980s when they both peak, and then declining to 1960s levels by 2006, the latest year for which

data are available. These results have important implications for our understanding of how future

advances in medical knowledge and technological innovation are likely to affect both health and

health disparities over time. Moreover, by focusing on prenatal smoking, our results show how

advances in medical knowledge can affect inequality in future generations.

       Finally, to better understand the connection between the gradients in smoking and

newborn health, we provide new estimates of the impact of smoking on newborn health using

multiple identification strategies. In so doing, we make two contributions to the existing

literature on smoking and birth weight. First, because we have siblings for a fixed effect analysis

and an independent measure of smoking in the form of serum cotinine levels, we can quantify

the extent of bias due to selection and measurement error, separately. Second, based on these

results we can explain why existing estimates differ based on the estimation technique used. We

conclude that the causal effect of smoking on birth weight is moderate in size (and non-linear)

and lies between existing fixed effect and IV estimates.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section II, we discuss the relevant

literature; in section III we present results of our analysis of the immediate impact of publication

of the 1964 surgeon general’s report on the education gradient in prenatal smoking and newborn

health and explore the role of peers in increasing the gradient; in section IV, we trace the

evolution of the education gradient in smoking and birth weight over time to the year 2006. In

section V we present the results of our analysis of the impact of prenatal smoking on newborn



                                                 4
health, shedding light on the extent of bias in OLS estimates due to negative selection into

smoking and measurement error separately. Section VI concludes.



II. Background Literature

   A. The Education Gradient in Health

   The first major study to document differences in mortality by education in the US was

conducted by Kitagwa and Hauser (1973) based on data from 1960. Since then, a number of

additional studies have documented significant educational differences in mortality and other

measures of health (Elo and Preston, 1996; Christenson and Johnson, 1995; Deaton and Paxson,

1999; Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2006). Even the health of children is highly correlated with the

educational attainment of their parents (Case, Lubotsky and Paxson, 2002). Moreover, it appears

that these inequalities have been increasing over time (Elo and Preston, 1996; Pappas et al,

1993).


   More recent work has sought to establish whether the relationship between education and

health is causal. Using compulsory schooling laws to instrument for education, Lleras-Muney

(2003) finds lower mortality rates for the more educated. Currie and Moretti (2003) instrument

for female education using the opening and closing of nearby colleges to estimate a significant

and positive relationship between maternal education and infant health. Both studies find a

larger effect of education on health in IV estimation relative to OLS, suggesting that any bias in

OLS estimates is likely downward due, presumably, to measurement error.




                                                 5
    There are multiple potential mechanisms behind the relationship between education and

health.2 We focus on one - that education is related to an individual’s ability to learn and make

decisions about his or her health. This is consistent with Grossman’s 1972 model of the demand

for health in which education improves the efficiency with which individuals produce health.

Specifically, education may increase the efficiency of health production by reducing the costs of

obtaining medical information and/or using it. There is some empirical evidence to support this.

Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008) find that for diseases with more innovation in medical treatment,

education gradients in mortality increase, suggesting that the more educated take advantage of

new medical innovation more quickly. Rosenzweig and Schultz (1989) show that more educated

women have greater success with ―complex‖ contraception methods (eg, the rhythm method).

Price and Simon (forthcoming) find that after publication of research on the riskiness of a

particular procedure (VBAC), more educated women received differentially fewer of these

procedures.3 These studies establish a static response to information. They do not exmine how

the response may evolve over time. Nor can they necessarily separate an individual’s response

to information from either selective sorting to providers or providers’ differential treatment of

patients based on their educational status.




2
  First, education may lead to better health because it leads to greater income and access to health care. However, the
documented relationship between education and health often remains, though somewhat diminished, when controls
for income are included, suggesting that income does not explain the entire relationship between education and
health (Elo and Preston, 1996; Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2006). A second possible mechanism may be that the
better educated tend to have less risky jobs. Again, Lleras-Muney and Cutler (2006) find that this can explain very
little of observed education gradients in health. Third, education may improve health by affecting one’s social rank.
The Whitehall studies (Marmot, 2002) documented a strong and positive relationship between social rank and health
among British civil servants. This is consistent with evidence based on experimental manipulation of social status in
animals: Sapolsky (1993) finds that lower ranked animals suffer worse health. A fourth potential mechanism is that
the more educated have lower discount rates, thereby increasing their value of the future and increasing their
investments in health. However, Fuchs (1982) and Leigh (1990) find little empirical support for this.
3
  VBAC refers to ―vaginal birth after cesarian section.‖

                                                          6
    B. The Education Gradient in Smoking


    Another area where education is likely to matter is in obtaining and using information on

unhealthy behaviors such as smoking. The less educated are more likely to smoke and this

relationship holds regardless of racial background or nativity (Kimbro et al, 2008). A number of

papers have sought to establish a causal relationship between education and smoking. Sander

(1995), using parental education as an instrument for own education in an IV regression, finds

that the highly educated are more likely to quit smoking. De Walque (2004) using exposure to

the draft for the Vietnam war as an instrument for college attendance provides some suggestive

evidence that education reduces smoking. Finally, and most relevant to the present study, Currie

and Moretti (2003) use the opening and closings of nearby colleges to instrument for maternal

education and find that more educated mothers are less likely to smoke while pregnant.4


    A second strand of this literature seeks to link the education gradient in smoking with

medical knowledge about the health effects of smoking. Based on retrospective smoking

histories collected in 1978-2000, de Walque (2004) finds no discontinuous break in 1964 with

publication of the first SG report on smoking and health. Meara (2001) and Kenkel (1991)

explore whether knowing about the health effects of smoking can explain the relationship

between education and smoking. Both find that controlling for knowledge does little to change

the gradient in smoking but that smoking knowledge and education have important interactive

effects: the smoking of the more educated is more responsive to knowledge than the smoking

behavior of the less educated. The authors conclude that the education gradient in smoking may


4
 Farrell and Fuchs (1986) find that differences in smoking behavior between the more and less educated are present
at age 17, before schooling is completed. They argue that this constitutes evidence that the relationship between
education and smoking is not causal. However, as de Walque (2004) also argues, these results are insufficient to
draw this conclusion because they do not account for the fact that much of the education gradient in smoking is
attributable to differences in quitting behavior which often occurs much after schooling is completed.

                                                        7
be less attributable to the fact that the more educated have more knowledge and more to their

greater responsiveness to that knowledge.


    A significant difference, however, between this study and that of Kenkel (1991) and Meara

(2001) is that the reference period for this study is earlier, during a time when information about

the health effects of smoking was not widespread, as we show later. Thus the differential

declines in smoking that we observe with publication of the 1964 report may reflect faster

diffusion of knowledge to the more educated or faster modification of behavior based on that

knowledge, or some combination of the two.




III. Impact of the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report on the Education Gradient in Smoking


    A. Knowledge about Smoking and Health


    Knowledge about the health effects of smoking was accumulating in the scientific literature

throughout the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950’s. However, it was not until the US Surgeon General

issued its first Report on Smoking and Health in 1964, that the information was made widely

accessible. The National Library of Medicine characterized the impact of the 1964 Report as

follows:


        ―[Surgeon General] Terry issued the commission's report on January 11, 1964, choosing
        a Saturday to minimize the effect on the stock market and to maximize coverage in the
        Sunday papers. As Terry remembered the event, two decades later, the report "hit the
        country like a bombshell. It was front page news and a lead story on every radio and
        television station in the United States and many abroad."5


5
 Profiles in Science- The National Library of Medicine ―The Reports of the Surgeon General: The 1964 Report on
Smoking and Health‖ accessed on November 17, 2009 at
http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/Views/Exhibit/narrative/smoking.html

                                                       8
The report focused on the link between smoking and diseases of the lung, heart disease and birth

weight. After the first report, additional information about the effects of smoking on health

followed, starting with warning labels on all cigarette packages in 1966.6


        Historical public opinion data are consistent with the hypothesis that publication of the

first SG Report on Smoking and Health increased the education gradient in knowledge about

smoking and health. In Table 1 We show how the education gradient in knowledge of a causal

link between smoking and heart disease evolved from 1957 to 1990. To do so we regress an

indicator equal to one of the respondent believes smoking is a cause of heart disease on three

education dummies (less than HS, HS, some college with college plus the omitted category) and

controls for race, age and gender.


    In 1957 there is no education gradient knowledge of the impact of smoking on heart disease

but by 1969 there is a strong gradient which grows until 1981.7 Between 1981 and 1990,

however, the gradient begins to decline. This trend in the education gradient in knowledge

(initially increasing but starting to decline sometime between 1980 and 1990) is very similar to

the trends in education gradient in smoking and birth weight presented later. These findings

suggest that the trends in the education gradient in smoking and birth weight that we observe are



6
  In 1971, cigarette ads were banned from TV; in 1979 the SG report concluded nicotine was addictive; in 1986 the
SG issued a report on second hand smoke and in 1998 there was a settlement reached between 46 state attorney’s
office and tobacco manufacturers limiting marketing to youths. See Chaloupka and Warner (2000) for a full
description.
7
  On June 12, 1957, Surgeon General Leroy E. Burney declared it the official position of the U.S. Public Health
Service that the evidence pointed to a causal relationship between smoking and lung cancer. Kenkel and Liu (2008)
examine the school-smoking gradient in knowledge about lung cancer and find that it appeared prior to the 1964,
consistent with knowledge about smoking and lung cancer disseminating in 1957. However, knowledge about the
negative effects of smoking on other health conditions and health more generally was not widely known until the
1964 report. But the 1957 statement of the SG can, potentially, explain the small gradient in smoking prior to the
1964 Report.

                                                        9
likely attributable to the slower diffusion of knowledge about the negative effects of smoking to

the less educated.


    B. Data


    For the analysis of the immediate impact of the 1964 Surgeon General’s (SG) Report on

Smoking and Health we use data from the National Collaborative Perinatal Project (NCPP), a

prospective survey of 59,391 pregnant women who sought care in one of 12 urban Academic

Medical Centers in the years 1959-1966. To our knowledge, this is the only data that contains

information on smoking habits prior 1964 that was collected prospectively. The women were

randomly recruited to participate in the study through public clinics and thus the pregnant

women included in the study are characterized by less education and lower income than the

general population at the time. This sample selection aids in our ability to compare the behavior

and birth outcomes of more and less educated pregnant women because they sought and received

the same medical care in terms of both quality and quantity, thereby reducing other potential

differences across education groups. This, for example, implicitly allows us to rule out the

possibility that the differential declines in smoking are due to either differential sorting to

medical providers or providers treating women differently based on their education as all

providers in the study were instructed to follow a standard protocol.8


    Descriptive statistics for the sample are presented in Appendix Table 1. Women under the

age of 19 or over the age of 35 at delivery were dropped from the analysis sample in order to

separate the effects of education from age. In column 1 are sample means for the analysis sample

(n=50,142); column 2 contains sample means for a subset of the data that consists of siblings

8
 Though the sample characteristics remain relatively stable throughout the period, we present the results of
weighted regressions in which the weights reflect the age, education and income distribution of the women in 1964
and applied to all other years. The results are very similar to un-weighted regressions.

                                                        10
(n=17,530). The average years of schooling is 11 and half of the women in the sample have not

completed high school. The sample is racially mixed: 50 percent white, 43 percent black and 7

percent Hispanic (all from Puerto Rico and thus US citizens). Perhaps most remarkable are the

rates of smoking among pregnant women as recorded in the third trimester: nearly half of the

women smoked and those who did smoked on average half a pack of cigarettes daily.


    C. Results


    Publication of the First SG Report on Smoking and Health on January 11, 1964 resulted in an

immediate decline in smoking among women with at least a high school degree relative to those

without a high school degree (Figures 1a and 1b).              Several observations can be made based on

these figures. First, prior to publication of the report in 1964, overall rates of smoking while

pregnant were very high (47 percent) and differences in smoking between HS drop outs and HS

graduates were relatively small (about a 5 percentage point difference, or ten percent). Second,

smoking is actually increasing over this period among the less educated, so much so that the

decline in cigarettes smoked by HS graduates after 1964 is compensated for by the increase in

smoking among HS drop outs. Figure 1C shows that the total number of cigarettes smoked per

day over this period remains constant, which is consistent with the constant trend in cigarettes

sales over this period documented by Sloan, Smith and Taylor (2002).9 Third, among the more

educated, smoking shows an immediate decline in 1964 that continues so that by 1966 the

difference in smoking rates between HS drop outs and HS graduates is closer to 10 percentage

points.




9
  Warner (1977) using data on cigarette sales predicts that in the absence of the 1964 Report, cigarette sales would
have increased over this period. He interprets the fact that they remained constant as evidence of a negative effect of
the 1964 Report on smoking.

                                                          11
     Given that education is correlated with other characteristics such as income and cognitive

ability, we explore whether the observed relationship between education and smoking simply

reflects trends in these other underlying characteristics. To do so we plot trends in smoking for

low and high income mothers and low and high IQ mothers, defined as below and above the

median levels in the sample (Figure 2). We observe no trend breaks in smoking around 1964

associated with either income or cognitive ability. Moreover, both income and cognitive ability

are positively correlated with smoking, reflecting the fact that cigarette smoking in the 1950s and

1960s was more prevalent among those of higher socio-economic status during this time period,

though that is no longer the case.10




     Regression Results – OLS/ Regression Discontinuity Specification


     To control for any changes in the composition of pregnant women before and after 1964 that

could explain the trends in Figures 1A and 1B, we present results of a regression discontinuity

analysis of the impact of the 1964 SG report on both prenatal smoking and newborn health. We

estimate two specifications: a change in intercept (means) and a change in slope (rates). For the

former, we estimate the following equation:


        Y= β1education + β2 education*post SG + β3 education*year + β4 education*year2
                  + β5 year + β6 year2 + β7 post SG + β8X + β9AMC + β10Tax +ε



In the above specification, Y is either smoking (smoker, cigarettes per day) or a measure of

newborn health (birth weight and fetal death). We include as regressors maternal education and


10
  Cognitive ability is available for less than half the sample and only very few mothers in 1959 or 1966 have
information on cognitive ability so we combined observations for these years with 1960 and 1965, respectively.

                                                        12
its interaction with ―post SG‖ (an indicator equal to 1 for years 1964-1966, after publication of

the SG report, and 0 for years 1959-1963, before publication of the report). To allow for a time

trend in the education gradient in smoking (or health) we include maternal education interacted

with a quadratic time trend (education*year and education* year2). The main effects (year,

year2, post SG) and a vector of personal characteristics including maternal race, age, family

income, birth order, and offspring gender are also included as is a fixed effect for the academic

medical center (AMC) in which the woman delivered as well as the real tax rate on cigarettes.

   The results suggest that the education gradients in smoking and birth weight increase

substantially after publication of the First SG Report on Smoking and Health (Table 2). Before

publication of the report, an additional year of education was associated with a 1.4 percentage

point decline in the probability of smoking. After 1964, this increases significantly by 50

percent from 1.4 to 2.0 (column 1). If we look at cigarettes per day, we see that before the 1964

report, an additional year of education was associated with smoking .3 fewer cigarettes per day,

after the report, it increases by one third to .4 fewer cigarettes per day (column 2). Finally in

column 3, we present estimates of the impact of the SG report on the gradient in newborn health

as measured by birth weight. Before publication of the report, an additional year of schooling is

associated with heavier birth weight (24 gram difference). After the report, this increases by 25

percent to 30 grams, though the difference is not significant. Likewise, the gradient in LBW and

fetal death increase after 1964, but not significantly. When the sample is expanded to include the

full sample (which includes women younger than 19 and older than 34), estimates of the impact

of the 1964 Report on the gradient in birth weight and fetal death become significant (columns 6-

8). Specifically, the gradient in birth weight increases 32 percent after the 1964 Report and the

probability LBW by 25 percent. For fetal death, there is no significant education gradient prior



                                                 13
to 1964. After 1964, an additional year of schooling is associated with a .2 percentage point

reduction in fetal death (baseline rate of fetal death in this sample is 3 percentage points).


   Though we include multiple maternal characteristics that might explain the relationship

between maternal education and smoking or birth weight in the above analysis, in Table 3 we

present the results of an analysis in which we allow the impact of all maternal characteristics (not

just education) to change after the report. Specifically, we present the results of separate

regressions of smoking/newborn health on maternal education and other characteristics from the

period just before (1962-1963) and just after (1964-1965) publication of the Report in the first

two columns of Table 3. The negative relationship between maternal education and smoking as

measured by whether she smokes at all (Panel A) and cigarettes smoked per day (Panel B)

increases by one third after publication of the report. Before publication of the report, a standard

deviation increase in years of schooling (2.5 years) was associated with a 4 percentage point

decrease in the probability of smoking, and with smoking .9 less cigarettes per day. Immediately

after the report, this increased to a 5.75 percentage points and 1.2 fewer cigarettes per day. We

observe a very similar increase with respect to education and birth weight (Panel C). However,

this trend does not extend to heavy smokers defined as those smoking at least one pack of

cigarettes a day (Panel D) whose smoking habits do not change appreciably with the publication

of information on the ill-effects of smoking on health.


   While the evidence thus far shows that women with more education responded immediately

to advances in medical knowledge in contrast to the less educated who did not, two questions

remain. The first concerns potential omitted variable bias. A priori we thought that the two

omitted variables most likely to bias the results would be income and cognitive ability, but

including controls for these two did not change the results. Though we cannot rule out other

                                                  14
unobserved characteristics that that might bias these results, the fact that including these two

characteristics, which one could argue are likely the most important, does not alter our results

suggests that other unobservables may not bias the results much.


   A second concern is that the observed relationship between maternal education and smoking

merely reflects differences in reported smoking. This would be the case if more educated

women perceive a stigma associated with smoking after publication of the first Surgeon

General’s Report that less educated women do not, thereby differentially affecting their reports

of smoking. In panel E of Table 3 we present results for a small subset of the sample for which

we have third trimester serum cotinine levels. Cotinine and reports of cigarettes smoked per day

are highly correlated in these data (ρ=0.72). Regression results suggest that maternal education

is strongly and negatively associated with serum cotinine levels and that this relationship

increases 40 percent after 1964. After 1964, an additional 2.5 years of schooling is associated

with a 20 percent standard deviation reduction in serum cotinine levels. The stronger results for

serum cotinine are consistent with less educated under-reporting after the 1964 SG Report or

smoking cigarettes more intensely after the Report (see Evans and Farrelly, 1998.)


   Next we estimate whether the 1964 report resulted in a change in the rate at which the

education gradient increased over this period. We refer to this as a change in slope model which

is specified as follows:


       Y= γ1education + γ2 education*year*post SG + γ3 education*year2*post SG +
               γ4 education*year + γ5 education*year2 + γ6 year + γ7 year2 + γ8X + γ9AMC +ε



Y can be an indicator variable for smoking, a count of the number of cigarettes smoked per day

or a serum cotinine level. The results (Table 4) suggest that the time trend in the education
                                                 15
gradient in smoking does increase significantly after the 1964 report. Prior to the report there is

no significant time trend in the education gradient in smoking (γ4 small and insignificant in all

specifications) but after the report, the gradient appears to increase in a linear fashion (γ2=-.004

for smoking, -.064 for cigarettes per day and -3.35 for cotinine, all significant). Results for

newborn health were not significant.


       Finally, we explore how the education gradient in smoking (defined as cigarettes per day)

changes after 1964 using count models (a zero-inflated poisson due to over-dispersion in

cigarettes per day). The predictions are nearly identical to those based on linear models.


   Based on these results, we conclude that immediately after publication of the first widespread

report about the effects of smoking on health, the negative relationship between maternal

education and smoking increased by one third and that this was not driven by differences in

income or cognitive ability. Nor does it reflect differences in reporting by education level.

Rather, the evidence seems to suggest that schooling itself affects the decision to smoke

presumably by reducing the costs of learning and/or acting on new knowledge. Moreover, this

increase in the gradient in smoking after publication of the report is accompanied by an increase

in the gradient in newborn health as measured by birth weight and fetal death.




   Regression Results – Maternal FE Specification


       To control for potential differences in any unobserved characteristics of pregnant women

before and after publication of the 1964 SG report, we limit the sample to mothers who had

multiple children over this period and include maternal fixed effects (n=17,287), thereby limiting

our comparison to the same women before and after publication of the 1964 SG report. This


                                                 16
would, for example, control for any differences in female education that may have coincided

with the 1964 Report. This might include passage of the 1964 Higher Education Act which

increased financial aid for higher education and Title I (1965) which increased federal funding

for schools serving low income children. For these regressions we include a linear time trend, an

indicator for post 1964 and maternal fixed effects. Moreover, we stratify the sample multiple

ways to assess whether the smoking decisions of some mothers were more responsive to

advances in medical knowledge than others.

       On average, we witness a decline in the probability of smoking of 3.5 percent after

publication of the report (Table 5A, column 1, Panel A) and half a cigarette less per day (Panel

B). The decline in heavy smoking is insignificant. In columns 2 and 3 we stratify the sample by

maternal education (HS drop out vs. HS graduate). While the change in the probability of

smoking is similar for both groups, the decline in cigarettes smoked per day is twice as great for

HS graduates relative to HS drop outs.

       We also explore whether other maternal characteristics such as income, maternal health

and health of previous children affect the decision to smoke after 1964. Income does not appear

to affect decisions to smoke after the 1964 report (columns 4 and 5). There is some suggestive

evidence, however, that maternal health and the birth weight of the previous child affect how a

mother responds to the 1964 SG report, though the estimates are very imprecise. Mothers

defined as ―not sick‖ (having no reported medical condition) are slightly more likely to reduce

their smoking relative to those defined as ―sick‖ (at least one medical condition), as are mothers

whose previous child was born of normal weight relative to those whose previous child was born

low birth weight (LBW).




                                                17
           Alternatively, for the sample of women with at least one birth before 1964 and at least

one birth after 1964, one can characterize women who quit, women who start and women with

no change after the 1964 Report (Table 5B). Women who quit are less likely to be black, more

likely to be white, are more educated, and have higher income than those who start smoking over

this period. They are very similar, however, to those whose smoking behavior does not change

over this period. It is the women who start smoking over this period who are significantly more

disadvantaged.



           The Role of Peers

           We explore whether peers may act as a social multiplier in either the diffusion and/or

uptake of new medical knowledge. Specifically, we hypothesize that having more educated

peers increases the probability of quitting (or not starting) after publication of the 1964 SG report

via two potential channels. First, more educated peers can serve as an additional indirect source

of information about the health effects of smoking (an information channel). This assumes that

the probability of knowing about the effects of smoking directly from 1964 SG Report increases

in education but is less than 1 and that peers can also transmit this information indirectly to each

other. As such, the probability that one knows about the effects of smoking on health is higher

for the more educated not only because they are more likely to have direct knowledge from the

SG Report, but also, if there is sorting on education, because their peers are more likely to have

that knowledge and transmit it to them. We refer to this as the information channel. The second

mechanism assumes that the cost of quitting, conditional on having information about the ill

effects of smoking, is lower among those whose peers do not smoke.11 As such, having more

educated peers who are themselves less likely to smoke after publication of the report, increases
11
     This is consistent with the cue theory of consumption (Laibson, 2001).

                                                           18
one’s own probability of quitting and/or not starting. We refer to this as the behavioral

channel.12

         If peers do serve as a social multiplier in the diffusion and/or take-up of new medical

knowledge, then the education gradient in smoking should increase more after the 1964 Report

among those groups characterized by a high degree of residential segregation by education. 13 To

examine this empirically, we calculate a dissimilarity index for each of the 11 cities included in

the NCPP based on 1960 census data. The dissimilarity index measures the degree of residential

segregation in the city and is defined as follows:




Where dropouti refers to the number of HS drop outs in the census tract (i), DROPOUT refers to

the number of HS drop outs in the city, gradi the number of HS graduates in the census tract and

GRAD the number of HS graduates in the city. To identify education segregation separate from

racial segregation, we calculate a separate index for each racial/ethnic group in each city (white,

black, Hispanic). We then stratify the sample based on low vs. high dissimilarity index (cutoff at

the median in the sample) and estimate separate regressions of the impact of the 1964 SG Report

on the education gradient in smoking for those more vs. less segregated.

         We specify both change in intercept (maternal education *post 1964) and change in slope

(maternal education*post 1964*year) empirical models. We consider that segregation could be

12
   Lleras-Muney and Jensen (2010) find that a randomized intervention in the Dominican Republic that increases
schooling reduces smoking among 18 year olds and that the effectiveness was due, in part, to changes in peer
networks.
13
   This assumes that the educated residing in segregated cities are more likely to interact with educated peers than
those in less segregated cities. Likewise, the less educated residing in segregated cities are less likely to interact with
educated peers than those in less segregated cities.

                                                            19
endogenous in this context because mothers who select to reside in more segregated cities may

differ in unobserved ways from those choosing less segregated cities. We argue, however, that

these regressions are identified for the following reasons. First, to address concerns that more

segregated cities differ in important ways that might also affect smoking, we include city fixed

effects. Second, we also allow the smoking behavior of the more (or less) educated to differ by

level of segregation. As such, identification in this model comes from the change in smoking

behavior by education by level of segregation over time. Any threat to identification would have

to come from an omitted variable that varies with the level of education, the level of segregation

and the timing of the 1964 Report.

       We find that the education gradient in smoking increases much more quickly after the

1964 Surgeon General’s report among those most segregated by education (Table 6). For

example, those with four more years of schooling reduce their probability of smoking by nearly

four percentage points after the 1964 SG Report in segregated areas, while mothers with the

same level of education in less segregated areas reduce their smoking by less than one

percentage point and the coefficient on the latter is not statistically significant. We take this as

evidence that peers serve as a social multiplier in either the diffusion of new medical knowledge

and/or the ability to act on such knowledge.



       Summary and Interpretation of the Short Run Effects of Information on the Gradient

       We conclude based on the results presented thus far that 1) the education gradient in

smoking increased immediately after the 1964 SG report and that the gradient continued to

increase further still in the two years after for which we have data, 2) this increase did not simply

reflect changes in reports of smoking, but actual smoking as measured by serum cotinine levels,



                                                  20
3) the observed negative relationship between education and smoking does not reflect differences

in income or cognitive ability, 4) the trend in the education gradient in smoking is consistent

with observed changes in the education gradient in knowledge about the negative effects of

smoking on health between 1957 and 1969, 5) peers affect the response to new knowledge about

the health effects of smoking, and 6) the education gradient in newborn health, as measured by

birth weight and fetal death, likewise increased after the 1964 SG report.

       How do we interpret these findings? Should we interpret them as causal? While we do

not instrument for education, we could argue that IV estimates would likely be similar to OLS

estimates for the following reasons. First, we are able to control for the two largest potential

sources of omitted variable bias: income and cognitive ability. Second, existing IV estimates of

the impact of education on smoking using various instruments are very similar, though slightly

larger, than OLS estimates (eg, Currie and Moretti, 2003).

       Alternatively, we could argue that a causal interpretation of the relationship between

education and the response to information is not crucial. Rather, the objective of this research is

to explore how new medical knowledge affects disparities in health – over the short and long

term. We focus on education because the more educated are better able to process new

information. This may be because education improves this ability or because the more able

pursue more education. From the perspective of this research, the distinction is not crucial.




IV. The Evolution of the Education Gradient in Smoking and Health




                                                 21
         Having shown that publication of the First SG Report on Smoking and Health in 1964

resulted in an immediate increase in the education gradient in smoking and newborn health, we

examine how the gradients in both smoking and health have evolved over time.


         A. Data


         For this analysis we use multiple sources of data. Vital statistics does not include

information on smoking during pregnancy until 1989, so for years prior to 1989 we use data

from the National Natality Surveys (NNS) of 1969 and 1980. The NNS were conducted by the

National Center for Health Statistics which randomly sampled certificates of live birth and

mailed questionnaires to 3,611 new mothers with births in 1969 and 9,941 new mothers with

births in 1980. Data on demographic characteristics and birth weight came from birth certificates

and the maternal surveys solicited information on income smoking habits while pregnant. The

resulting sample, when weighted, is representative of the population of married mothers with US

citizenship. However, we conclude that the omission of single mothers and non-citizens from the

NNS data is unlikely to affect our results. 14




         B. Results


         Based on regressions of smoking on maternal education and additional controls (age,

race, marital status, birth order, child gender and state cigarette tax rates) for the period 1969 -

2006, we find that the education gradient increases until about 1990 when it begins to decline


14
  In 1970 and 1980, approximately 88 and 73 percent of all births were to married US citizens, respectively,
suggesting small potential bias in estimates from 1969 but potentially more bias in 1980 as more women were
excluded. To address any potential bias caused by the omission of these two groups, we compare estimates of the
education gradient in birth weight from the NSS with estimates based on vital statistics data which is representative
of the entire population of births for 1970 and 1980. We find that they are very similar.

                                                         22
and continuities to do so until 2006, the most recent year for which we have data. Specifically, an

additional year of education is associated with smoking 0.21 fewer cigarettes per day in 1969,

0.48 fewer cigarettes per day in 1980, 0.45 fewer cigarettes in 1990, 0.22 fewer cigarettes by

2000 and returning to levels below initial 1969 levels by 2006 (.14 fewer cigarettes per day), the

most recent year for which we have data (columns 2,4,6,8,10 of Table 7). The education

gradient in any smoking is similar (columns 1,3,5,7,9 of Table 7). In the second panel we

examine the impact by HS degree and in the third we present the same results redefining

education as an indicator variable for being in the top 25 percent of the education distribution in

that year to account for the fact that the composition of women within education categories has

changed over time. Regardless of how we define education, we see the same pattern and

conclude that the education gradient in smoking which was relatively small prior to publication

of the 1964 SG report, widens over time until sometime between 1980 and 1990 when it begins

to fall, declining to levels below 1969 levels by 2006. This trend mimics trends in the education

gradient in knowledge about the negative effects of smoking on health presented earlier.15

         Finally, we explore the implication of these results for the evolution of health disparities.

The results of regressions of birth weight on maternal education and other demographic

characteristics over time (Table 8) suggest that the education gradient in birth weight tracks the

education gradient in smoking quite closely. Visually, we can see this in Figure 3 where we

have plotted regression coefficients on maternal education from the birth weight and smoking

regressions from Tables 7 and 8. As the education gradient in smoking increases between 1969


15
  To isolate the relationship between education and smoking separate from income, we can re-estimate the above
education gradient regressions conditioning on income for 1969 and 1980 (because the NNS data include income
that the vital statistics data do not). When we do, the education gradient in smoking increases slightly from -.21 to -
.28 in 1969 and from -.48 to -.54 in 1980, suggesting that the relationship between education and smoking while
pregnant is not operating through income, at least for this period.



                                                          23
and 1980, so too does the education gradient in birth weight. Likewise, as the gradient in

smoking declines between 1990 and 2006, so too does the gradient in birth weight.16

         Yet many other things that likely affect the education gradient in birth weight (such as

expansions in Medicaid eligibility for pregnancy) are also changing over this period. As such,

any claim that the evolution of the education gradient in smoking can explain the evolution of the

education gradient in birth weight requires a negative causal impact of smoking on birth weight.

Though previous research has consistently produced estimates that are negative, the estimated

size of the effects has varied substantially with the estimation method used. Because of the

richness of our data and ability to estimate the impact of smoking on birth weight using multiple

identification strategies, we can 1) quantify the bias in OLS estimates due to selection and

measurement error, separately, 2) attempt to explain and reconcile the variation in existing

estimates, and 3) provide a new estimate of the impact of smoking on birth weight that corrects

for bias from both selection and measurement error.



 V. Prenatal Smoking and Newborn Health

         For this analysis we focus on birth weight as a measure of newborn health, not fetal death

which is too infrequent (0.03) to generate stable estimates, particularly with the reduced sample

for the fixed effect estimates. However, we acknowledge debate over the appropriateness of

birth weight as a measure of newborn health and the presence of evidence both for and against

it.17


16
   This is consistent with Racine and Joyce (2004) who document a similar decline in the income gradient in birth
outcomes (LBW and mortality) in New York City over the period 1988 -2000.
17
   For example, Almond, Chay and Lee (2005), using variation within twins for identification, find very small
negative effects of birth weight on short term health outcomes, with the exception of very low birth weights. Black,
Devereaux, and Salvanes (2007) and Oreopolis et al (2008) using the same identification strategy do find moderate
long term effects on IQ, income, education and welfare receipt.


                                                         24
        Previous attempts to estimate a causal relationship between smoking and birth weight

have used multiple techniques to overcome potential bias from omitted variables and

measurement error in reports of smoking. These techniques have included maternal fixed

effects, propensity score matching, randomized controlled trials and IV, with the results varying

with the estimation method used.18 Studies using fixed effects (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1991;

Abrevaya, 2006) produce estimates that are smaller than OLS estimates. Those using propensity

score techniques produce estimates similar to OLS estimates (Almond, Chay and Lee, 2005) as

do those correcting for selection using the Heckman selection technique (Grossman and Joyce,

1990). Sexton and Hebel (1984) conduct a randomized controlled trial of a smoking cessation

program for pregnant women and find that women randomly assigned to the smoking cessation

program smoked less and delivered babies that weighed significantly (92 grams) more. The final

method, IV, produces estimates that are considerably larger than OLS estimates, with the highest

estimate nearly double that of OLS.19

        Our contribution to the existing literature is to assess the bias in OLS estimates due to

selection and measurement error, separately. To do so, we exploit 1) the large number of

siblings in the data that allows us to include maternal fixed effects to address selection bias and

2) a subset of data with serum cotinine levels which allows us to address the issue of

measurement error in reports of smoking in an IV framework. We argue that a careful

comparison of the OLS, FE and IV estimates allows us to 1) determine the amount of bias due to


18
   Another method used by Fertig (2009) is to compare OLS estimates of the impact of smoking on birth weight over
time to assess the degree of selection into smoking. This method assumes that negative selection into smoking has
grown over time and her finding that OLS estimates based on 1958 data from the UK are considerably smaller than
those based on 2000 data suggests that selection can explain a substantial portion of current OLS estimates.
19
   Evans and Ringel (1999) use state cigarette taxes as instruments for smoking while pregnant, yielding IV
estimates of 350-600 grams. Lien and Evans (2005) using the same technique but a limited sample yields a smaller
IV estimate of 189 grams. Finally, Permutt and Hebel (1989) using data from the 1984 randomized control trial for
smoking cessation during pregnancy and instrumenting for smoking status using the randomization, estimate that
smoking reduces birth weight by 430 grams.

                                                       25
selection and measurement error, respectively, 2) produce an estimate that adequately accounts

for both and 3) explain the variation in existing estimates.




   A. OLS Estimates


   OLS estimates suggest that smoking is associated with a decline in birth weight of 187

grams, or 28 percent of a standard deviation (Table 9). Defining smoking as cigarettes smoked

per day, we find that each cigarette smoked per day is associated with a reduction in birth weight

of 20 grams, and the relationship is decreasing in the number of cigarettes smoked (Column 1,

Panel B). In panel C, we explore this non-linearity and categorize women as non-smokers

(omitted), light smokers (1-10 cigarettes per day), moderate smokers (11-20 cigarettes per day)

and heavy smokers (more than 20 cigarettes per day). Light smokers deliver babies that are on

average, 128 grams lighter, while moderate and heavy smokers deliver babies that are nearly 300

grams lighter (43 percent of a standard deviation).

       We repeat the analysis defining the birth outcome as a LBW birth and find that smokers

are 6 percentage points more likely to have a LBW birth (column 4) which represents a 50

percent increase and that the relationship is again concave in cigarettes smoked per day: light

smokers face a 4 percentage point increase in the probability of a LBW birth, and moderate and

heavy smokers face between a 7.4 and 8.8 percentage point increase.

       We also explore whether smoking is correlated with prematurity and find that it is,

though the relationship is much weaker than with birth weight. Smokers deliver on average 2

days earlier (Table 9 column 6) and like birth weight, there seems to be a concave relationship

between number of cigarettes smoked per day and gestation at birth. When we define the

outcome as premature (delivery before 36 weeks gestation), we find that smokers face a 2

                                                 26
percentage point increase in the probability of delivering prematurely (the average probability of

prematurity is 16 percent in this sample).




   B. Fixed Effect Estimates


        To assess the extent of selection bias in OLS estimates, we include maternal FE, thereby

reducing identifying variation in smoking to that between births to the same mother. The sibling

subsample (n=16,483) used for the FE analysis is very similar to the full sample along nearly

every dimension including income, education, race, smoking habits and birth outcomes

(Appendix Table 1). For purposes of comparison and to assess generalizability of the fixed

effect estimates that are based on a subset of the full sample, OLS estimates of the impact of

smoking on birth weight based on the sibling subsample are presented in column 2 of Table 9.

They are very similar to the OLS estimates based on the full sample, suggesting that the FE

estimates are likely generalizable to the full sample. It should be noted, however, that the

variation in smoking declines considerably when we limit our analysis to that within mothers.

For example, the standard deviation in the number of cigarettes smoked per day is 9.5, overall

(the mean number of cigarettes smoked per day is 6.5). Within mothers, there is still some

variation, but considerably less with the standard deviation falling to 3.0.

       When we include maternal fixed effects, the coefficient on smoking declines by two

thirds from -175 to -58 (Table 9 column 3), suggesting that once we control for omitted

variables, smoking reduces birth weight by less than 60 grams or 9 percent of a standard

deviation. Smoking an additional cigarette per day reduces birth weight by 12 grams, relative to

the OLS estimate of 20 grams, with the effect decreasing in the number of cigarettes smoked

(Table 9 column 3, panel B). Women who smoke more than 10 cigarettes per day on average

                                                 27
can expect newborns weighing 125 grams fewer (19 percent of a standard deviation), which is

half the OLS estimate, but still represents a moderate effect. The decline in the estimated

impact of smoking on the probability of a LBW birth when fixed effects are included is similar

to the decline in the birth weight regressions but are not significant due, perhaps, to the low

probability of LBW and relatively small sample size.

        Interestingly, when fixed effects are included in the regressions estimating the

relationship between smoking and gestation/prematurity, the point estimates do not decline at all,

and in some cases actually increase, though they become imprecise, suggesting that selection

bias may be less of an issue in estimates of the impact of smoking on gestation/prematurity. 20




     C. Measurement Error in Smoking Reports


        To assess potential measurement error in these data we instrument for maternal smoking

with a measure of serum cotinine from the third trimester of pregnancy. This measure is highly

correlated with reports of maternal smoking but it is also correlated with any unobservables that

may be correlated with both smoking and newborn health. As such, this instrument only

addresses bias due to measurement error in reports of smoking, it does not address bias due to

selection into smoking.

        Comparison of results from OLS, FE and IV regressions enables us to assess the extent of

bias in the OLS estimate due to omitted variables and measurement error, respectively and to

adjust (upwards) our FE estimate to account for measurement error in smoking. OLS results in

Table 10 columns 1 and 2 based on the full and sibling subsample suggest that each additional

20
 Without conditioning on gestation, a standard deviation increase in cigarettes smoked per day, 9, reduces birth
weight by 14 percent of a standard deviation, while the same increase in cigarettes smoked per day reduces birth
weight conditional on gestation by 8 percent of a standard deviation.

                                                        28
cigarette smoked per day reduces birth weight by 11.7 grams. 21 The fixed effect estimate in

column 3 is much smaller, -3.7. Columns 4 and 5 contain the first and second stages,

respectively, of an IV regression. Cotinine is a very strong predictor of reported smoking (t

statistic = 31). However, we do not interpret the cotinine measure as the ―true‖ measure as it is

also subject to measurement error. Specifically, it is a single spot measure that reflects only

relatively recent smoking which may or may not be the average level. Moreover, it can also

reflect second hand smoke.

         When we do instrument for reports of smoking with cotinine, the resulting IV estimate is

much larger than the OLS estimate: -18.6 vs -11.7, yielding a reliability ratio of 0.63 in the

measure of smoking and suggesting that measurement error in smoking leads to a considerable

downward bias in the OLS estimate. As previously noted, attenuation bias due to classical

measurement error is exacerbated in a fixed effect setting (Grilliches, 1979) with this

―exacerbation‖ increasing in the degree of correlation in the smoking reports of siblings which in

this case is high (ρ=0.77). It should be noted that the greater impact of smoking instrumented

with cotinine does not reflect the fact that conditional on smoking, those with a higher cotinine

levels suffer worse birth outcomes. The estimated direct impact of cotinine on birth weight is in

fact slightly smaller than the estimated impact of reported smoking (Appendix Table 2A).22

         Based on this, we conclude that OLS estimates are biased upward by 59 percent due to

negative selection into smoking and biased downward by 37 percent due to classical

measurement error. On net, the results suggest that OLS estimates are biased upward by 22

percent. Moreover, we can calculate a causal estimate that accounts for both selection and

21
  We exclude the quadratic term because we have only one instrument.
22
  We also regress birth weight on ln(cotinine) separately by maternal education, income and the Duncan SES index
as a means of exploring selection into smoking. If there’s no selection, the effect of cotinine should not vary by type
of mother. We find that the estimated effects do vary across these types, consistent with non-random selection into
smoking. We thank Ted Joyce for this suggestion.

                                                          29
measurement error by adjusting the fixed effect estimates for classical measurement error in

smoking. When we do, we find that smoking results in 9.6 fewer grams at birth per cigarette

smoked per day and -152 grams for smoking, representing a moderate effect.

         As a final identification strategy, we instrument for maternal smoking using the

publication of the 1964 report interacted with maternal education as an instrument.23 This

instrument is designed to mitigate bias from both measurement error and selection. The results of

the first and second stages are presented in the last two columns of Table 10, respectively. The

first stage is strong (t statistics of 5 and 6). As expected, the point estimate for smoking in the

second stage (-15.6 for cigarettes smoked per day and -311 for smoking) falls between the fixed

effect and IV estimates based on cotinine, reflecting the fact that this second IV estimate corrects

for both measurement error and selection. However, the coefficient is imprecisely estimated and

the 95 percent confidence interval includes a wide range.

         We draw four main conclusions based on these analyses. First, OLS estimates of the

impact of smoking on birth weight are biased upward due to negative selection into smoking and

biased downward due to classical measurement error in smoking reports; second, fixed effect

estimates which correct for selection bias are significantly attenuated by measurement error;

third, a comparison of OLS and IV estimates based on cotinine suggest a reliability ratio of .63 in

reports of prenatal smoking (cigarettes/day); fourth, the true causal estimate of smoking on birth

weight corrected for selection and measurement error represents a moderate effect: -152 grams

for smoking and -9.6 grams per cigarette/day.

         This analysis can help to explain the substantial variation in existing estimates that are

based on different estimation methods. With respect to the existing fixed effect estimates, we


23
  The two main effects, publication of the report and maternal education, are included in the first and second stages
of the IV regression (eg, they are not excluded as instruments but rather are allowed to affect birth weight directly).

                                                          30
conclude that they are too small because of exacerbated measurement error. This also explains

why estimates based on propensity score and selection correction, which are subject to less

measurement error (though still some), are larger than the FE estimates and why IV estimates

which correct for selection and measurement error are larger still.



       VI. Conclusions

       The goals of this paper were threefold. First, using the only dataset that, to our

knowledge, has information on smoking habits before and after the first wide-spread publication

of the effects of smoking on health in 1964, we explored the immediate impact of the 1964

Report on the education gradients in smoking and health. We found that more educated women

immediately reduced their smoking in response to the report while the least educated did not.

These differences are consistent with an increase in the education gradient in knowledge about

the effects of smoking on health also observed over this period and cannot be explained by

differences in income or cognitive ability, nor differences in reported smoking as differential

declines in serum cotinine levels were also observed. Moreover, we provide evidence of strong

peer effects in the response to information. The immediate increase in the gradient in smoking

after 1964 was accompanied by an immediate increase in the gradient in newborn health as

measured by increases in birth weight and reductions in fetal death.

       Second, we examined the long-run effects of an advance in information on the gradient in

smoking and health. We showed that the education gradient in smoking which increased

immediately after 1964, continued to increase until the mid 1980s when it began to decline as the

smoking behavior of the less educated began to converge to that of the more educated. This

trend in the education gradient in smoking witnessed over the past half century was mirrored by



                                                31
trends in the education gradient in birth weight which initially increased after the 1964 report,

and likewise, beginning in the mid 1980s, began to decline.

       Finally, we provided new evidence on the impact of smoking on newborn health using

FE and IV techniques that allowed us to assess the degree of measurement error and selection in

smoking reports separately and provide a causal estimate that is moderate in size and adjusts for

both sources of bias.

       We conclude based on these findings that increasing health disparities is a likely

byproduct of advances in medical knowledge, which the more educated are quicker to adopt.

Moreover, the increase in inequality can persist to the next generation. However, over time, the

disparities decline as the behavior and health of the less educated eventually converge to that of

the more educated. Obviously, this does not imply that scientific progress should be eliminated

even though it will, at least initially, increase health disparities. It can, however, explain why

despite efforts to reduce inequalities in health, they continue to persist in an era characterized by

continuous advancements in scientific knowledge.




                                                 32
                                           References

Abrevaya J. 2006. Estimating the effect of smoking on birth outcomes using a matched panel
data approach. Journal of Applied Econometrics 21: 489–519.

Almond D, Chay KY, Lee DS. 2005. The costs of low birth weight. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 120(3):1031–1083.

Black, S., Devereaux, P and K. Salvanes. 2007. From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The
Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics.122(1): 409-439.

Brachet T. 2005. Maternal smoking, misclassication, and infant health. Unpublished manuscript
available at http://works.bepress.com/tbrachet/1

Case, A., A. Fertig and C. Paxson. 2005. The lasting impact of childhood health and
circumstance. Journal of Health Economics 24: 365-389.

Case, A., D. Lubotsky, and C. Paxson. 2002. Economic status and health in childhood: the
origins of the gradient. American Economic Review 92(5): 1308-1334.

Chaloupka, Frank and Kenneth Warner. 2000. ―The Economics of Smoking‖ in Handbook of
Health Economics, Joseph Newhouse and Anthony Cuyler, eds. Amsterdam: North Holland
Press.

Cutler, D.M., and A. Lleras-Muney. 2007. Education and health: evaluating theories and
evidence, in J.S. House, R.F. Schoeni, G.A. Kaplan, and H. Pollack (eds.), The Health
Effects of Social and Economic Policy, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Currie, J., and M. Stabile. 2003. Socioeconomic status and health: Why is the relationship
stronger for older children? American Economic Review 93(5): 1813-1823.

Deaton, A., D. Cutler, and A. Lleras-Muney. 2006. The determinants of mortality. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 20(3): 97-120.

Deaton, A. 2003. Health, inequality, and economic development. Journal of Economic
Literature 41(1): 113-158.

Deaton, A. and C. Paxson. 2004. Mortality, income, and income inequality over time in
Britain and the United States, in D.A. Wise (ed.), Perspectives on the Economics of Aging.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 247-279.

De Walque, D. 2004. Education, Information and Smoking Decisions: Evidence from Smoking
Histories, 1940-2000. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3362.

Elo, I. T. and S.H. Preston. 1996. Educational differentials in mortality: United States, 1979-
85. Social Science and Medicine 42(1): 47-57.


                                                33
Evans WN, Farrelly MC (1998) ―The Compensating Behavior of Smokers: Taxes, Tar and
Nicotine‖ Rand Journal of Economics. 29(3): 578-595.

Evans WN, Ringel JS. 1999. Can higher cigarette taxes improve birth outcomes? Journal of
Public Economics 72:135–154.

Fertig, A. 2009. Selection and the Effect of Prenatal Smoking. Health Economics.

Fuchs, V. 1982. ―Time Preferences and Health: An Exploratory Study‖ in Victor Fuchs (ed)
Economic Aspects of Health. Chicago: the University of Chicago Press.

Glied, S. and A. Lleras-Muney. 2008. Health inequality, education, and medical innovation.
Demography 45(3): 741-761.

Goldman, Dana and James Smith. 2002. Can Patient Self-Management Help Explain the SES
Health Gradient? Procedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 99(16):10929-10934.

Grossman, M. 1972. The Demand for Health—A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grossman M, Joyce TJ. 1990. Unobservables, pregnancy resolutions, and birth weight
production functions in NewYork City. Journal of Political Economy 98(5): 983–1007.

Kenkel, D. 1991. Health Behavior, Health Knowledge and Schooling. Journal of Political
Economy. 99(2):287-305.

Kenkel, D and F. Liu. 2007. The Evolution of the Schooling-Smoking Gradient. Mimeo Cornell
University.

Kitagawa, E. M. and P. M. Hauser. 1973. Differential Mortality in the United States: A Study in
Socioeconomic Epidemiology, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Lien DS, Evans WN. 2005. Estimating the impact of large cigarette tax hikes: the case of
maternal smoking and infant birth weight. Journal of Human Resources 40(2): 373–392.

Lleras-Muney, A. 2005. The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United
States. Review of Economic Studies 72: 189-221

Lleras-Muney, A. and R. Jensen. 2010. Does Staying in School (and not Working) Prevent Teen
Smoking and Drinking? UCLA mimeo.

Marmot, M.G., G.D. Smith, S. Stansfield, et al. 1991. Health inequalities among British civil
servants: The Whitehall II study. Lancet 337: 1387-1393.

Meara E. 2001. Why is health related to socioeconomic status? The case of pregnancy and low
birth weight. NBER Working Paper 8231.

                                               34
Oreopoulos, Philip, Stabile, Mark, Roos, L., and Walld, R., 2008. The Short, Medium, and Long
Term Effects of Poor Infant Health. Journal of Human Resources, 43(1): 88-138.

Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wolber Hadden and Grail Fisher. 1993. The Increasing Disparity
in Mortality Between Socioeconomic Groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986. The New
England Journal of Medicine.

Permutt T, Hebel R. 1989. Simultaneous-equation estimation in a clinical trial of the effect of
smoking on birth weight. Biometrics 45(2): 619–622.

Price, Joseph and Kosali Simon (forthcoming) Patient Information and the Impact of New
Medical Research. Journal of Health Economics.

Racine AD, Joyce, TJ. 2004. The Disappearing Income Gradient in New York City Birth
Outcomes: Thirteen Years of Convergence from 1988 to 2001. 114: e51-e57.

Sapolsky, R.M. 1993. Endocrinology alfresco: Psychoendocrine studies of wild baboons.
Recent Progress in Hormone Research 48: 437-468.

Sloan, FA, Smith VK and DH Taylor. 2002. Information, Addiction and Bad Choices: Lessons
from a Century of Cigarettes. Economic Letters. 77(2): 147-155.

Sexton, M, Hebel R. 1984. A Clinical Trial of Change in Maternal Smoking and Its Effect on
Birth Weight. Journal of the American Medical Association 25(1):911-915.

US Office of the Surgeon General. 1964. Smoking and health: report of the advisory committee
of the surgeongeneral of the public health service. Technical Report, Public Health Service,
Office of the Surgeon General.(Public Health Service Publication No. 1103.)

Warner, Kenneth. 1977. The Effects of the Anti-Smoking Campaign on Cigarette Consumption.
American Journal of Public Health. 67(7): 645-650.




                                                35
             Table 1: The Education Gradient in Knowledge of Smoking and Heart Disease 1957-1990

                                              1957           1969         1977          1981         1990
HS drop-out                                 -0.0555         -0.149       -0.167        -0.231       -0.164
                                           [0.0446]       [0.0441]     [0.0414]       [0.0366]     [0.0321]
HS graduate                                 -0.0558         -0.177        -0.13        -0.121      -0.0794
                                           [0.0474]       [0.0442]     [0.0402]       [0.0344]     [0.0271]
Some college                                 -0.112        -0.0943      -0.0188       -0.0609      -0.0436
                                           [0.0580]       [0.0492]     [0.0426]       [0.0374]     [0.0292]
Observations                                  1445           1486         1504          1529         1223
R-squared                                    0.013          0.017        0.027         0.037        0.061
Regressions weighted by sample weights for 1969-1990. Omitted/Reference is College Grad+.
Regressions also include controls for age, gender and race.
Dependent variable is whether the respondent answers that he or she believes
smoking is a cause of heart disease
                                                      Table 2: Changes in the Education Gradient in Smoking and Birthweight Associated with the 1964 SG Report

                                                                               Sample Restricted to 19-34 Year Olds                                                            Full Sample
                                                  Smoker             Cigarettes per day        Birthweight             LBW              Fetal Death              Birthweight      LBW        Fetal Death
Maternal education*post 1964                       -0.006                  -0.094                  6.008              -0.002              -0.001                     8.019       -0.003         -0.002
                                                  [0.003]                 [0.056]                 [4.006]             [0.002]             [0.001]                  [3.524]      [0.002]        [0.001]
Maternal education                                 -0.014                  -0.313                 24.048              -0.009               0.001                    25.269       -0.012         0.001
                                                  [0.006]                 [0.085]                 [5.816]             [0.003]             [0.001]                  [5.038]      [0.003]        [0.001]
Maternal education*year                               0                    -0.013                 -4.724               0.001              -0.001                    -4.396       0.002          -0.001
                                                  [0.002]                 [0.035]                 [2.484]             [0.001]             [0.001]                  [2.148]      [0.001]        [0.000]
Maternal education*year2                              0                       0                    0.318                  0                    0                     0.163          0              0
                                                  [0.000]                 [0.004]                 [0.283]             [0.000]              [0.000]                  [0.247]     [0.000]        [0.000]
Black                                              0.101                    0.268               -125.597               0.076                0.032                 -123.709        0.07          0.025
                                                  [0.038]                 [0.589]                [49.481]             [0.021]              [0.004]                 [45.335]     [0.020]        [0.005]
White                                              0.243                    5.074                 81.774               0.024                0.018                   83.985       0.015          0.015
                                                  [0.037]                 [0.563]                [47.843]             [0.019]              [0.002]                 [44.122]     [0.019]        [0.004]
Hispanic                                          -0.081                   -1.789                 -30.97                0.05                0.035                  -29.701       0.035          0.031
                                                  [0.042]                 [0.644]                [55.209]             [0.026]              [0.006]                 [50.063]     [0.024]        [0.006]
Birth Order                                        0.015                    0.392                 15.897                  0                -0.001                   16.704       -0.002         -0.001
                                                  [0.002]                 [0.035]                 [2.529]             [0.001]              [0.001]                  [2.186]     [0.001]        [0.001]
Married                                           -0.131                   -2.608                  32.27              -0.015               -0.004                   27.725        -0.01         -0.003
                                                  [0.009]                 [0.174]                [11.330]             [0.006]              [0.002]                  [9.271]     [0.005]        [0.002]
Ln(family income in $1000)                          0.02                    0.268                 25.308              -0.004                   0                    20.905       -0.004         -0.001
                                                  [0.007]                 [0.126]                 [8.398]             [0.005]              [0.002]                  [6.807]     [0.004]        [0.002]
Male                                               0.005                    0.099                110.987              -0.024                0.002                  110.373       -0.026         0.003
                                                  [0.006]                 [0.107]                 [7.460]             [0.004]              [0.002]                  [6.470]     [0.004]        [0.001]
Maternal age                                      -0.007                   -0.038                  0.978               0.001                0.002                    1.604       0.001          0.002
                                                  [0.001]                 [0.018]                 [1.182]             [0.001]              [0.000]                  [0.805]     [0.000]        [0.000]
Year                                               7.581                   96.351              -13,868.92              3.584                 0.19                -17,918.12       4.07          1.681
                                                  [7.986]                [121.996]             [8,533.548]            [5.104]              [2.165]               [7,245.653]    [3.089]        [1.708]
Year squared                                      -0.002                   -0.024                   3.54              -0.001                   0                     4.575       -0.001            0
                                                  [0.002]                 [0.031]                 [2.174]             [0.001]              [0.001]                  [1.847]     [0.001]        [0.000]
Post 1964                                          0.052                    0.722               -105.978               0.037                 0.01                  -125.72       0.044          0.016
                                                  [0.035]                 [0.617]                [43.570]             [0.025]              [0.013]                 [37.020]     [0.020]        [0.010]
Cigarette tax in cents (real)                      0.001                    0.008                 -0.932                  0                    0                    -0.739          0              0
                                                  [0.001]                 [0.009]                 [0.633]             [0.000]              [0.000]                  [0.555]     [0.000]        [0.000]
Observations                                       40668                   40668                   40601               40863                40863                    53120       53459          53459
R-squared                                           0.06                     0.1                    0.05                0.01                   0                      0.06        0.02             0
Robust standard errors in brackets
Also included are indicators for city of birth.
           Table 3: Changes in The Gradient in Smoking and Birthweight - Stratified Specifications

Panel A: Smoker                                                         1962/1963             1964/1965
Maternal education                                                        -0.016                -0.023
                                                                          [0.002]               [0.002]
Observations                                                               12884                 14924
R-squared                                                                   0.07                  0.06


Panel B: Cigarettes Smoked per Day
Maternal education                                                        -0.358               -0.486
                                                                          [0.045]              [0.040]
Observations                                                               12884                14924
R-squared                                                                   0.11                 0.11


Panel C: Heavy Smoker (at least 1 pack per day)
Maternal education                                                        -0.005               -0.005
                                                                          [0.001]              [0.001]
Observations                                                               12884                14924
R-squared                                                                   0.04                 0.05


Panel D: Birthweight
Maternal education                                                        11.242               14.063
                                                                          [3.188]              [2.702]
Observations                                                               12829                14879
R-squared                                                                   0.05                 0.05


Panel E: Cotinine
Maternal education                                                        -5.881               -10.858
                                                                          [1.689]              [2.746]
Observations                                                                346                  293
R-squared                                                                   0.07                 0.08
Robust standard errors in brackets
                     Table 4: Changes in the Education Gradient in Smoking - Spline Specifications

                                                              Smoker          Cigarettes per day     cotinine(ng/ml)
Maternal education*year*post 1964                              -0.004               -0.064                -3.353
                                                              [0.002]              [0.030]                [1.755]
Maternal education*year^2*post 1964                               0                 0.008                  0.318
                                                              [0.000]              [0.004]                [0.231]
Maternal education*year                                        -0.007               -0.013                -1.548
                                                              [0.007]              [0.082]                [5.804]
Maternal education*year^2                                      0.001                -0.001                 0.345
                                                              [0.001]              [0.010]                [0.693]
Maternal education                                                0                 -0.234                -5.425
                                                              [0.015]              [0.162]               [12.383]
Year                                                           0.104                0.862                 16.457
                                                              [0.065]              [0.848]               [68.253]
Year^2                                                         -0.012               -0.063                -4.032
                                                              [0.007]              [0.103]                [7.959]
Post 1964                                                      0.086                0.746                107.171
                                                              [0.047]              [0.855]               [54.370]
Observations                                                   44695                44695                   923
R-squared                                                       0.05                 0.09                  0.06
Robust standard errors in brackets
                                  Table 5A: Changes in Smoking Behavior Across Birth Stratified by Maternal Characteristic - FE Specification

Panel A: Smoker                                       All        <HS       >=HS       Poor     Non Poor       Sick    Non Sick     LBW          Not LBW     White     Black
post 1964                                          -0.035      -0.031     -0.038      -0.04      -0.03      -0.034     -0.052      0.015         -0.041    -0.023    -0.044
                                                   [0.013]     [0.017]    [0.021]    [0.021]    [0.017]     [0.016]   [0.057]     [0.037]        [0.014]   [0.018]   [0.021]
year                                                0.007       0.011      0.001      0.015         0        0.006      0.016     -0.007          0.008    -0.002     0.016
                                                   [0.004]     [0.006]    [0.007]    [0.007]    [0.006]     [0.005]   [0.016]     [0.014]        [0.005]   [0.006]   [0.007]
Observations                                        17287       9429       7858       6596       10691       14086      3201       2399           14502     9041      7564
R-squared                                            0.89       0.89       0.89        0.9        0.89        0.9       0.95       0.94            0.89      0.9      0.89




Panel B: Cigarettes per Day                           All        <HS       >=HS       Poor      Not Poor      Sick    Non Sick     LBW          Not LBW     White     Black
post 1964                                          -0.507      -0.344     -0.709     -0.425      -0.547     -0.426     -0.634     -0.401         -0.512    -0.545    -0.421
                                                   [0.231]     [0.341]    [0.303]    [0.416]     [0.265]    [0.285]   [0.887]     [0.665]        [0.249]   [0.334]   [0.332]
year                                                0.458       0.53       0.365      0.51        0.408      0.449      0.491      0.389          0.462     0.465     0.445
                                                   [0.074]     [0.110]    [0.093]    [0.128]     [0.085]    [0.093]   [0.243]     [0.223]        [0.079]   [0.105]   [0.108]
Observations                                        17287       9429       7858       6596        10691      14086      3201       2399           14502     9041      7564
R-squared                                            0.9         0.9       0.92       0.89         0.92       0.91      0.96       0.93            0.9      0.91      0.87




Panel C: >20 Cigarettes per Day                      All         <HS       >=HS       Poor     Non Poor       Sick    Non Sick     LBW          Not LBW     White     Black
post 1964                                         -0.009       -0.009     -0.009      0.005     -0.018       -0.01     -0.01      -0.025         -0.007    -0.013    -0.005
                                                  [0.008]      [0.012]    [0.011]    [0.014]    [0.010]     [0.010]   [0.035]     [0.027]        [0.009]   [0.013]   [0.010]
year                                                0.01        0.012      0.007      0.007      0.011       0.011     0.005       0.011           0.01     0.013     0.006
                                                  [0.003]      [0.004]    [0.003]    [0.004]    [0.003]     [0.003]   [0.011]     [0.008]        [0.003]   [0.004]   [0.003]
Observations                                       17287        9429       7858       6596       10691       14086     3201        2399           14502     9041      7564
R-squared                                           0.77        0.77       0.76       0.73        0.79        0.79     0.84         0.8            0.76     0.78       0.7
Robust standard errors clustered on mother in brackets
                      Table 5B: Characteristics of Quitters and Starters

Maternal Characteristic                           Quitter            Starter    No Change in Smoking
White                                               0.46               0.6              0.46
Black                                               0.51               0.35             0.5
Maternal Education                                  10.7               10.2             10.6
Married                                             0.82               0.68             0.8
Family income (in $1000)                            30.7              23.99             27.6
HS Drop-Out                                         0.56               0.68             0.58
Obs                                                 653                653             8369
Sample consists of 9675 births to 4035 mothers with at least one birth before and one
birth after 1964
                       Table 6: Changes in the Education Gradient in Smoking and Residential Segregation



                                                                                                           Drop Hispanic
Change in Intercept Specification                               Low           High                      Low            High
Maternal Education*post 1964                                  -0.001        -0.009                    -0.001         -0.009
                                                              [0.003]       [0.004]                   [0.003]        [0.005]
Maternal education                                            -0.024        -0.007                    -0.024         -0.012
                                                              [0.002]       [0.004]                   [0.002]        [0.005]
Observations                                                   24522         21296                     24522          18626
R-squared                                                       0.06          0.04                      0.06           0.04


                                                                                                           Drop Hispanic
Change in Slope Specification (Spline)                          Low           High                      Low            High
Maternal education*year*post 1964                                 0         -0.003                       0           -0.002
                                                              [0.001]       [0.001]                   [0.001]        [0.001]
Maternal education*year                                       -0.001        -0.002                    -0.001         -0.003
                                                              [0.001]       [0.002]                   [0.001]        [0.002]
Observations                                                   24522         21296                     24522          18626
R-squared                                                       0.06          0.04                      0.06           0.04
Robust standard errors in brackets
Also included as covariates: maternal indicators for race, marital status, maternal age,
 family income, birth order, child gender, city FE and a linear time trend
Note: Hispanics have very high segregation values and are dropped from the analysis sample in columns 3 and 4 to segregation"
test whether the results for "high" segregation are driven by their inclusion. They are not .
                                                                            Table 7: The Education Gradient in Smoking Over Time

                                                              1969                                 1980                              1990                   2000                   2006
Panel A: Education in years                           Smoker       Cigs/Day                Smoker       Cigs/Day             Smoker Cigs/Day        Smoker Cigs/Day        Smoker Cigs/Day
Maternal education in years                            -0.012        -0.21                 -0.0201        -0.478             -0.0295     -0.4508    -0.0192      -0.219    -0.0125     -0.1377
                                                    [0.00452]      [0.0861]              [0.00249]      [0.0535]            [223.89] [204.56]      [205.63] [170.48]      [127.00] [114.49]
White                                                  0.157         3.795                  -0.14         -3.336             0.0706      1.3521     0.0262      0.4767     0.0566      0.6375
                                                     [0.0520]       [0.754]               [0.0147]       [0.262]             [46.75]     [61.83]    [30.46]     [48.31]    [82.26]     [85.33]
Black                                                  0.109         0.479                 -0.0886        -2.077             -0.0126      -0.653    -0.0817      -0.975    -0.0413     -0.5465
                                                     [0.0570]       [0.801]               [0.0650]       [1.442]              [7.37]     [26.61]    [82.31]     [84.62]    [44.37]     [56.42]
Maternal age                                        0.000857        0.0686                -0.00903        -0.104             -0.0022     -0.0155    -0.0018     -0.0126     -0.097     -0.9874
                                                    [0.00327]      [0.0684]              [0.00171]      [0.0352]             [20.98]      [9.10]    [23.46]     [12.59]   [113.23] [107.76]
Male                                                 -0.00711        0.513                0.00328         0.238              -0.0002     0.0012     0.0004      -0.0023     -0.001     -0.0514
                                                     [0.0204]       [0.408]               [0.0110]       [0.230]              [0.39]      [0.13]     [1.01]      [0.42]     [1.98]      [8.58]
birth order                                          0.00204        0.0972                -0.00287      -0.0832              0.0216        0.376    0.0209      0.2454     -0.0008     -0.0065
                                                    [0.00740]       [0.155]              [0.00421]      [0.0847]             [92.63]     [92.14]   [117.58]     [98.81]     [1.65]      [1.20]
Married                                                                                                                      -0.2072      -2.883    -0.1454     -1.5136     -0.004     -0.0315
                                                                                                                            [180.67] [142.34]      [181.96] [135.06]       [49.73]     [33.02]
Hispanic                                                                                                                     -0.0997     -1.4941    -0.1088     -1.2218    -0.1164     -1.1098
                                                                                                                             [65.35]     [69.23]   [132.24] [128.97]      [142.49] [112.66]
Native born                                                                                                                  0.0867      1.0705      0.067      0.4852     0.0195      0.2069
                                                                                                                             [88.88]     [76.15]   [117.92]     [73.21]    [96.85]     [83.01]
Cigarette tax in cents (real)                         0.232            5.397              0.0372             -0.765          -0.0797     -2.3445    -0.0274     -1.0169
                                                     [0.113]          [2.224]             [0.102]           [2.154]          [17.44]     [31.41]    [23.09]     [72.67]
Observations                                          2417             2417                6734               6734          1517622 1502984        1741927 1722596        1107945    1107945
R-squared                                             0.008            0.019               0.029              0.03             0.11         0.1       0.12        0.09      0.1        0.08

                                                               1969                                  1980                           1990                   2000                   2006
Panel B: HS Graduate                                 Smoker           Cigs/Day             Smoker           Cigs/Day         Smoker Cigs/Day        Smoker Cigs/Day       Smoker Cigs/Day
Mother HS graduate                                    -0.132            -2.388            -0.0894             -2.019         -0.1748    -2.9586     -0.1119    -1.4483    -0.0786     -0.9125
                                                    [0.0259]           [0.533]            [0.0181]           [0.401]        [136.41] [122.33]      [109.41]    [93.11]     [70.00]    [63.08]
Observations                                           2417              2417               6734               6734         1517622 1502984        1741927 1722596        1105797 1105797
R-squared                                             0.016             0.026               0.024             0.023            0.1        0.09        0.1        0.08       0.09        0.07

                                                               1969                                  1980                            1990                  2000                   2006
Panel C: Top 25% Education Distribution              Smoker           Cigs/Day             Smoker           Cigs/Day         Smoker Cigs/Day        Smoker Cigs/Day        Smoker Cigs/Day
Mother in top 25% education distribution            -0.0666             -1.42               -0.119            -2.539          -0.136     -2.0058    -0.0941    -1.0061     -0.0731    -0.7448
                                                    [0.0228]           [0.441]            [0.0119]           [0.243]        [228.90] [214.10]      [225.08] [191.07]      [156.78] [138.88]
Observations                                          2417              2417                 6734              6734         1517622 1502984        1741927 1722596        1107945 1107945
R-squared                                             0.009             0.021               0.034             0.032            0.11        0.09       0.11       0.08        0.1        0.08
Robust standard errors in brackets
Notes: Regressions for 1969 and 1980 based on National Natality Surveys with population weights. No state FE included.
Regressions for 2006 do not include state level cigarette taxes because geographic identifiers are not available in the data.
                                        Table 8: The Education Gradient in Birthweight Over Time

                                                             1969                1980               1990              2000      2006
Panel A: Education in years                                   (1)                 (3)                (5)               (7)       (9)
Maternal education in years                                  7.92                12.27           10.8532             8.0111    6.7238
                                                            [5.080]             [3.132]           [64.89]           [47.17]    [29.62]
White                                                        112.3              -269.5           170.0505          187.7722   146.678
                                                            [71.97]             [20.78]           [83.80]          [106.77]    [77.30]
Black                                                       -92.39              -39.21           -77.7836          -32.2724   -55.6605
                                                            [78.51]             [64.64]           [32.79]           [14.99]    [22.67]
Maternal age                                                 6.835               4.396            -0.3716            1.5685   31.1836
                                                            [3.817]             [2.125]            [2.61]           [11.37]    [27.16]
Male                                                          106                132.2           126.5078          114.7956   114.6417
                                                            [23.65]             [13.02]          [161.20]          [147.40]   [110.41]
birth order                                                    13                7.318           15.7339           13.4443     2.8838
                                                            [8.937]             [5.321]           [50.95]           [44.40]    [15.98]
Hispanic                                                                                           138.56          156.8904    7.5195
                                                                                                  [67.21]           [88.96]    [19.04]
Native born                                                                                      -26.8764           -16.044   132.4854
                                                                                                  [18.82]           [12.71]    [56.25]
Married                                                                                          135.6773            91.248   79.6678
                                                                                                 [104.73]           [77.25]    [54.96]
Cigarette tax in cents (real)                               -0.256               5.143           155.8128          103.4779
                                                            [130.9]             [116.9]           [26.79]           [46.54]
Observations                                                 2417                6734            2024664           2032666    1107945
R-squared                                                    0.025               0.04               0.05              0.04      0.04


Panel B: HS Graduate                                         1969                1980              1990              2000       2006
Mother HS graduate                                           71.44               110.6           85.5699           54.1084    40.5553
                                                            [30.78]             [20.66]           [61.13]           [37.87]    [21.24]
Observations                                                 2417                6734            2024664           2032666    1105797
R-squared                                                    0.026               0.041              0.05              0.04       0.04


Panel C: Top 25% Education Distribution                      1969                1980              1990              2000       2006
Mother in top 25% education distribution                     21.78               38.43           60.7556           40.1383    42.2488
                                                            [26.85]             [14.68]           [71.41]           [45.97]    [35.19]
Observations                                                 2417                6734            2024664           2032666    1107945
R-squared                                                    0.024               0.039              0.05              0.04       0.04
Robust standard errors in brackets
Notes: Regressions for 1969 and 1980 based on National Natality Surveys with population weights. No state FE included.
Regressions for 1990, 2000 and 2006 based on vital statistics data. State FE included but results very similar if excluded.
Results for 2006 exclude controls for cigarette taxes because state identifiers excluded from the data.
However, results are nearly identical when cigarette tax is excluded for years 1969-2000.
                                                                      Table 9: Impact of Smoking on Birthweight and Gestation

                                                Birthweight (grams)                                    LBW                         Gestation (weeks)            Premature
Panel A: Smoker                          OLS              OLS             FE                    OLS             FE                 OLS             FE       OLS             FE
Smoker                               -187.105         -174.905         -58.171                 0.059          0.015              -0.254         -0.247     0.021          0.033
                                      [7.052]         [13.944]        [32.936]               [0.008]         [0.020]            [0.083]        [0.256]   [0.008]        [0.023]
Maternal education                      9.293           10.082                                -0.003                             -0.024                   -0.001
                                      [1.584]          [3.287]                               [0.002]                            [0.020]                  [0.002]
Ln(family income in $1000)             26.994           34.696          15.897                -0.004          0.001               0.155          0.187    -0.017         -0.016
                                      [7.137]         [15.046]        [20.178]               [0.008]         [0.014]            [0.097]        [0.176]   [0.010]        [0.016]
Married                                 8.592            28.08         -23.474                -0.028          0.026              -0.125         -0.508    -0.002          0.05
                                      [9.665]         [21.399]        [37.516]               [0.012]         [0.023]            [0.138]        [0.276]   [0.013]        [0.028]
White                                   9.706           52.445                                 0.003                             -0.451                    0.052
                                     [69.293]        [173.420]                               [0.054]                            [0.509]                  [0.034]
Black                                 -204.32          -168.69                                 0.061                             -1.605                    0.143
                                     [69.876]        [173.929]                               [0.055]                            [0.521]                  [0.035]
Hispanic                             -137.997         -158.692                                 0.108                             -1.926                    0.198
                                     [73.472]        [194.657]                               [0.081]                            [0.638]                  [0.065]
Asian                                 -279.99         -267.392                                -0.033                             -0.939                   -0.005
                                     [87.758]        [200.010]                               [0.064]                            [0.652]                  [0.042]
Maternal age                             1.19           -2.472         -51.507                 0.003           0.035             -0.015         -0.437    -0.001          0.029
                                      [0.797]          [1.802]        [15.989]               [0.001]         [0.010]            [0.010]        [0.114]   [0.001]        [0.010]
Male                                  116.485          120.436        137.983                 -0.034          -0.037             -0.238         -0.088     0.021          0.016
                                      [6.458]         [11.847]        [15.004]               [0.007]         [0.010]            [0.075]        [0.114]   [0.008]        [0.011]
Birth Order                            18.721           22.717          41.068                   0            -0.008             -0.036         -0.059     0.006          0.003
                                      [2.081]          [4.502]        [15.264]               [0.003]         [0.009]            [0.026]        [0.117]   [0.003]        [0.010]
Observations                           46907            16483           16493                 16901           16912              16840          16851     16840          16851
R-squared                                0.08             0.08           0.81                  0.03            0.71               0.04           0.69      0.04            0.7


Panel B: Cigarettes per Day
Cigarettes per day                   -20.615         -20.371          -12.398                 0.007           0.003              -0.031         -0.028    0.002          0.003
                                     [0.870]         [1.660]          [3.996]                [0.001]         [0.002]            [0.010]        [0.029]   [0.001]        [0.003]
Cigarettes per day squared            0.324           0.331            0.213                    0               0                 0.001          0.001      0              0
                                     [0.027]         [0.049]          [0.095]                [0.000]         [0.000]            [0.000]        [0.001]   [0.000]        [0.000]
Observations                          46907           16483            16493                  16901           16912              16840          16851     16840          16851
R-squared                              0.09            0.09             0.81                   0.04            0.71               0.04           0.69      0.04           0.7


Panel C: Heavy Smoking
1-10 Cigarettes per Day              -127.738        -104.842          -43.618                 0.04            0.01              -0.122          -0.22    0.014          0.034
                                      [8.135]        [15.905]         [32.570]               [0.009]         [0.020]            [0.100]        [0.257]   [0.010]        [0.023]
11-20 Cigarettes per Day             -268.549        -269.061         -126.574                0.088           0.037               -0.46         -0.357    0.034           0.03
                                      [9.978]        [19.513]         [46.332]               [0.011]         [0.029]            [0.111]        [0.363]   [0.011]        [0.033]
>20 Cigarettes per Day               -272.429        -257.716         -121.178                0.074           0.013              -0.335         -0.413    0.022          0.009
                                     [17.551]        [31.006]         [70.163]               [0.017]         [0.048]            [0.180]        [0.514]   [0.017]        [0.049]
Observations                           46907          16483             16493                 16901           16912              16840          16851     16840          16851
R-squared                               0.09           0.09              0.81                  0.03            0.71                0.04           0.69     0.04            0.7
Robust standard errors in brackets
                              Table 10: Impact of Smoking on Birthweight: Comparison of OLS, FE and IV Estimates

Panel A: Cigarettes per Day                           OLS         OLS             FE          First Stage        IV     First Stage        IV
Cigarettes per day                                  -11.64      -11.74          -3.661                        -18.563                  -15.634
                                                   [0.340]     [0.593]         [1.338]                        [2.345]                 [11.522]
Maternal education                                   7.399       6.732                          -0.302         6.847      -0.295         5.917
                                                   [1.420]     [2.667]                         [0.120]        [8.403]    [0.024]       [4.505]
Ln(family income)                                   24.143      29.692          4.295           -0.551        -38.424       0.26        25.148
                                                   [6.298]    [12.152]        [15.315]         [0.618]       [42.238]    [0.090]       [6.942]
Maternal age                                        -0.273      -3.661         -72.927           0.054         1.036      -0.033        -0.412
                                                   [0.863]     [1.588]        [12.160]         [0.069]        [4.747]    [0.012]       [0.952]
Birth Order                                         21.177      26.573          46.648           0.026         14.783       0.39         22.74
                                                   [1.837]     [3.457]         [9.683]         [0.161]       [11.001]    [0.026]       [4.869]
Male                                                110.77     101.047        118.141           -0.592        138.511      0.042       110.937
                                                   [5.970]    [10.690]        [11.316]         [0.494]       [33.856]    [0.085]       [5.999]
Married                                              5.248      13.395                          -2.089        -18.625     -2.462        -4.593
                                                   [8.384]    [16.696]                         [1.073]       [73.971]    [0.119]      [29.598]
White                                              132.277     103.258                           0.333         6.098       4.513       150.463
                                                  [30.906]    [62.132]                         [3.227]      [220.824]    [0.442]      [60.904]
Black                                             -122.461    -166.249                           -3.63       -287.494     -0.315      -123.592
                                                  [31.850]    [63.557]                         [3.291]      [225.217]    [0.456]      [32.068]
Hispanic                                           -15.952     -20.682                                                    -1.773       -23.156
                                                  [35.036]    [74.448]                                                   [0.501]      [40.782]
Post 1964                                          -30.818     -20.965           8.9            -0.033      -147.534       1.961       -32.367
                                                  [12.450]    [21.929]        [21.869]         [0.982]      [67.181]     [0.424]      [13.248]
Birth year                                         -35.019     -26.287         50.705            1.694        -44.01       0.351       -33.514
                                                   [7.944]    [14.656]        [19.626]         [0.775]      [53.087]     [0.114]       [9.064]
Birth year squared                                   4.252       3.188          0.588           -0.167         6.403      -0.025         4.142
                                                   [0.986]     [1.828]         [1.875]         [0.091]       [6.197]     [0.014]       [1.037]
Cotinine(ng/ml)                                                                                  0.093
                                                                                               [0.003]
Education*post 1964                                                                                                       -0.216
                                                                                                                         [0.036]
Observations                                       42238       15126           15160             859          859         42397        42238
R-squared                                           0.07        0.07            0.76             0.54         0.11          0.1         0.07


Panel B: Smoker                                      OLS        OLS              FE           First Stage      IV       First Stage       IV
Smoker                                            -187.105    -174.905         -58.171                      -462.589                   -311.829
                                                   [7.052]    [13.944]        [32.936]                      [60.473]                  [231.128]
cotinine(ng/ml)                                                                                 0.004
                                                                                               [0.000]
Education*post 1964                                                                                                       -0.011
                                                                                                                         [0.002]
Observations                                       46907       16483           16493             859          859         42397        42238
R-squared                                           0.08        0.08            0.81             0.38         0.04         0.06         0.06
Standard errors in brackets
Sample                                               Full      Sibling         Sibling         Cotinine     Cotinine       Full         Full
                Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: National Collaborative Perinatal Project 1959-1966

                                                                Full Sample                            Sibling Sample
                                                             mean        Std dev                     mean         Std dev
Maternal Characteristics
Maternal education (years)                                  10.86           2.55                   10.82           2.39
HS Drop out                                                  0.52                                   0.53
HS graduate                                                  0.33                                   0.35
Some college                                                 0.09                                   0.07
College +                                                    0.06                                   0.05
SRA Rank Quotient (IQ)                                      89.77           19.86                  90.28           19.62
Family income (in 2007 $)                                 $   27,200    $     15,050             $   27,570    $     14,270
Married                                                      0.80                                   0.84
White                                                        0.49                                   0.52
Black                                                        0.43                                   0.44
Hispanic                                                     0.07                                   0.03
Asian                                                        0.00                                   0.00
Maternal age                                                24.20           4.56                   24.23           4.47
male                                                         0.51                                   0.51           0.50
Birth order                                                  2.72           2.21                    3.16           2.12

Smoking Variables
Smoker                                                        0.48                                    0.49
Cigarettes per Day                                            6.07          9.31                      6.44         9.46
Cigarettes per Day conditional on Smoking                    12.70          9.80                     13.10         9.70

Birth Outcomes
Birth weight                                                 3108           660                      3080          706
Gestation (weeks)                                            38.68          4.83                     38.38         5.18
Low Birth Weight                                              0.12                                    0.14

Observations                                                  50142                                 17530
note: Sample excludes all women less than 19 at time of birth
                                      Appendix Table 2A: OLS Regressions of Birth Weight on Smoking and Cotinine

                                                                                      Birthweight                                           Cigarettes per day
                                                              (1)              (2)                  (3)          (4)                                (5)
Positive cotinine                                          -178.006
                                                           [53.507]
Smoker                                                                      -211.383
                                                                            [40.992]
Ln(cotinine)                                                                                   -97.373
                                                                                               [18.207]
Ln(cigarettes per day)                                                                                        -115.568
                                                                                                              [28.115]
cotinine(ng/ml)                                                                                                                                   0.093
                                                                                                                                                 [0.007]
Cotinine*LBW                                                                                                                                     -0.006
                                                                                                                                                 [0.016]
LBW                                                                                                                                               1.562
                                                                                                                                                 [1.643]
Observations                                                 970               968                  526         524                                968
R-squared                                                    0.08              0.1                  0.13        0.11                              0.53

Sample                                                        Full             Full            Smokers        Smokers                              Full




                                               Appendix Table2B: Impact of Cotinine on Birthweight Stratified by Maternal Characteristics

                                                             <HS              >=HS                              Poor          Non-Poor                           Low SES    High SES
Ln(cotinine)                                               -96.524            -82.1                           -108.251         -77.461                           -90.473      -83.6
                                                           [17.472]         [13.859]                          [23.238]        [12.967]                           [19.249]   [12.972]
Observations                                                 342               506                              268              580                               380         468
R-squared                                                    0.22              0.15                             0.22             0.15                              0.19        0.17
Robust standard errors in brackets
Also included were controls for maternal education, race, age, marital status, offspring birth order, gender, AMC attending and linear term in year of birth.
                  Figure 1A: Trends in Maternal Smoking
                               by Education
     0.6
    0.55
     0.5
    0.45
     0.4
    0.35
     0.3
              1959      1960      1961      1962       1963      1964      1965      1966

                                           <HS         >=HS




             Figure 1B: Trends in Cigarettes per Day
                          by Education
8
7
6
5
4
3
           1959      1960      1961      1962      1963       1964       1965       1966

                                         <HS         >=HS



             Figure 1C: Trends in Maternal Smoking
    0.6                                                                                    8
0.55                                                                                       7
    0.5
                                                                                           6
0.45
                                                                                           5
    0.4
0.35                                                                                       4

    0.3                                                                                    3
             1959     1960      1961     1962      1963       1964      1965      1966

                                  Smoker           Cigarettes/Day

Sample: women ages 19-34
            Fig 2A: Cigs/Day by Cognitive Ability
 8
 7
 6
 5
 4
 3
 2
 1
 0
         1960      1961           1962        1963         1964          1965

                                  high IQ     low IQ




                Fig 2B: Cigs/Day by Income
     8
     7
     6
     5
     4
     3
     2
     1
     0
         1959   1960       1961     1962      1963      1964      1965     1966

                                   non poor      poor


Sample: women ages 19‐34
                                Fig 3A: Education Gradient in Smoking Over Time
                                0                                                                     0
                           -0.005      1969     1980            1990              2000     2006
                                                                                                      -0.1
  Probability of Smoking




                            -0.01




                                                                                                             Cigarettes/Day
                                                                                                      -0.2
                           -0.015
                                                                                                      -0.3
                            -0.02
                                                                                                      -0.4
                           -0.025
                            -0.03                                                                     -0.5

                           -0.035                                                                     -0.6

                                                       Smoker          Cigs/Day




                                    Fig 3B: Education Gradient in Smoking and
                                              Birthweight Over Time
                           14                                                                     0
                           12                                                                     -0.005




                                                                                                             Smoking (probability)
  Birthweight (grams)




                           10                                                                     -0.01
                            8                                                                     -0.015
                            6                                                                     -0.02
                            4                                                                     -0.025
                            2                                                                     -0.03
                            0                                                                     -0.035
                                    1969      1980        1990                 2000      2006

                                                         BW            Smoke

Note: Each point represents a coefficient estimate on education in a regression in which
the outcome is either an indicator for smoking, the number of cigarettes smoked per day
or birth weight. Other covariates listed in Table 7 also included.
