                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              A DISAGGREGATED, STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
               OF RETIREMENT BY RACE, DIFFICULTY
                       TO WORK AND HEALTH


                        Alan L. Gustman

                      Thomas L. Steinmeier



                     Working Paper No. 1585




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          March 1985




The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from
the U.S Department of Health and Human Services to the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank Olivia
Mitchell for her comments. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Labor Studies and project in
Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or of any
agency of the United States Government.
                                                  NBER Working   Paper ft 1585
                                                  March 1985




                   A Disaggregated, Structural Analysis
                    of Retirement by Race, Difficulty
                            of Work and Health



                                 ABSTRACT




        Intergroup differences in retirement rates by race, major occupation

and health status are examined and allocated to differences in budget sets

and indifference curve parameters. In addition, comparisons indicate that

average retirement rates for groups may, at times, be misleading indicators

of marginal responses to incentives. It is predicted that all groups will

respond to the work incentives in the 1983 Social Security Amendments, even

those ill health and difficult jobs, and the resulting increases in earnings

are predicted to amount to from one sixth to over one half of the reduction

in lifetime benefits created by the amendments.




Alan L. Gustman                                   Thomas L. Steinmeier
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                 Texas Tech University
Hanover, NH 03755                                 Lubbock, TX 191409
(603) 616—2641                                    (806) 7142—2203
                                I.    Introduction

     There has been continuing interest is explaining intergroup differences in

labor market outcomes between blacks and whites, between those in different

occupations, and among other groupings. Given the recent advances in structural

estimation, it is now feasible to approach the analysis of intergroup

differences in labor market outcomes in conventional economic terms, with some

portion of the difference attributed to divergent market opportunities between

the groups and another portion attributed to divergent preferences. A major

purpose of this paper is to contribute to this approach to analyzing intergroup

differences in labor market outcomes. Specifically, we will examine differences

in retirement rates between blacks and whites and between those in more and less

physically demanding jobs, and we will use maximum likelihood techniques to

assess to what degree these differences are due to divergent market

opportunities and to what degree they are due to divergent preferences among the

groups.

     There are two other motivations for this work. First, although there have

been important advances in the specification and estimation of structural

retirement models, these models have not been applied to analyze separately

retirement behavior by older black males.1 This is an important subject by

itself, and one which we hope to shed some light on in this study. Secondly,

Congress has demonstrated a concern that recent Social Security legislation

which has extended the retirement age and reduced the Social Security benefits

for those who retire early will adversely affect those who because of poor

health or physically demanding jobs are unable to adjust their dates of

retirement.2 In order to suggest whether or not these concerns are warranted,

the paper examines the differences in retirement behavior between those in more

or less physically demanding jobs and analyzes the reasons for these differences



                                     -3-
and their relation to health status.

     In the next section, descriptive statistics will be presented on the

probabilities of full-time work, partial retirement, and full retirement for

groups of older workers disaggregated by race, occupation and health status.

The following two sections describe a structural retirement model and present

separate estimates of the model for blacks and whites 1n more and less

physically demanding jobs. Section V presents the results of simulations which

assess how the explanation for differing retirement behavior among these various

groups can be divided between divergent opportunity sets and divergent

preferences. The next section, reflecting the Congressional concerns mentioned

above, examines the likely effects of the 1983 Social Security amendments on

individuals in poor health or holding the more physically demanding jobs.3 A

final section contains a summary, some caveats, and some indications of

directions in which further work might be useful.

     Among the findings of the study, three would appear to be of particular

interest. First, the large differences in rates of full-time labor force

participation observed between black and white males in their late fifties

narrow considerably with age, both proportionately and in absolute terms, with

the average rate of full—time work among older black males being only about two

percentage points lower than the rate for older white males. Secondly, the two

characteristics singled out by Congress, health status and occupation, do bear an

important relation to retirement outcomes. Those in physically demanding jobs

are 7 percentage points less likely to be working full—time than are those in

less physically demanding jobs, and those in poor health are over thirty

percentage points less likely to be working full-time than are those in good

health. Finally, the 1983 social security amendments contain a number of

provisions designed to increase work effort, especially by those over 65. The

analysis suggests that these incentives will produce little response among those


                                   —4—
under 65 but will produce relatively larger responses among those between 65 and

69. Even those with long term health limitations would respond to incentives,

although at half the rate of those in good health.   In addition average rates of

retirement do not always provide a reliable clue as to a group's marginal

response. In particular, those in more physically demanding jobs appear to be

about as responsive to incentives as those in less demanding jobs. These

behavioral responses are large enough to amount to one sixth to over one half

of the 11 to 14 percent reduction in social security benefits received over the

lifetime which would result from 1983 Social Security amendments if there were no

behavioral adjustments.




                          II. Descriptive Statistics

     This section presents some basic descriptive statistics relating to the

probability that an individual will be working full-time, the probability that

he will be partially retired, and the probability that he will be fully retired.

Let these three probabilities be denoted as P, P, and P respectively,

where a indicates the age of the individual. These retirement probabilities

are in turn calculated from a weighted average of the corresponding

probabilities for the eight groups of concern to us in this study, categorized

by race, physical difficulty of work, and health. Thus for retirement status s

we have:


                              pS3
                                ijkijkQijk
                                          5   5




where ijk is the probability of observing outcome s for those in race

with difficulty of work j, and with level of health k, and where for

notational convenience the age subscript has been suppressed. jk is the

corresponding weight in the population for that group.


                                  —5—
     Probabilities of falling into one of the three retirement categories are

presented in Table 1 for various groups, as calculated from the Retirement

History Survey (RHS).4 The measure of retirement used in this study is the

individual's self-reported retirement status.5 Jobs classified as more

physically demanding (MPD) include craftsmen, foremen and kindred workers,

operatives and laborers, while jobs classified as less physically demanding

(LPD) include professionals, managers, and clerical, sales and service workers.

Poor health is indicated by an individual's self—reported indication that for a

prolonged period of time (at least one year) he has experienced a health problem

that limits his ability to work.6 Alternative health measures which have been

suggested, such as subsequent mortality (Parsons 1982), introduce other errors,

and the direct use of medical data rather than self-reported health status both

requires some procedure for matching health problems with the requirements of

particular jobs and in addition would preclude the use of longitudinal surveys

such as the RHS, surveys which contain other necessary information for analyzing

retirement.7 The probabilities presented in this table are based on a set of

data which, after eliminating the self—employed, pools all responses for males

in the RHS, not distinguishing either on the basis of the individual's age in

the initial survey year, 1969, or on the basis of date of the survey wave.

     The first panel of the table reports the aggregate retirement rates for the

RHS, along with a breakdown by narrower age categories. The rapid decline in

full-time work and the corresponding increase in full retirement during the 60-

70 year age range are both readily apparent from these data. Even by age 65,

the majority of individuals have stopped working full-time and have retired.

The importance of partial retirement, especially after age 65, is also evident.

In fact, after age 65 there are more individuals who are partially retired than

there are working full-time.


                                   —6-
     The second through fourth panels present three sets of differences between

contrasting groups. Black-white differentials in retirement rates are

summarized -in the second panel, and these figures reveal an interesting finding.

Although there are clear indications of the substantial differences in

nonparticipation rates between black and white males in younger age groups,

differences which have been emphasized by other authors (eq., see Parsons,

1980), the black-white differences in rates of full-time participation decline

with age, both absolutely and as a proportion of the level of full-time

participation observed for the sample. Overall, blacks in this survey were two

percent less likely than whites to be working full-time, and correspondingly

more likely to be fully retired or partially retired.

     The importance for retirement outcomes of the two characteristics singled

out by Congress, difficulty of work and health status, are readily apparent in

the third and fourth panels of the table.    Those in demanding jobs are 7,0

percentage points less likely to be working full time, 3.6 percentage points

less likely to be working part time, and thus 10.6 percentage points more likely

to be retired than are individuals in jobs that are less physically demanding.9

Moreover, difficulty of work bears a stronger and stronger relation to

retirement as an individual moves from his late 50's through his 60's.

     From the fourth panel, poor health is associated with a higher probability

of retirement, increasing this probability by 28 percentage points on average.

Poor health is also associated with a 2 percentage point increase in the

probability of partial retirement and correspondingly is associated with a

reduction in the probability of full-time work by 31 percentage points. Prior

to age 65, poor health depresses full-time work by a roughly constant amount,

and thereafter the effect diminishes in absolute terms but not so much relative

to the level of full-time participation. With regard to partial retirement,



                                   -7
those in poor health are more likely than those in good health to be partially

retired during the late 50's and early 60's, but after that age the situation is

reversed. It should be noted that in these descriptive statistics we do not

distinguish between those in poor health who are and are not receiving disability

payments, but those receiving SSDI payments are distinguished in our later

empirical analysis.

          Interactions are also quite important, as can be inferred from the last

panel of the table. Blacks in good health who hold physically demanding jobs

are 5 percentage points more likely than comparably situated whites to be

working full-time, and are 8 percentage points more likely if they hold less

physically demanding jobs. On the other hand, blacks in poor health are less

likely than whites to be working full-time, by 3.5 and 4.8 percentage points

respectively.        In other words, poor health is associated with a larger

reduction in the probability of working full-time for blacks than for whites,

and a corresponding increase in the probabilities of full and partial

retirement, even controlling for differences in job mix between blacks and

wh it e


          Differences in retirement outcomes between blacks and whites not only

reflect differences between those in the same occupation and with similar health

status, but they also arise because blacks have a much higher probability than

do whites of holding jobs that are more physically demanding to perform and also

have a much higher probability of having a long term health problem that limits

ability to work. Analogously, differences in retirement behavior between those

in more difficult and less difficult jobs and between those in poor and good

health reflect differences in the composition of each broad group. These

differences can be seen in the data in Tables 2 and 3. Table 2 indicates the

relevant weights in the sample for each of the eight groups defined by race,

difficulty of work and health status, and relevant conditional percentages for


                                        -8-
these weights are reported in Table 3. From these data it is clear that

disaggregating the estimation of relevant behavioral functions as we do here is

an exercise that may help us to understand better what determines retirement

behavior of older Americans in the aggregate, as well as the separate retirement

behavior of those falling into each of the eight groups mentioned above.


                                  III. The Model

     In order to analyze further the reasons for differences in retirement

probabilities observed in Tables 1 and 2, and to facilitate an analysis of the

effects of the 1983 Social Security reform on those in difficult jobs and in

poor health, a separate structural model of retirement behavior is specified and

estimated for each race—occupation group, with health status being allowed to

affect both the utility function and the opportunity set. Each individual is

presumed to be trying to maximize a lifetime utility function of the form


                          U =          u[C(t),   L(t), t] dt


where C(t)    is consumption at time t, L(t) is leisure at time t, and T

is the relevant time horizon over which the maximization is done. This utility

function is maximized with respect to consumption, leisure, and work effort

subject to the lifetime budget constraint


                      f e[Y(t) - C(t)]           dt +
                                                        A0
                                                             =   o



where A0     is initial assets, Y(t)      is compensation at time t (including any

increments to the present value of Social Security and pension benefits), and r

is the real interest rate.      Y(t) and L(t) take on values of YF(t) and L0,

respectively, if the individual chooses full—time work; otherwise, they take on

values of Yp[Hp(t)] and 1 -      Hp(t).      respectively, where Hp(t) is the amount

of labor supplied to the partial retirement job and is restricted to be less


                                       -9—
than       1 —
                 L0    Yp[.] is the function relating partial retirement work effort

to compensation and reflects the effects of Social Security and pension rules on

compensation, given the actual wage rate.

       The utility function used in the empirical work is of the following CES

specification:


                  u[C(t), L(t), t] =    sign(k){[C(t)]k        +
                                                                   [exp(x+e)][L(t)]k}

where Xt is a vector of explanatory variables which affect the relative weight

of leisure in the utility function at time t and b is the associated vector

of parameters which is presumed to be constant across both time and individuals.

k (with k <= 1) is a time-invariant stochastic term defining the curvature of

the indifference curves for each individual.               It is presumed to come from the

exponential distribution


                               f(k) =    exp[-g(1   -
                                                        k)],       k <= .1

where g is a positive parameter defining the distribution. e is a time—

invariant stochastic term reflecting the relative weight that the individual

places on leisure, and it is assumed to be distributed normally with the

parameters N(pk, s), with the parameter p providing a means by which k and

e may be correlated. In this specification, which follows that used by Gordon

and Blinder, the within-period elasticity of substitution is calculated as n =

1/(1   -
            k).
       In this model ,     the time—varying elements of Xt cause the individual to
place an increasing weight on the leisure term in the utility function as he

grows older. During the first part of the life cycle, the individual values

leisure relatively little, and he will find it advantageous to work full—time

and to spend the income on current or future consumption. At some point in

time, however, the weight on leisure will grow sufficiently that it no longer


                                            -10-
pays the individual to work full-time. The age at which this happens depends in

part on the value of stochastic term e; for otherwise identical individuals, a

person with high value of e will quit full-time work at an earlier age than a

person with low value of e, Whether the individual works part-time or retires

completely at this point depends on the value of the second stochastic term, k.

If an individual has a high value of k, which implies that his elasticity of

substitution between leisure and consumption is high, then he is unlikely to

find part—time work at a reduced wage a very attractive alternative relative to

complete retirement. For an individual with a lower elasticity of substitution

between consumption and leisure, part-time work may be much less onerous than

full—time work, and this individual will find the opportunity to work part—time

more than offsets the fact that part-time wages are lower. Eventually though,

the increasing weight on leisure in the utility function will cause even this

individual to retire completely.

     A number of caveats are in order regarding this model. First, the model

takes as given whether an individual initially chose a more phyically demanding

or a less demanding job and does not try to analyze the reasons for this choice.

In terms of the model itself, each individual is given only one full—time

compensation path YF(t) and one part-time compensation function Y[.] rather

than a choice of two different sets of paths associated with more or less

physically demanding work. This limitation implies that the model cannot be

used to analyze the effects on retirement behavior that may result from

individuals in more demanding jobs taking less demanding jobs instead, and vice

versa." A second caveat is that the model assumes perfect foresight. The

difficulty of estimating a structural model is increased very substantially when

uncertainty is introduced even in a very simple way, so we leave further

extension of the model in this direction to future work. It is partly for this



                                   -11-
reason and partly because of the problem of inferring the unhealthy individuals

self assessment of the chances that he will eventually be determined to be

eligible for benefits that the model does not incorporate the uncertainty

associated with the eligibility determination process and with the waiting period

of the DI program. The sum and substance of these limitations is that the

parameters estimated for the utility functions will not be entirely clean and may

be subject to such major changes in the very long term as those produced when mix

of more demanding vs. less demanding jobs adjusts to changes in the opportunity

sets. Nevertheless, the parameter estimates we obtain should provide a first

approximation of individual responses of those in each group to changes brought

about by Social Security reform, pension regulation, laws governing mandatory

retirement, and other related changes.


                            IV. Empirical Estimates

     The parameters of the model are the elements of the vector b plus the

parameters g, Se and p which characterize the distribution of the

stochastic terms. In order to estimate these parameters, it is necessary to

impute values for x and for the compensation paths. Because of the complexity

of the computations during the estimation procedure, the number of elements in

x was kept to a minimum which includes a constant term, age, health status and

vintage. The imputation of the compensation paths from the available data makes

for a tedious discussion and is relegated to a data appendix. The essential

idea of the imputations is to use whatever wage observations are available for

the individual to infer the height of the compensation profile and to use

estimated wage equations to provide the shape of the profile over time. At

least one actual observation for full-time work was required for each individual

in the sample so that at least the height of the overall full-time profile was

based on something other than imputed information.



                                   -12-
     The formulation of the likelihood function for the model has been discussed

in detail elsewhere (Gustman and Steinmeier, l983a), and that discussion will

not be repeated here. The essential idea of the estimation procedure is that

the observed retirement sequence places limits on the possible values of k and

e for each individual, given the parameter values and the compensation path for

that individual, and the procedure chooses parameter values so as to maximize

the probability that the stochastic variables will lie within the prescribed

region.

     The estimation procedure was carried out separately for the four groups

defined by the black/white and the more/less physically demanding job

dichotomies. The resulting parameter estimates from the model are presented in

Table 4, with standard errors indicated in parentheses below each figure. As

can readily be seen, most of the parameters with the exception of the

coefficient of vintage are highly significant at standard levels. Table 5

presents the results of chi—square tests for the equality of various pairs of

coefficient sets. This is in essence a test of whether the parameter estimates

for the four groups are significantly different from one another. The estimates

for blacks and whites, whether in more or less demanding jobs, are significantly

different from one another at much better than a 1% significance level. The

estimates for more vs. less demanding jobs are significantly different for

whites at the 1% level but for blacks only marginally significant at the 5%

level. A glance at Table 4 suggests that the sharpest differences among the

groups is between whites in more demanding jobs and the other three groups, and

the chi—square statistics are indeed higher for comparisons involving this

group, even considering that this group has relatively more observations.

     In interpreting what differences between these coefficient sets mean, it

is important to keep in mind that the differences can arise from two distinct

sources with different implications. First, since the groups are doing


                                  -13-
different kinds of jobs, the disutility of each additional hour of work will in

general be different for the various groups, and this disutility may be affected

in different 1iays among the groups by such factors as age and health. This is

obviously true for the groups with more vs. less physically demanding jobs. But

it may also be true for blacks vs. whites, since for example within the

physically demanding job group blacks may have the most demanding jobs (see

footnote 10). Secondly, the underlying tastes for work may vary among the

groups, and this can also affect the parameter values. For the black/white

dichotomy these differences may be regarded simply as distinctions among groups,

while for the more/less demanding job dichotomy the differences in underlying

tastes may have their origins in a self-selection process during the time people

choose their occupations. The expectation would be that people with more of a

distaste for physically demanding work would sort themselves into occupations in

which they will not encounter it, and oppositely for individuals with less of a

distaste for that kind of work. The parameter values for the various groups

reflect both of these factors, namely the actual difficulty of the group's work

and the preferences of the group for demanding or undemanding jobs, and it will

not be possible to separate these two factors without a considerably more

complicated model which explicitly looks at the sorting process by which

individuals choose the type of work they do.

     In looking at the specific parameter estimates, four of the parameters are

of particular interest. The central parameter of the model is b1, the

coefficient for age, since the greater the value of this parameter, the faster

the disutility of work will be growing with age and the less responsive will the

retirement decision be to any kind of economic incentives. Among the four

groups, the value of b1 varies considerably but not excessively, and there—is

no obvious pattern. A second important parameter is 5e with measures the



                                   -14-
dispersion of tastes for work and leisure. Of particular significance is the

value of this parameter relative to b1, since this ratio may be thought of as

the number of years that it takes for an individual's disutility of work to

increase by an amount representing one standard deviation of the dispersion of

tastes.   In this sense, the major pattern in the figures would appear to be that

blacks have more dispersed tastes for work than do whites in the corresponding

class of jobs.

     The third parameter of interest is b2, the coefficient of the poor health

indicator. This parameter can be interpreted relative to b1 in much the same

way as was Se, and again it would appear that the estimated impact of poor

health is greater for blacks than for whites in the same class of jobs. (Notice

that the health indicator is not interacted with age, so ill health increases

once and for all the disutility of work, but does not further affect the shape

of the relation between age and disutility of work within any of the four groups

considered.) The final parameter of importance is g, which governs the

distribution of the elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure

in the utility function. The higher the value of this parameter, the more

concentrated will be preferences in inelastic values of the substitution

elasticity. As is readily evident from the first line of the table, all the

groups have relatively similar values of this parameter except for whites in

more difficult jobs, who appear to have more elastic preferences between

consumption and leisure. This has two expected consequences for retirement

behavior. First, for any given set of compensation paths, this group would be

expected to enter partial retirement less frequently. And secondly, the higher

substitution elasticities imply that a uniform upward shift in the lifetime

compensation streams will have less of a negative effect on retirement for this

group than for other groups.




                                   -15--
           V. Using The Model To Analyze Differences In Retirement Rates

       In order to gain insight into what underlies the observed differential in

the retirement rates between two groups, there is a natural exercise which is

suggested by the model.          It is possible to ask what part of the difference in

labor market outcomes reflects the effects of differences in opportunity sets

and what part reflects differences in utility functions. More explicitly, let

u(.) represent the preference function appropriate for a particular group.

This preference function reflects both the effects of the utility function

parameters in b and the parameters defining the distributions of the

stochastic error terms k and e for that group.                       Similarly, let o(.)

represent the opportunity set for that group, including both the compensation

streams F(t) and Yp[.] for the various individuals in the group and the

level of health of the individuals in the group. The retirement outcome for the

particular group can then be written as R[u(.),o(.)]. Using this notation, the

difference between, for example, the groups with more or less physically

demanding jobs may be written as R[u(m),o(m)] —                  R[u(l),o(l)],   or

R(m,m) -   R(l,l)   for short.

       In turn, this differential may be decomposed into the sum of two component

differentials, one resulting from differences in o(.) and the other from

differences in u(.) between the groups. Using the notation developed above,
                                                                                                -
they may be written, definitionally, as either [R(m,m)— R(m,l)] +                     [R(m,l)
R(l,l)]    or as [R(l,m) -       R(l,l)]   +    [R(m,m)   -
                                                              R(l,m)].   The first bracketed term

1i   both expressions represents the effect of the differences in o(.) between

the groups. In the first expression this difference is calculated using the

u(.) for those in more demanding jobs, while in the second expression the

calculation uses the u(.) of those in less demanding jobs. The second

bracketed term in each expression represents the effect of differences in u(.)

between the groups, this time calculated using the o(.) of those with less


                                               —16—
demanding jobs in the first expression and of those with more demanding jobs in

the second expression.


Retirement Differences According To Occupation

     The predicted values from the model for the differences in the

probabilities of observing each of the retirement outcomes between those in more

physically demanding vs less physically demanding jobs are reported in the first

line of Table 6. These predictions compare well with the corresponding

descriptive statistics in Table 1. Those differences were -0.070, -0.036, and

0.106 for the probabilities of nonretirernent, partial retirement and full

retirement respectively.

     The second and third lines of the table describe that part of the the

overall difference that can be accounted for by differences in the compensation

paths and in the health status between the two groups. The second line makes

this calculation using the utility function parameters for those in more

demanding jobs, while the third line uses the parameters for those in less

demanding jobs. The two calculations agree fairly well that a significant

fraction, but substantially less than half, of the overall difference can be

attributed to this source. The final two lines of the table show agreement that

the major part of the overall difference in retirement outcomes arises from

differences in the utility function parameters, regardless of whether the

calculation is done using the opportunity sets for those in more demanding or

less demanding jobs.

     In interpreting the results of this table, it should be kept in mind that

the second and third lines do not answer the hypothetical question: what would

be the result of taking individuals in more physically demanding jobs and giving

them less demanding jobs? They do answer the somewhat more restricted question:

what would be the result of taking these individuals and giving them the


                                   -17-
compensation streams arid the health levels of those in less physically demanding

jobs, but keeping the nature of work the same as it currently is? Similarly,

the last two lines answer the question: what is the combined effect of

differences in preferences and of differences in the difficulty of work between

the two groups? That these two effects are combined arises because both are

reflected in the same utility function parameters, and particularly in those

parameters which describe the disutility of work effort. With this

interpretation, the result that most of the difference in retirement behavior

between these two groups comes from the combined effect of preferences and job

difficulty, as opposed to compensation streams or health levels, appears quite

plausible.


Black—White Differences

     The first line of Table 7 reports on the simulated black/white differences

in retirement behavior. These differences compare with the observed values of

-0.020, 0.002, and 0.017 reported in Table 1. There is reasonably close

agreement between the simulated and observed differences for full—time work, but

there is a moderate discrepency for partial retirement, and to a lesser extent,

for full retirement. For either the simulated or the actual figures, however,

the central feature is that they are not very large, particularly in contrast to

corresponding figures in the 0.06 to 0.10 range for the more/less physically

demanding job comparison.

     The remainder of this table suggests that the mild black/white overall

differential is composed of two offsetting effects, at least as far as full-time

work and full retirement are concerned. From the second and third lines of the

table, the effects of the utility function parameters are to reduce full—time

work of blacks relative to whites by around 6 percentage points and to increase

both full and partial retirement. Such an effect could arise either from


                                   -18-
 stronger preferences of blacks for leisure or from the fact that within the

 broad job classifications, blacks have more physically demanding work. As noted

before, the model cannot distinguish between these two causes. Offsetting this

effect to some degree, the fourth and fifth lines of the table suggest that the

black compensation paths and health status encourage more full-time work and

less full retirement relative to those for whites. This last result is mildly

surprising and raises the natural question: what is it in the black opportunity

sets that would encourage them to work more than would the white opportunity

sets?

        Attempts to decompose the impact of the opportunity sets suggests that this

impact is itself the result of offsetting components. First, black health

levels are in general poorer than those of whites. Simulations investigating

the effect of health status operating both through wage levels and through the

vector x of explanatory variables in the model suggest that the differential

health status (including a differential SSDI eligibility rate) should reduce

full-time work of blacks by 4.2 percentage points relative to that of whites.

The major offsetting effect to this appears to come from the fact that general

black compensation levels are substantially lower than for whites. Simulations

indicate that a 50% compensation advantage for whites would account for a 3.6

percentage point increase in full-time work effort by blacks relative to whites,

if measured using black utility function parameters, and a 1.7 percentage point

increase if measured using white utility function parameters.12 Further

offsetting effects come from Social Security and pensions; simulations suggest

that each of these increase black full-time effort by about 0.5 percentage point

relative to that of whites. From the simple sum of these components, it would

appear that the black opportunity sets should increase full-time work, relative

to white opportunity sets, by an amount ranging from -1.5 to 0.4 percentage



                                     —19-
points. The four effects discussed in this paragraph thus appear to be roughly

offsetting, leaving the net positive effect of black opportunity sets on full-

time work effort to be accounted for either by interactions among the four

separate effects or by other less obvious types of differences between black and

white opportunity sets.


                VI. Effects Of The 1983 Social           Reforms

     In this section, we simulate the effects of the changes in the Social

Security law in the long term by contrasting the steady state retirement

behavior which would be expected under the 1977 rules with the steady state

behavior which would be expected under all of the provisions ultimately called

for by the 1983 amendments. In the simulations, individuals are assumed to

count their spouse's benefits as if they were their own. Details of the

simulation procedure are reported in Gustman and Steinmeier (1983b). Two

important assumptions made in the simulation should be noted, however. First,

because the simulation is meant to address long—run steady state retirement

rates, it is assumed that each worker is employed in a covered job for 35 years.

Secondly, for the same reason it is assumed that there is no ceiling on covered

earnings. Thus the incentives for continued work which were observed for the

period of the 60' and 70's, which are based on replacing years of zero or low

maximum ($3000) covered earnings in an average monthly earnings calculation with

a relatively small number of years in the average, do not play the same strong

role in these simulations as they did in the earlier simulations, which used the

actual Social Security rules in place during the sample period.

    The 1983 legislation changed a number of elements of the Social    Security

system. The major provisions of the legislation considered include: (a) the

eventual increase in the age of normal retirement to 67, with the associated

increase in the penalty for retirement at age 62 to 30 percent, (b) the eventual



                                   -20-
increase in the delayed retirement credit to 8 percent per year for benefits

that are lost after the normal retirement age, (c) the reduction in the rate at

which benefits are lowered for earnings over the test amount to one dollar of

benefits foregone for every three dollars in earnings over the test amount (this

provision applies only to individuals over the normal retirement age), and (d)

the delay by six months in the inflation adjustment to benefit levels.'3

     The provisions of the 1983 law listed above would appear to have greatest

effect on those over 65. Our earlier work suggested that the major impact of

the new Social Security law operated through the increase in the delayed

retirement credit, which made the benefit structure approximately actuarially

fair, with noticeable effects from increasing the age of normal retirement. As

would be expected, our current simulations reflect this result for each of the

separate groups analyzed here. Work effort rises by two to three times as much

for 65 to 69 year olds as a result of this legislation as it does for the sample

weighted average of 58 to 72 year olds.'4

      Table 8 reports the absolute change in retirement rates and the percentage

change which results for 65 to 69 year olds as a result of the 1983 legislation.

The 1983 reforms are seen to increase full—time work activities and reduce the

rates of both partial and full retirement for all groups between 65 and 69.

These increases are substantial ,   corresponding to large proportionate increases
in full—time work effort by these older individuals. From these results, it

would appear that Congressional concern about inability of certain groups to

respond to increased work incentives is not always borne out. The reason is that

retirement levels for a particular group do not provide a reliable clue as to

responsiveness of retirement rates of the group to changes in retirement

incentives. For example, the increase in the percentage working full—time due to

the 1983 rules is at least as great if not greater among white males in more

physically demanding jobs than among white males in less physically demanding


                                     -21-
jobs despite the fact that percentage of those working in more demanding jobs is

less than the comparable percentage in less demanding jobs. Even among those in

poor health, who have a much reduced probability of working full-time, the

percentage increase in full-time work is comparable those in good health. In

terms of the absolute response, though, it appears those in poor health have

a third to over a half of the response to work incentives as those in good health.

     None of this means that after the 1983 reforms we can expect older workers

to return to the market in droves. The incentives create additional work effort

among exactly the age group that some feel should, in light of improving

longevity, be permitted, and indeed encouraged, to continue to work. It should

not be forgotten, however, that these work increases brought about by the act

are added to a low level of full-time work activity. The simulations indicate

that under the 1983 reforms the rates of full-time work for 65 to 69 year olds in

the same order for the categories as in Table 8 would be .238, .302, .089, .116,

 .292, .388, .135 and .151 respectively.

    In addition to their effect on labor force behavior, another important

question about the 1983 reforms is their effect on the incomes of older

Americans. The data in Table 9 address this issue. The first row of this table

indicates the net change in the present discounted value of Social Security

benefits for the group which can be expected under the 1983 rules, expressed as

a percentage of the expected benefits under the 1977 rules. For example,

whites in good health with more demanding jobs can be expected to lose

about 12.4 percent of the present value of their benefits under the new rules.

The second row of this panel indicates the amount by which increased work creates

additional labor earnings for the group, again expressed as a percentage of the

present value of the Social Security benefits. For whites in good health in more

demanding jobs, increased labor earnings should increase income by about 6.5



                                   —22-
percent of the present value of Social Security benefits, and hence the net

effect of the 1983 rules for this group will be to reduce total lifetime income

by about 5.9 percent of the present value of Social Security benefits. A roughly

similar story emerges for those in good health in less demanding jobs.     In

general, the net loss of income--a lost that clearly understates the welfare loss

to older individuals from reduced benefits because it ignores the value of

leisure—-is about 6 percent for those in good health and about 10-12 percent for

those in poor health.

     Within each group, those who retire after 65 will have a much milder loss of

income than those who retire before 65, for two reasons. First, the labor supply

response of individuals who are still working at 65 will be considerably

stronger, so most of the increase in labor earnings will he concentrated among

this group. Secondly, the fact that the new rules will be more actuarially fair

to this group will mitigate the general decline in the benefit structure under

the new rules. The fact that the income loss of those in poor health is higher

than for those in good health largely reflects the fact that a smaller percentage

of those in poor health are still working at 65.    In short, for those who would

have retired before age 65 under the 1977 rules, it is just as some in Congress

feared. Benefits are reduced proportionately more for this group, individuals in

poor health or in a more demanding job are more likely to have retired by this

age, and the incentives produce no counteracting increase in work effort.'5

However, for those who would have retired at 65 or later under the 1977 rules,

the incentive effects in the new law should work.

     A clear implication of this work is that ignoring the behavioral response

to incentives contained in the 1983 Social Security reforms will cause important

offsetting effects of these responses, counteracting the initial decline in

benefits, to be overlooked. Our model predicts that. increased earnings from

work responses eventually will amount from a sixth of the benefit reduction to


                                   -23-
more than half of the lifetime reduction in Social Security benefits. Thus as

in other areas of policy analysis (e.g. see Gustman, 1984), it is important in

the retirement area to include behavioral responses when analyzing the effects

of policy changes.


                               VII. Conclusions

     Disaggregation has provided useful information about the retirement

behavior of blacks and whites, those in more or less physically demanding jobs,

and those in good and poor health. We have been able to decompose the reasons

for these intergroup differences into those reflecting differences in budget

sets and those reflecting differences in estimated preference functions. Thus

we have been able to extend a standard type of study--the analysis of intergroup

differences in a labor market outcomes--by utilizing recent developments in the

econometric estimation of labor supply through the use of maximum likelihood

techniques. Moreover, this study has simulated the effects of recent Social

Security reforms on groups that Congress felt would be more adversely affected

by the reforms, groups that were of sufficient concern to Congress that they

mandated a study of this type. A number of these concerns are borne out by the

estimates, essentially because those in demanding jobs and in poor health are

more likely to retire early, and none of the incentives in the new law have

major effects for those under 65.   Interestingly, however, the analysis

indicates that average retirement rates for a group may prove to be a misleading

indicator of the group's marginal responses to policy change, and specifically

that the labor supply responses of those in demanding jobs to incentives to

postpone retirement are as large as the responses of those in less demanding

jobs. The simulation predicts that even those in poor health will exhibit a

response to incentives, one that is half as large as the response of those in

good health in absolute terms, and proportionately just as great. These labor


                                    —24-
supply responses are large enough to amount to from one sixth to one half of the

social security benefit reductions contained in the 1983 amendments.

     In considering these conclusions, several caveats which were mentioned

throughout the paper should be kept in mind. First, the measurement of health

status is a dichotomous variable based on the individual s self-response to a

question asking for health problems which limited work or housework, and such a

variable may be subject to considerable measurement error. Secondly, the

initial choice between a more or less physically demanding job is taken as

given, so that any change whose major impact operates through occupational

choice cannot be analyzed very well. Thirdly, the model employed in the

investigation assumes perfect foresight and is hence inappropriate for analyzing

the short—run effects of any changes. Finally, SSDI participation is not

explicitly modelled, both because the RHS contains little information which

would enable reasonable imputations of an individuals self-assessment of his

probability of being accepted into the program if he applied and because the

treatment of such participation would require explicitly incorporating the

disability determination process at the agency level. Despite these caveats,

the parameter estimates we obtain should provide a first approximation of

individual responses of those in each group analyzed o changes brought about by

Social Security legislation, pension regulation, laws governing mandatory

retirement, and other related changes.




                                  -25-
                                 Footnotes

1.   Structural analyses have been conducted in which both the utility
     function and the budget constraint are suitably specified for a life cycle
     model, replacing the single period specification utilized in earlier
     studies. Gordon and Blinder (1980) pioneered in the. estimation of a
     structural, life cycle retirement model. For recent efforts see Fields and
     Mitchell (1984), Burtless and Moffitt (1984) and Gustman and Steinmeier
     (1983a). Available structural analyses of retirement have not, however,
     analyzed seriously the differences in retirement behavior between black and
     white males and the reasons for these differences. There has been some
     effort to understand differences by race in labor force participation by
     middle aged and younger males. These latter analyses have has been
     concerned primarily with the impact of disability insurance on labor force
     participation. See, for example Leonard (1979 ), Parsons (1980b), Haveman
     and Wolfe (1982,1984a,1984b), and Halpern and Hausman (1984).

2.   The 1983 Social Security amendments require of the Secretary of Health
     and Human Services that:

          "The Secretary shall conduct a comprehensive study and analysis
          of the implications of the changes made by this section in
          retirement age in the case of those individuals (affected by such
          changes) who, because they are engaged in physically demanding
          employment or because they are unable to extend their working
          careers for health reasons may not benefit from improvements in
          longevity."

3.   The 1983 amendments to the Social Security Act contain a number of
     provisions which reduce benefits for future recipients below what was called
     for under previous legislation. Reducing benefits disturbed many
     Congressmen because of their special concern for those who retire early
     because ill health and/or the requirements of physically demanding jobs make
     adequate performance difficult or impossible once one advances beyond prime
     age. Indeed, it is concern for such individuals that led to the institution
     of early retirement benefits under Social Security in 1961. (See Staff
     Paper, Special Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate, "Social Security Disability,
     Past, Present and Future," March 1982, p. 32.)   Nevertheless, the changes
     brought about by the amendments, and especially the gradual increase in the
     age at which normal benefits are paid from 65 to 67, reduced benefits
     substantially for those retiring early. Some in Congress held out the hope,
     or at least the rationalization that despite the negative simple correlation
     in time series data between longevity and the typical age of retirement,
     that increasing longevity, together with the stronger work incentives
     incorporated in the 83 law, would eventually lead to an increase in work by
     older individuals, with resulting increases in their earnings offsetting
     benefit reductions from the new amendments.

4.   The Retirement History Study covers a sample of 11,153 individuals who
     were 58 to 63 year olds in 1969, and were surveyed biennially through 1979.
     For more information on this survey, see U.S. Department of Health,
     Education and Welfare, Social Security Administration, Office of Research
     and Statistics, Almost 65: Baseline Data From The Retirement History
     Study(Washington, D.C., GPO, 1976). To keep E descriptive stfftics on
     fffëãme basis as the later simulations, the average figures presented


                                   -26-
     pertain to 58 to 72 year olds. Including the 73 year olds in the social
     security simulations would have involved an extensive amount of additional
     programming.

5.   We have examined elsewhere the effects of using alternative measures of
     retirement status on the estimates obtained in reduced form retirement
     equations, for example the effects of classifying individuals as partially
     retired if they have experienced a fifty percent drop in either wages or in
     hours of work. The effect appears to be minor. (Gustman and Steinmeier,
     1984)

6.   In measuring the impact of health status on retirement, two issues may
     be noted. One is that measurement error in the health variable arises
     because individuals have incentives to misreport health status, both because
     some program benefits are conditioned on health status and because there may
     be some stigma attached to early retirement that is not brought about by a
     health problem, leading some to rationalize their behavior by exaggerating
     health problems. A second measurement issue arises because health is a
     choice variable that can be affected by deliberate investment activities
     (Eq., see Grossman ,1972, Menefee,1980, and Bartel and Taubman 1979). A
     direct implication is that instead of health status causing retirement, both
     may be jointly determined. Indeed, as Lee (1982) has demonstrated, the wage
     and health may be treated as jointly determined eridogenous variables.
     Although a complete analysis of the relation between health and retirement
     should probably treat investment in health, health status and the wages paid
     for full—time and part—time work as jointly determined outcomes, such an
     approach cannot be supported by the data and its requirements are beyond our
     current capabilities for econometric estimation.

7.   The questions which arise about the usefulness of timing of subsequent
     death as an indicator of current health status are closely related to the
     questions which arise in the debate about the nature of the relationship
     between advances in medicine, which increase longevity, and the health
     status of the surviving population. To be sure, advances in medicine make
     many older individuals more active than they otherwise would have been.
     However, some whose lives have been prolonged may be in relatively poor
     health. For further discussion see Haveman and Wolfe(1984a), Andrisanni
     (1977), Butler (1983), Feldman (1983), Kingson (1981, 1982, 1983) and Meyers
     (1982, 1983).

8.   Note that the two groups of occupations classified as more or less
     physically demanding differ in other ways than just in terms of difficulty
     of work. For example, the set of jobs labeled here as more physically
     demanding include blue collar jobs for which pension coverage is more
     likely. The effects of these and other differences between jobs on
     retirement behavior will be explored below. (See Quinn, 1978, for a reduced
     form analysis of the relation between nonpecuniary aspects of jobs and
     retirement rates.

9.   The relative differences are preserved when occupation on last job, or
     on longest job, is used instead of job held in 1969.

10. Although in this paper we treat blue collar jobs as "physically
     demanding," it is important to note that in the remaining set of jobs which
     they hold blacks also are likely to face tasks which are more physically


                                   -27-
    demanding. Specifically, 9% of the wage observations for whites pertain to
    those employed in service occupations, 22% of those for blacks do.
    Moreover, despite the fact that service occupations do not involve the kind
    of systematic pacing and repetitive activities of production work, some
    service jobs may be quite physically demanding. Over one third of whites
    are in professional, managerial, clerical arid sales occupations, while not
    quite 20% of blacks are. To the extent that within each broad occupational
    category blacks hold more difficult jobs than do whites, we will estimate a
    higher disutility of work for blacks than for whites. This will convey no
    information on relative preferences of each group for leisure, nonpecuniary
    aspects of jobs constant.

11. The use of only two broad occupational categories may mitigate some of
     these problems. The problems would be more severe if a number of narrow
     occupational categories were used.

12. The 3.6 figure was obtained from a simulation which increased the black
     compensation paths, both full-time and part—time, by 50%. The 1.7 figure
     was obtained from an analogous simulation in which the compensation paths
     for whites were lowered by 33.3%. The fact that the effect appears to be
     substantially lower using the white utility function parameters is probably
     due to the fact that the estimated distribution for k for whites in more
     physically demanding jobs favors a more elastic substitution between
     consumption and leisure, which would in turn reduce the size of a negative
     income effect on work effort.

13. Another provision of the amendments, the taxation of half of the
     benefits if total income exceeds a given income level, could not be
     simulated very well within the context of the present model. The given
     income level is high enough so that very few individuals in the sample would
     be affected on the basis of labor earnings alone, and the model is probably
     not very robust in terms of simulating non-labor income. For further
     discussion on this last point, see Gustman and Steinmeier (1985). Also,
     because the simulations use the compensation functions of the RHS cohorts,
     they may do less well in predicting labor market outcomes in future years
     for black males than for white males if the compensation opportunities have
     changed more for blacks than for whites.

14. The average increase for 58 to 64 year aids in the rate of full—time
     work associated with the 1983 reforms, whatever their occupation and health
     status, is never more than one—half of one percentage point. Those in poor
     health in this age range were seen in Table 1 to be about 37 percentage
     points less likely to be working full-time than were healthy individuals.
     Those in this age range who held demanding jobs were 4 to 9 percentage
     points less likely to be working full-time than were individuals in less
     physically demanding jobs.

15. Although those in poor health who retire before age 65 generally lose
     the most under the 1983 rules, those whose health is poor enough to qualify
     them for SSDI benefits should not lose much if anything. Those who qualify
     for SSDI benefits are eligible for the full primary insurance amount
     immediately, and the primary insurance amount calculation is not affected by
     the new rules (the general reduction in benefits is enforced instead through
     a later normal retirement age and an increased penalty for early retire-
     ment). Hence the benefits of those who receive SSDI are not adversely


                                  -28-
affected under the new rules. Indeed, the incentives to apply for SSDI are
clearly enhanced by the 1983 reforms, although greater stringency in
enforcement observed in recent years will counteract these incentives.




                             —29-
                                        Table 1

         Retirement Probabilities By Race, Difficulty of Work and Health
                             58 To 72 Year Old Males


                                        Not        Partially       Fully
                                      Retired       Retired       Retired

                                        By Age

           58   to   72                0.404         0.149         0.447
           58   to   61                0.811         0.064         0.126
           62   to   64                0.548         0.138         0.314
           65   to   69                0.173         0.197         0.630
           70   to   72                0.082         0.172         0.747


                Differences Between Groups By Age: Blacks - Whites

           58   to   72               —0.020         0.002         0.017
           58   to   61               -0.074         0.015         0.059
           62   to   64               -0.039         0.009         0.030
           65   to   69               -0.004        -0.004         0.007
           70   to   72               —0.004        —0.002         0.007


            Differences Between Groups By Age:      MPD Jobs - LPD Jobs

           58   to   72               —0.070        —0.036         0,106
           58   to   61               -0.043        -0.013         0.056
           62   to   64               —0.094        —0.016         0.111
           65   to   69               —0.096        —0.050         0.146
           70   to   72               -0.038        -0.068         0.106


         Differences Between Groups By Age:       Poor Health - Good Health

           58   to 72                 —0.306         0.022         0.284
           58   to 61                 -0.378         0.072         0.306
           62   to 64                 -0.366        -0.058         0.308
           65   to 69                 —0.159        —0.030         0.189
           70   to 72                 —0.082        —0.049         0.130


                                      E22
White,   MPD Job,     Good   Health    0.495         0.124         0.381
White,   LPD Job,     Good   Health    0.528         0.155         0.316
Black,   MPD Job,     Good   Health    0.548         0.144         0.308
Black,   LPD Job,     Good   Health    0.606         0.137         0.257
White,   MPD Job,     Poor   Health    0.178         0.136         0.685
White,   LPD Job,     Poor   Health    0.259         0.192         0.549
Black,   MPD Job,     Poor   Health    0.143         0.150         0.707
Black,   LPD Job,     Poor   Health    0211          0.191         0.789


                                         -30-
                                   Table 2

        Population Weights By Race, Difficulty of Work and Health


                        Good Health             Long Term Health
                                                      Probl em



 White, MPD Job            0.280                      0.180

 White, LPD Job            0.285                      0.162

 Black, MPD Job            0.032                      0.029

 Black, LPU Job            0.018                      0.013




                                   Table 3

       Conditional Percentages Calculated From Population Weights



Base Population       % Black         % in MPD Jobs       % with LT
                                                        Health Problem


   Blacks              100.0                 66.5                45.0
   Whites                0.0                 50.8                37.7

In MPD Jobs             11.7               100.0                 40.1
In LPD Jobs              6.4                 0.0                 36.6

In Good Health           8.2                 50.8             100.0
In Poor Health          10.7                 54.5               0.0




                                    -31-
                                       Table 4

                       Parameter Estimates of Utility Functions


                                            White                    Black

                                     MDJ             LDJ      MDL]             LDJ


g    parameter for distri-          0.781        0.543       0.478            0.546
        bution of k                (0.022)      (0.074)     (0.036)          (0.066)

       std. deviation               0.775        1.400       1.350            1.380
             of e                  (0.009)      (0.005)     (0.029)          (0.061)

p      correlation of             -11.270       —6.380      —6.160           —6.060
         k     and e               (0.070)      (0.041)     (0.137)          (0.261)


b0       constant                  —1.580       —6,650      -4.150           -1.940
                                   (0.064)      (0.152)     (0.138)          (0.225)

b1     coefficient of               0.160        0.230       0.210            0.160
             age                   (0.009)      (0.007)     (0.009)          (0.018)

b2     coefficient of               0.630        1.070       1.090            1.330
      health indicator             (0.060)      (0.217)     (0.144)          (0.239)

b3     coefficient of               0.050        0.090      —0.070           -0.010
      vintage measure              (0.024)      (0.049)     (0.057)          (0.085)


     median value of k              1.127           0.783    0.690            0.788
     calculated from g


number of                            510             366      281              129
observations

log likelihood                    -1251.58      —986.24     —753.83          -358.84




                                      -32-
                        Table 5

Tests for Equality Between Pairs of Coefficient Sets


        Coefficient                 Test
           Pairs                  Statistic

      White MDJ and                 42.70
        White LDJ

       Black MDJ and                 14.18
         Black LDJ

      White MDJ and                 97.96
         Black MDLI

      White LDJ and                 28.10
        Black LDJ


 Critical values:

      5% Significance               14.07

      1% Significance               18.48




                        -33-
                                  Table 6

           A Decomposition of Retirement Differences By
                      Occupation: Ages 58 to 72


                           Not              Partially    Fully
                         Retired             Retired    Retired

R(m,m) —   R(ll)         -0.060              -0.023        0.083

R(m,m) -   R(m,l)       —0.016               —0.008        0.023
R(l,m) -   R(l,l)       -0.008               -0.008        0.015

R(m,i) -   R(l,l)        -0.044              —0.017        0.060
R(m,m) —   R(l,m)        -0.052              -0.015        0.068




                                  Table 7

              A Decomposition of Black-White Differences
                   In Full Time Work: Ages 58 to 72


                           Not              Partially    Fully
                         Retired             Retired    Retired

R(b,b) - R(w,w)          -0.027               0.032     -0.005

R(b,w) - R(w,w)          -0,061               0.016        0.045
R(b,b) - R(w,b)          -0.056               0.029        0.026

R(b,b) - R(b,w)           0.034               0.016     —0.050
R(wb) - R(w,w)            0.029               0.003     -0.031




                                   —34-
                                              Table 8

           Changes in Retirement Probabilities for 65 to 69 Year Olds
                              Brought About By The
                         1983 Social Security Amendments


                           Good Health           Poor Health         Good Health                Poor Health
                            NIPD   Jobs           MPD Jobs            LPD Jobs                   LPD Jobs
                           Wh          Bl        Wh       Bl          Wh           31            Wh             Bi
Full—time Work            .074      .059        .032     .020        .056         .067          .031           .022
   %    change            45.1      24.3        56.1     20.8        23.7         20.9          29.8           17.1

Partial Retirement —.028 -.033                 -.010 -.006          -.031 —.049             -.016 -.010
   % change        -19.9 -.170                 -13.5 -5.3           -18.3 -18.6             -15.2 -6.2

Full Retirement        —.046 -.026             -.022 -.014          -.026 —.019             -.015          -
                                                                                                               .013
   % change            -6.6        -4.6        -2.5     -1.8        -4.4      -4.6          -1.9           -1.8




                                              Table 9

                    Changes in Lifetime Income Brought About
                       By 1983 Social Security Amendments
          (as a fraction of initial lifetime Social Security Benefits)


                          Good Health            Poor Health           Good Health                    Poor Health
                           MPD Jobs               MPD Jobs              LPD Jobs                       LPD Jobs

                      White        Black       White     Black        White         Black             White           Black
From:
                      -   .124                                        - .113
Social Security                    -.117        -.138    -   .140                   -    .114         -.134           -   .135

Labor Earnings            .065         .056      .030        .023          .050          .055             .030            .026


Net Effect            -   .059     -   .061                  .117                   - .059
                                               -.108     -            -
                                                                           .063                       -   .104        -   .109




                                              -35-
                                References

Andrisani, Paul 3. Health Limitations and Labor Market Experience During
     The Preretirement Years" in Seymour L. Wolfbein, editor, Men in The
     Pretirement Years, Philadelphia, Temple University, 1977, pp.'-T

Bartel, Ann and Taubman, Paul, "Health and Labor Market Success: The Role
     of Various Diseases," REStat, Feb. 1, 1979, LXI, No. 1, pp. 1-8.

Burtless, Gary and Moffitt, Robert A. "The Effects Of Social Security On
     The Labor Supply Of The Aged" in Henry Aaron and Gary Burtless,
     editors, Retirement And Economic Behavior, Brookings Institution,
     Washington, D.C., f94T

Butler, Robert N., "Current Data Inconclusive About Aged's Health and
     Work," Aging and Work, vol. 6, no. 3, 1983.

Feldman, Jacob 3., "Work Ability of the Aged Under Conditions of Improving
     Mortality," Aging and Work, vol. 6, no. 3, 1983.

Fields, Gary S. and Mitchell, Olivia S., Retirement, Pensions and Social
     Securit, MIT Press, forthcoming.

Gordon, Roger H. and Blinder, Alan S., "Market Wages, Reservation Wages
     andRetirement," Journal of Public Economics, vol. 14, 1980, pp. 277—
     308.

Grossman, Michael, The Demand For Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
     Investigation,flw York, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.

Gustman, Alan L., "Modeling Individual's Behavior: Evaluation of A Policy
     Maker's Tool," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Winter,
     1984, pp. 191-205.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L., "A Structural Retirement
     Model." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 1237,
     October, l983a.

Gustman, Alan L., and Steinmeier, Thomas L., "Social Security Reform and
     Labor Supply, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No.
     1212, October, 1983b.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L., " Partial Retirement and The
     Analysis of Retirement Behavior", Industrial and Labor Relations
     Review, vol. 37, April, 1984, pp.4fl3-4l5.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L., "The Effect of Partial
     Retirement on Wage Profiles of Older Workers," Industrial Relations,
     Spring, 1985.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeler, Thomas L., "The 1983 Social Security
     Reforms and Labor Supply Adjustments of Older Individuals In the Long
     Run," Journal of Labor Economics, April, 1985, (forthcoming.)



                                   —36—
Halpern, Janice and Hausman, Jerry. "A Model of Applications For the
     Social Security Disability Insurance Program," mimeo, March, 1984.

Haveman, Robert and Wolfe, Barbara, "Disability Transfers and the Work
     Effort Response of Older Males: A Reconciliation,' mimeo, 1982.

Haveman, Robert and Wolfe, Barbara, "The Decline In Male Labor Force
     Participation: Comment," Journal of Political Economy, June 1984(a),
     vol. 92, No. 3 pp. 532-541.

Haveman, Robert and Wolfe, Barbara, "Disability Transfers and Early
     Retirement: A Causal Relationship," Journal of Public Economics, vol.
     24, 1984(b), pp. 47-66.

Kingson, Eric R., "The Health of Very Early Retirees," Aging and Work, vol.
     4, no. 1, winter 1981, pp. 11—22.

Kingson, Eric R., "11—Critique Retirement Study Disputed," Aging and Work,
     vol. 5, no. 2, 1982, pp. 93—110.

Kingson, Eric, "Still More About Early Retirement," Aging and Work,    vol.   6,
     no. 2, 1983, pp. 111—116.

Lambririos, James, "Health: A Source of Bias in labor Supply Models,"
     Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1981, 206-212.

Lee, Lung-Fei, "Health and Wage: A Simultaneous Equation Model with
     Multiple Discrete Indicators," International Economic Review, vol. 23,
     No. 1, 1982, pp.199-221.

Leonard, Johnathan S., "The Social Security Disability Program and labor
     Force Participation," NBER Working Paper No. 392, August 1979.

Menefee, John, "The Demand for Health and Retirement," in Robert L. Clark,

     1980, piSTT
                                  —
     editor, Retirement Policy in an Aging _________
                                           Society, Durham, Duke Press,


Meyers, Robert J., "Health and Early Retirement Debate:  I - Why Do People
     Retire From Work Early?" Aging and Work, vol. 5, no. 2, 1982, pp. 83-
     92.

Meyers, Robert J., "More About the Controversy on Early Retirement Study,"
     Aging and Work, vol. 6, no. 2, 1983, 105-110.

Parsons, Donald 0., "The Decline In Male Labor Force Participation,"
     Journal of Political Eco, February 1980a, vol. 88, pp. 117-134.

Parsons, Donald 0., "Disability Insurance and Male Labor Force
     Participation: A Response to Haveman and Wolfe," Journal of Political
     Economy, vol. 92, no. 3, June 1984, pp. 542—549.

Parsons, Donald 0., "The Male Labor Force Participation Decision, Health,
     Reported Health and Economic Incentives," Economica, February 1982,
     vol. 49, pp. 81—91.



                                   -37-
Parsons, Donald 0., "Racial Trends in Male Labor Force Participation
     Decisions,' American Economic Review, December 1980, vol. 70, pp. 911-
    920.

Quinn, Joseph F., "Microeconomic Determinants of Early Retirement: A Cross
     Sectional View of White Married Men," The Journal of Human Resources,
     Summer, 1977, vol. XII, No. 3, pp. 3296

Sickles, Robin C. and Taubman, Paul, "An Analysis of Health and Retirement
     Status of the Elderly," mimeo, July, 1984.




                                   -38-
                                Appendix A

    The data base used in this study is the Retirement History Survey

(RHS), a random longitudinal sample of approximately 11,000 households.

Detailed questionnaires were administered to these households every two

years from 1969 to 1979. The study excludes female—headed households and

households in which the head was self—employed full—time in 1969, or if he

was not employed at that time, was self-employed in his previous job. The

study also excludes households if critical information is missing, although

a major effort is made to impute missing information if at all possible.

All remaining black households are included, but in order to produce

comparable sample sizes and to avoid an overwhelming computational burden,

only one in every five white households is included in the final sample

used in the estimation and simulation of the model

     The sample is divided into four distinct groups according to the

black/white dichotomy and the more/less physically demanding job dichotomy.

The job category is determined by the individual's occupation in a full-

time job in 1969, or in the last job if he was not employed full-time in

1969. For the estimation and simulations, it is necessary to calculate

three distinct types of information for each individual in the sample:     (i)

the compensation profiles for full- and part-time work, (ii) the

individual's retirement sequence, and (iii) the values for the variables

in the X vector. The compensation profiles, in turn, can be decomposed

into components due to wages, pension benefits, and Social Security

benefits. The major steps in the construction of the compensation profiles

and the retirement sequences are described in the following section.

          Profiles. The first step in constructing the wage profiles is to

estimate wage equations for the four groups. Then for each individual, the



                                   —1—
shape of the profile over time is inferred from the individuals work

history as reported in the survey, in combination with the estimated

coefficients of the experience, tenure, mandatory retirement horizon, and

long-term health problem variables in the appropriate wage equations. The

height of the resulting profile is adjusted to go through the center of

whatever wage observations are available for the individual. The process

is carried out separately for the full-time wage profile and the part-time

wage profile, and individuals are dropped from the sample unless at least

one actual full—time wage observation is available. This assures that at

least the overall height of the full—time profile is based on actual

information for the individual. For cases in which there are no

observations for part-time wages, the height of the part-time profile is

determined by the estimated equation.

     For full-time wages, separate equations are estimated for the part of

the profile over and under 55 years of age. This is done because the RHS

includes individuals who were at least 58 in the initial year, and any

projection of the profile before age 55 would necessarily rely on strong

assumptions about the functional form of the experience and tenure

variables. For that part of the profiles prior to age 55, equations are

estimated from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The wage

equations estimated from these two data sets are reported in Tables Al and

A2, respectively. All wages are deflated to 1967 levels using the index of

hourly earnings, so that these estimates are net of the effects both of

general price increases and productivity increases.'

     The form of the wage equations estimated from the PSID is reasonably

standard. When similar equations are estimated from the RHS, the tenure

and experience variables, both in quadratic and linear forms, imply a rate

of wage decline for blacks in less demanding jobs that is implausibly large


                                   —2—
as compared with the actual wage changes observed for those who held the

same job in successive surveys. Hence, a constraint is imposed in these

equations to force the sum of the experience and tenure effects to match

the average wage changes observed for individuals who held the same job in

successive surveys.

     Chow tests are performed on these equations to see whether separate

equations are needed for the four groups. For the RHS, tests for the

equality of coefficients between the equations for blacks vs. whites yield

test statistics of 4.13 for more demanding jobs and 3.55 for less demanding

jobs, both above the 1% critical value of 1.87.2 A further test for

differences between equations for more vs. less demanding jobs results in a

test statistic of 11.25 for whites, which is substantially above the 1%

critical level of 1.87. For the PSID equations, the test for differences

in the equations for more vs. less demanding jobs gives a statistic of 2.23

for whites, above the 1% critical level of 1.95. Tests for black/white

differences yields 2.90 fo iore demanding jobs amd 3.63 for less demanding

jobs, both above the 1% critical level of 2.01. The general conclusion

from all of these tests is that the wage equations for these four groups do

indeed show significant differences.

     Table A3 reports the equations used for part—time wages. These

equations are not separated according to the more/less demanding job

dichotomy. For part-time work in jobs started before 55, the test

statistic for separate equations for more vs. less demanding jobs for

whites indicates that such separation is not necessary. The statistic is

0.69, well below the 5% critical level of 1.62. For part-time work in jobs

started after 55, the use of separate. equations for more vs. less demanding

jobs is avoided because it would require modelling the choice between the



                                   -3.-
two, and it is doubtful that the data would support estimating the

parameters associated with this additional choice. For all the part—time

wage equations, the tenure and experience variables are excluded to

simplify the control solution to the life-cycle problem. The test

statistics for this exclusion are 1.22 for jobs started after age 55, which

is below the 5% critical value of 2.57, and 3.10 for jobs started before

age 55, which is above the 5% critical value of 3.41 but below the 1%

critical value of 2.41.

     A rough imputation of the individual's complete job history begins

with the starting and finishing dates for the individual's first, longest,

last,and current jobs, as reported in the first survey year of the RHS.

Additional jobs are assumed to fill whatever gaps are left in the job

history after consideration of the first, longest, last, and current jobs.

If there is no indication that the individual faced mandatory retirement,

it is presumed that he could have continued indefinitely in his last full—

time job. If the individual did indicate that he faced mandatory

retirement, it is presumed that after the mandatory retirement date, he

could have begun a new full—time job in the same occupation, but at a wage

rate which reflected a drop in tenure to zero, a return of the mandatory

retirement horizon variable to zero, and an absence of pensions. With

regard to part—time work, it is assumed that unless the individual was

observed to work part-time in a job he held before age 55, his

opportunities to work part—time were limited to new jobs that began or

would have begun after that age. This assumption is consistent both with

findings pertainint to the relative frequency of part—time work in jobs

begun before and after age 55 (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1984) and with

information on the pervasiveness of lower limit constraints on hours of

work on full-time jobs (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1983).


                                   -4-
     The job history thus constructed provides the time path for the

tenure, experience, and mandatory retirement variables over the

individual's working life, and it indicates which part—time wage equation

was or would have been appropriate for the individual. The effects of

these variables on the individual's wages over time are then inferred from

the coefficients of the wage equations, and any additional effects of long—

term health problems on wages are handled in a similar fashion. Finally,

after the wage paths are imputed, the effects of productivity increases

over tine are added back in by multiplying the wage by the ratio of the

average hourly earnings index to the consumer price index.

     Pensions. The pension component of compensation is calculated as the

increase (or decline) in the total present value of expected pension

payments which arises if the individual works in the job another year. For

most individuals who are eligible for pensions, the RHS inquires about the

age at which they could receive full benefits, the age at which they might

be eligible for reduced benefits, and the amount of the benefits when they

start to collect them. This provides sufficient information to make a

rough calculation of the pension component of compensation even though

there is no information as to the specific form of the pension formulae in

the RHS.

     The pension calculations exploit the fact that most pensions are of

the defined benefit type, and of those most use a formula in which annual

payments are found by multiplying years of service times a base amount and

adjusting the result downward if the individual has retired early. The

base amount can be either a specific dollar sum or some percentage of the

final average salary, but the important point for the present calculations

is that in either case, the base amount for those still working is likely



                                   —5-.
to be increasing roughly proportionately to increases in the wage levels.4

Where the figure is a stated dollar amount, as in the UAW pension plan, the

amount rises as the union negotiates increased pension payments along with

increased wages. Where it is a final average salary, it rises as the final

average increases along with the general wage level.

     Several auxiliary assumptions are used in the calculations. First,

once an individual has retired, it is assumed that nominal pension payments

increase at 37.9% as fast as prices (see Allen, Clark, and Sumner, Table 1)

and that the individual projects inflation to be roughly the average

inflation observed over the previous ten years. Secondly, it is assumed

that once an individual reaches the normal retirement age under the plan,

he does not accrue additional years of service for purposes of the pension

if he continues to work. Finally, it is assumed that if an individual

retires early, the amount by which the pension is reduced is given by the

occupation-specific figures reported in Hatch et al (1981).

     These assumptions, along with data about the individual's actual

pension receipts and the ages for early and normal retirement associated

with his pension plan, permit year—by-year calculations of the discounted

value of benefits were the individual to retire in that year, and the

difference between successive yearly calculations is then taken as the

pension component of compensation. In cases where not all the data is

available, imputations are done as follows. First, if the age at which the

individual can receive full benefits is missing, it is taken to be 65,

since over 70% of the individuals who reported such an age reported it to

be 65. Secondly, if the age at which the individual became eligible for

early benefits is missing, this age is taken to be 62 (almost half of the

individuals who reported such an age reported 62) unless the age at which

he was eligible for full benefits occured earlier. Finally, if the actual


                                   —6-
pension amount is missing, it is imputed according to the regressions

reported in Table A4.5

     Social Security. The calculations for the Social Security component

of compensation follows much the same approach as that for pensions, except

for the fact that the Social Security calculations can reflect the actual

rules in greater detail. For the estimation of the model and for the

simulations presented in Section V, the calculations use the Social

Security rules actually in place during the sample period, from 1969 to

1979. The simulations of Section VI are intended to investigate the

effects of the recent changes in the Social Security rules and hence use

the more recent rules. In both cases, the individual is assumed to

consider the effects of Social Security which operate through his spouse's

benefits and through her potential widow's benefits as well as through his

own benefits.

     The rules during the sample period, as reflected in the model, include

the following features: (i) the formulae for calculating the average

monthly earnings and the primary insurance amount, (ii) the earnings

disregard and, prior to 1972, a second earnings break point above which

earnings were effectively taxed at 100%, (iii) the reduction of benefits

for retirement before age 65, (iv) automatic benefit recomputation if the

individual lost benefits due to the earnings test, and (v) the indexing of

benefits after an individual had started collecting them. In the average

monthly earnings calculations, the individual's actual earnings from the

Social Security records are used up to age 55, and after that the earnings

implied by the model are used.6 The percentages used in the primary

insurance amount formula, which were adjusted by Congress in an ad hoc

manner prior to 1972, are characterized as being adjusted according to



                                   —7—
average hourly earnings throughout the period.7 And finally, as stressed

by Burkhauser and Turner, the benefit reductions for early retirement are

assumed to have been fixed in nominal rather than real terms.

     For the simulations using the more recent rules, several changes in

the simulation procedure are made in addition to using the more recent

figures for the normal retirement age, the early retirement penalty

percentage, and the delay?d retirement credit percentage. First, these

calculations use the average indexed monthly earnings formula, and in the

averages they use a full 35 years' worth of earnings, not just the years

since 1951. This reflects the number of years which will eventually be

used for everyone once the system reaches a steady state. Secondly, no

maximum is applied to earnings subject to Social Security, which reflects

the fact that the present maximum is so large that it applies to only a

small fraction of earners but which contrasts with the relatively low

maximum amounts in force through the 1950's and 1960's. And finally,

reflecting a change in the rules since the sample period, the reductions in

benefits due to early retirement are assumed to be adjusted for inflation

in these simulations instead of being fixed in nominal terms.

     With these rules, it is possible to calculate the discounted value of

the Social Security benefits if an individual were to retire at a given

age, and to calculate the discounted value if the individual were to have

retired in the previous year. The Social Security component of

compensation is then taken as the difference between the two, which is

attributable to the additional year's work. Such calculations are

undertaken both for the individual's full-time job and for any amount of

work that he may choose in a part-time job.

     Total Compensation Profiles. At each age, the compensation for full—

time work is calculated as the sum of the wage, pension, and Social


                                   -8—
Security components. The wage component is in turn calculated as the full—

time wage rate times the average annual hours which the individual reported

working in full-time jobs during the survey, or if such an average cannot

be computed, times 2000 hours. The compensation for part—time work is

calculated as the sum of the wage and Social Security components, with the

assumption that pensions do not figure in part—time work. For any given

year, the rate of part-time compensation is not a constant amount but, due

to the nature of the Social Security system, it depends on the number of

part-time hours worked.

     A problem which arises from these imputations is that some individuals

are observed to have worked full-time when, according to the imputations,

it would have been possible to receive more compensation from their part-

time jobs. This may arise either from the imputation procedure,

particularly for the part—time wage, or by misclassification of the

individual as working full-time when in fact he is in a part—time job. The

difficulty is that such a choice is not consistent with any combination of

the stochastic variables in the model and hence would cause the maximum

likelihood estimation procedure to fail. It would be possible to avoid the

difficulties by including another stochastic variable related to imputed

wages, but an additional stochastic term would most likely increase the

computational burden to the point of rendering it infeasible. Other

potential solutions might cause the estimation procedure to pay undue

attention to these observations when in fact it seems that their

informational content is almost nil. If an individual says that he is in a

full—time job when earnings are less than in a potential part-time job with

fewer hours, it is impossible to infer very much of anything about the

preferences of the individual. Given that such individuals appear to



                                  —9-
provide no useful information to the estimation procedure, it seems best

simply to drop them rather than to attempt some kind of further correction

which risks severely distorting the estimates. For this reason 21 of 531

whites in more demanding jobs, 28 of 394 whites in less demanding jobs, 27

of 308 blacks in more demanding jobs, and 15 of 144 blacks in less

demanding jobs are excluded from the sample.

     The Retirement Sequence. In addition to calculating the compensation

profiles for full—time and part—time work, it is necessary for purposes of

estimation to specify the retirement sequence for each individual in the

sample. The retirement sequence, which is essentially the dependent

variable in the estimation, consists of up to six observations for each

individual about whether he was completely retired, partially retired, or

not retired at all. In almost all instances, the individual's response is

taken at face value. The exception is for an individual who reported

himself to be partially retired despite the fact that he had not held a job

in the previous two years. Such an individual, for the purposes of the

estimation procedure, is considered to be fully retired.

     A problem arises with what may be called "reverse' sequences in which

an individual reports himself to be working full—time after having been

partially or fully retired or reports himself to be partially retired after

having been fully retired. Such sequences would not in general be

predicted by the model for any combination of the stochastic variables and

hence would cause the estimation procedure to fail. The most likely cause

of reverse sequences would seem to be unforseen changes which either

decrease the disutility of working or increase its rewards. There are a

couple of approaches which could be used to incorporate uncertainty of this

kind into the model, but both have severe drawbacks. Parameter estimates

could be derived using the recent "random walk" models of labor supply, but


                                   -10-
this kind of a model is not very useful for analyzing the effects of

changes which affect the budget constraint over a significant part of the

life cycle. Another approach would be to introduce a time-varying

stochastic variable in the utility function and/or budget constraint. The

difficulty with this approach is basically computational—-the introduction

of additional stochastic terms in the model would tend to increase the

computational burden nearly exponentially and hence render the model

impossible to estimate.

     Despite the fact that the exact factors causing reversals are not

explained in the context of the model, the sequences do contain useful

information about the stochastic variables. For example, a sequence which

begins with full-time work and ends with full retirement, but with no

partial retirement in between, establishes a rough range for the disutility

of work and a minimum value for the elasticity of substitution between

consumption and leisure, even if there is a reversal at some point.

Similarly, a sequence that begins with full—time work, ends with full

retirement, and has some partial retirement in the interim, indicates a

rough range of the disutility of work and a maximum value for the

substitution elasticity regardless of the presence of a reversal.

Therefore, recognizing that the model simply does not have sufficient

complexity to explain the reversals, but that nevertheless such sequences

do place reasonable limits of the stochastic variables for the individual,

the approach followed in the estimation procedure is to drop from the

retirement sequence the specific observations which create the reversals,

but in a manner which always preserves partial retirement observations if

they are present. In essence, the strategy is to use the observations in

the sequence which contain useful information about the stochastic



                                   —11—
variables (and hence about the parameters being estimated in the model)

while ignoring any observations which do not contribute useful information

about the stochastic variables and which require explanations beyond the

scope of the model.




                                  —12--
                          Footnotes for Appendix

                                                                      —
1. The hourly earnings figures are taken from the Economic Report of the
     President, 1981, Table 8-36.

2.   All of these test statistics are derived from equations in which the
     tenure and experience terms are unconstrained and in which quadratic
     experience and tenure terms are added, so that the rejections are not
     the result of the constraints which were imposed on the reported
     equations.

3. Tests for differences between equations for more vs. less demanding
     jobs are only reported for the much larger sample of whites (although
     a one in five sample of whites is used for estimation and simulation
     of the model, the full sample is used for estimation of the wage
     equations). The relatively low number of blacks in the sample made
     such tests much less powerful for that group.

4. According to a study for the Urban Institute which is based on the BLS
     Level of Benefits Survey, more than 80 percent of surveyed
     participants belong to a plan which either ties their benefits to
     final pay or in which they receive a dollar amount for each year of
     service (Hatch etal, 1981, p. 25).

5. Test statistics for different equations for blacks and for whites are
     0.78 for more physically demanding jobs, compared to a 5% critical
     value of 1.88, and 0.98 for less demanding jobs, compared to a 5%
     critical value of 1.83. The statistic for differences between more
     vs. less demanding jobs is 2.14 for whites, which is above the 5%
     critical value of 1.83 but below the 1% critical value of 2.32.

6. This procedure is followed to insure that the calculations fairly
     closely reproduce the effect of additional earnings on average monthly
     earnings while at the same time allowing for the fact that after age
     55, the Social Security earnings records increasingly fail to reflect
     potential earnings for those who partially or fully retire.

7. This approach does not reflect the unusually large increase in benefits
     -in 1972, but otherwise it does approximate reasonably well the benefit
     formulae actually encountered during this period. In particular, it
     reflects the phenomenon of "double indexing," which was responsible
     for the large increases in the real value of Social Security benefits
     during this period.




                               -13-
                                   Table Al

                        Full-Time Wage Equations (RHS)a


                                          White      White      Black     Black
                                         MDJ Job    LDJ Job    MDJ Job   LDJ Job

Constant                                  0.847      1.054      0.225    0.716
                                         (0.044)    (0.100)    (0.110)   (0.181)

Years of Experienceb                     —OOO6      —0.014      0.005    -0.008
                                         (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)   (0.003)

Years of Tenurec                          0.002      0.007      0.004     0.000
                                         (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)   (0.003)

                                                     0.378                0.287
Occupation Category 1d
                                                    (0.024)              (0.087)

                                                     0.186                0.259
Occupation Category 2
                                                    (0.025)              (0.098)

                                          0.240      0.180     —0.192     0.197
Occupation Category 4
                                         (0.017)    (0.057)    (0.042)   (0.282)

Dummy Variable for Private                0.288      0.211      0.417     0.206
   Pension Eligibility                   (0.014)    (0.020)    (0.049)   (0.081)

Dummy Variable for Public                 0.198      0.237      0.307     0.229
   Pension Eligibility                   (0.020)    (0.021)    (0.068)   (0.071)

Mandatory Retirement Horizone             0.006      0.007      0.014     0.024
                                         (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.008)   (0.010)

Dummy Variable for Short-Term            -0.009     -0.028     -0.037     0.074
   Health Problem                        (0.037)    (0.055)    (0.112)   (0.165)

Dummy Variable for Long-Term             -0.044     -0.066     -0.157    -0.040
   Health Problem                        (0.016)    (0.022)    (0.058)   (0.075)

Dummy Variable for Health Problem        -0.124     -0.058     -0.120    -0.330
   That Ended the Previous Job           (0.039)    (0.050)    (0.135)   (0.151)

Dummy Variable Equal to Unity If          0.110      0.146      0.025     0.120
   Father's Occupation Is Nonfarm        (0.012)    (0.018)    (0.041)   (0.060)

Years of Education                        0.020      0.000      0.006    —0.004
                                         (0.005)    (0.013)    (0.012)   (0.021)

Years of Education in Excess of           0.016      0.013      0.088     0.090
   8 Years                               (0.010)     (0.021)   (0.040)   (0.055)

Years of Education in Excess of          —0.027      0.007     —0.120    -0.068
   12 Years                               (0.018)    (0.016)   (0.074)   (0.072)


                                  -14—
                             Table Al (continued)

Dummy Variable for High School          —0.072      0.058   —0.233    —0.418
   School Graduation                    (0.027)   (0.042)   (0.136)   (0.173)

Dummy variable for College              -0.020      0.076    0.086     0.389
   Graduation                           (0.084)   (0.047)   (0.375)   (0.257)

Number of Observations                   4062       3749      498       308

R2                                       0.33       0.44     0.29      0.41




a. Dependent variable is the log of the hourly wage rate. Standard errors
     are in parentheses. The regressions include multiple wage
     observations for some individuals, and the reported standard errors
     are uncorrected for the possibility that the multiple observations for
     a single individual may be correlated.

b. Years of experience is calculated as the age less years of education
     less six.

c. The sum of the experience and tenure variables is constrained in these
     regressions, as noted in the text.

d. The occupational categories are as follows:
      1: Professional and technical workers, farmers, managers, officials,
          and proprietors.
      2: Clerical and sales workers.
      3: Craftsmen, foremen, operatives and service workers (this is the
          omitted group in all regressions).
      4: Laborers and farm foremen.

e. The mandatory retirement horizon is calculated as ten less the number
     of years until mandatory retirement if the individual is subject to
     mandatory retirement and if this number is greater than zero, and zero
     otherwi se.




                                 —15—
                                   Table A2

                        Full—Time Wage Equations (PSID)8


                                          White      White     Black     Black
                                         MDJ Job    LDJ Job   MDJ Job   LDJ Job

Constant                                  0.691     -0.225     0.542    -0.677
                                         (0.155)    (0.728)   (0.138)   (0.758)

Years of Experience                       0.008      0.029     0.007     0.000
                                         (0.007)    (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.023)

Square of Experience                     0.00000 -0.00042     0.00002   0.00006
                                         (0.00016) (0.00020) (0.00017) (0.00057)

Years of Tenure                           0.009      0.026     0.017     0.027
                                         (0.006)    (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.024)

Square of Tenure                     -0.00023 -0.00078 —0.00055 -0.00048
                                         (0.00022) (0.00026) (0.00026) (0.00097)

Occupation Category 1                                0.099              -0.015
                                                    (0.039)             (0.105)

Occupation Category 4                    -0.268     -0.043    -0.170    -0.099
                                         (0.042)    (0.060)   (0.036)   (0.123)

Dummy Variable for Private                0.177      0.192     0.258     0.327
   Pension Eligibility                   (0.031)    (0.038)   (0.038)   (0.123)

Dummy Variable for Public                 0.129      0.107     0.305     0.415
   Pension Eligibility                   (0.054)    (0.045)   (0.050)   (0.129)

Dummy Variable for Short-Term            -0.032     -0.132     0.181
   Health Problem                        (0.103)    (0.176)   (0.147)

Dummy Variable for Long-Term             -0.071      0.079    -0.163     0.225
   Health Problem                        (0.074)    (0.088)   (0.091)   (0.478)

Dummy Variable Equal to Unity If          0.046      0.107     0.034     0.264
   Father1s Occupation Is Nonfarm        (0.033)    (0.046)   (0.036)   (0.121)

Years of Education                        0.051      0.116     0.047     0.202
                                         (0.020)    (0.095)   (0.017)   (0.107)

Years of Education in Excess of          -0.002     —0.019    —0.041    -0.331
   8 Years                               (0.033)    (0.122)   (0.032)   (0.165)

Years of Education in Excess of           0.003     —0.029    —0.015     0.185
   12 Years                               (0.032)   (0.054)   (0.049)   (0.100)

Dummy Variable for High School            0.014     -0.143     0.205     0.246
   School Graduation                      (0.062)   (0.139)   (0.069)   (0.229)


                                  -16—
                             Table A2 (continued)

Dummy variable for College              —0.204      0.015   -0.093     0.306
   Graduation                           (0.126)   (0.072)   (0.244)   (0.197)

Number of Observations                    610        698      455       120

R2                                       0.24       0.30     0.30      0.36




a. See notes to Table Al. All notes to that table apply here, except as
     follows. First, the sum of tenure and experience is unconstrained in
     these regressions. Secondly, the PSID lumps service workers and
     laborers into a single occupational group, and in these regressions
     service workers are placed in occupational category 4, along with
     laborers. This treatment leaves no workers in occupational category 3
     for LPD jobs, so occupational category 2 is used as the omitted group
     for the two regressions for LPD jobs.




                                 -17-
                                   Table A3

                            Part-Time Wage Equationsa


                                          Part-Time Jobs      Part—Time Jobs
                                           Begun Before        Begun After
                                              Age 55              Age 55

                                          White    Black     White      Black

Constant                                  0.096     0.342     0.100    —0.046
                                         (0.239)   (0.203)   (0.130)   (0.149)

Occupation Category 1                     0.363     0.606
                                         (0.110)   (0.419)

Occupation Category 2                     0.320     0.191
                                         (0.099)   (0.305)

Occupation Category 4                    -0.006    —0.121
                                         (0.128)   (0.141)

Dummy Variable for Private                0.475     1.357
   Pension Eligibility                   (0.102)   (0.378)

Dummy Variable for Public                 0.055     0.601
   Pension Eligibility                   (0.213)   (0.310)

Mandatory Retirement Horizon              0.036    —0.026
                                         (0.016)   (0.042)

Dummy Variable for Short-Term            -0.120    -0.243    -0.067     0.140
   Health Problem                        (0.163)   (0.472)   (0.098)   (0.195)

Dummy Variable for Long-Term             -0.086    -0.210    -0.034    —0.011
   Health Problem                        (0.083)   (0.137)   (0.041)   (0.102)

Dummy Variable for Health Problem         0.103     0.153    -0.141    -0.208
   That Ended the Previous Job           (0.185)   (0.238)   (0.059)   (0.127)

Dummy Variable Equal to Unity If          0.152    -0.298     0.152    -0.078
   Father's Occupation Is Nonfarm        (0.081)   (0.136)   (0.036)   (0.098)

Years of Education                        0.026     0.001     0.025     0.041
                                         (0.032)   (0.035)   (0.017)   (0.027)

Years of Education in Excess of           0.002    —0.058     0.040     0.028
   8 Years                               (0.068)   (0.139)   (0.032)   (0.088)

Years of Education in Excess of           0.125     0.198     0.005    -0.170
   12 Years                              (0.087)   (0.237)   (0.038)   (0.127)

Dummy Variable for High School            0.039     0.373    —0.121    —0.043
   School Graduation                     (0.184)   (0.519)   (0.084)   (0.267)


                                  -18-
                             Table A3 (continued)

Dummy variable for College              —0.394    —0.292    —0.011    0.619
     Graduation                         (0.314)   (0.929)   (0.144)   (0.520)

Number of Observations                    403         64     1210      118

R2                                       0.27       0.50    0.10      0.14



a. See notes to Table Al.




                                — 19—
                                Table A4

                           Pension Equations3


                                       With Industry      Without Industry
                                       and Occupation      and Occupation

                                      MDJ Job   LOJ Job   MDJ Job   LDJ Job

Constant                              3.969      3.922     4.143     4.460
                                      (0.116)   (0.147)   (0.112)   (0.115)

Log of Hourly Wage                    0.350      0.150     0.404     0.278
                                      (0.089)   (0.086)   (0.090)   (0.079)

Occupation Category 1                           0.515
                                                (0.122)

Occupation Category 2                            0.202
                                                (0.130)

Occupation Category 4                  0.195    0.002
                                      (0.122)   (0.346)

Industry 1                             0.887     0.195
                                      (0.707)   (0.685)

Industry 2                             0.688    0.018
                                      (0.211)   (0.453)

Industry 3                             0.991     0.487
                                      (0.121)   (0.238)

Industry 5                             0.053    0.039
                                      (0.124)   (0.156)

Industry 6                             0.231     0.150
                                      (0.171)   (0.163)

Industry 7                             0.200     0.566
                                      (0.189)   (0.109)

Industry 8                             0.573     0.791
                                      (0.161)   (0.119)

Number of Observations                 1041       845      1041       845

R2                                     0.10      0.10      0.02      0.01




a. Dependent variable is log(annual pension amount/tenure).     The
     occupation categories are the same as in the footnotes to Table Al.
     The industry categories are as follows:


                               —20—
           Footnotes to Table A4 (continued)

1: Agriculture, forestry and fisheries.
2: Mining.
3: Construction.
4: Manufacturing.
5: Transportation, communication and public utilities.
6: Wholesale and retail trade.
7: Finance, insurance and real estate, business and repair
     services, personal services, entertainment and recreation,
     professional and related services.
8: Public administration.




                    -21-
