                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HARMONIZING AND COMBINING LARGE DATASETS – AN APPLICATION
             TO FIRM-LEVEL PATENT AND ACCOUNTING DATA

                                           Grid Thoma
                                         Salvatore Torrisi
                                       Alfonso Gambardella
                                        Dominique Guellec
                                         Bronwyn H. Hall
                                         Dietmar Harhoff

                                       Working Paper 15851
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w15851


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2010




We thank Jim Bessen, Hélène Dernis, Megan MacGarvie, Paola Giuri, Stine Grodal, Myriam Mariani,
Kazu Motohashi, Teruo Okazaki, James Rollinson, Philipp Sander, Georg von Graevenitz, Stefan
Wagner, Norihiko Yamano, Maria Pluvia Zuniga, and the participants at the PATSTAT Users’ Meeting
in Paris in March 2008, seminars at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München and Università
L. Bocconi in Milan for very fruitful discussions. We also thank Armando Benincasa and Luisa Quarta
from Bureau Van Dijk for clarifications about the structure of the Amadeus database and its changes
over time. Thoma and Hall are grateful to the Kauffman Foundation for support of some of this work.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Grid Thoma, Salvatore Torrisi, Alfonso Gambardella, Dominique Guellec, Bronwyn H.
Hall, and Dietmar Harhoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Harmonizing and Combining Large Datasets – An Application to Firm-Level Patent and Accounting
Data
Grid Thoma, Salvatore Torrisi, Alfonso Gambardella, Dominique Guellec, Bronwyn H. Hall,
and Dietmar Harhoff
NBER Working Paper No. 15851
March 2010
JEL No. C81,O34

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper discusses methods for the harmonization and combination of large-scale patent and trademark
datasets with each other and other sources of data. Dictionary- and rule-based approaches to the consolidation
of applicant names in patent data are presented and shown to have both benefits and drawbacks in
isolation. We combine the two methods and develop a set of rules and dictionaries to consolidate European,
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) and US patent data with firm accounting data. The resulting data
encompass about 131,000 patent applicant names from 46 countries, covering 58.8 percent of EPO
applications and 50.6 percent of PCT applications by business organizations during the time period
from 1979 to 2008. For US data, the resulting dataset includes around 54,000 assignee names and
51.3 percent of US granted patents during approximately the same time period.


Grid Thoma                                            Dominique Guellec
School of Science and Technology                      OECD/OCDE
University of Camerino, Italy                         2, rue Andre Pascal
Via Madonna delle Carceri, 9                          75016 Paris France
62032 Camerino (MC)                                   Dominique.Guellec@oecd.org
and KITES-Bocconi University
grid.thoma@unibocconi.it                              Bronwyn H. Hall
                                                      Dept. of Economics
Salvatore Torrisi                                     549 Evans Hall
Department of Management                              UC Berkeley
University of Bologna, Italy                          Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Via Capo di Lucca 34 - 40126 Bologna                  and NBER
and KITES-Bocconi University                          bhhall@nber.org
torrisi@unibo.it
                                                      Dietmar Harhoff
Alfonso Gambardella                                   Institute for Innovation Research
Department of Management and KITeS                    Munich School of Management
Bocconi University                                    University of Munich
Via Roentgen 1                                        Kaulbachstrasse 45
20136 Milan                                           D-80539 Munich, Germany
Italy                                                 harhoff@bwl.uni-muenchen.de
alfonso.gambardella@unibocconi.it
1      Introduction
While innovation is frequently touted to be one of the most important drivers of economic
growth, it is also one that is not observed in particular detail in standard statistics. The
knowledge economy still largely escapes the grasp of statisticians, and researchers in this
field have therefore experienced serious data constraints for many decades. Recently, the
availability of large datasets containing information on R&D expenditures, patents and
trademarks has relaxed these constraints considerably and has spurred the growth of a new
wave of research.

However, the availability of such large-scale datasets has led to a new embarrassment of
riches. Many researchers have put effort into the matching and consolidation of names of
applicants of patents or trademarks, or have combined such data with firm-level financial
data. Predictably, there is currently much duplication of such efforts. While the matching task
has proven quite feasible for focused industry and technology studies, there is still no reliable
and proven standard approach for larger datasets. Moreover, replication of studies is made
very difficult by the lack of acknowledged standard approaches. This paper seeks to fill this
gap, building on the experiences and results that the authors have achieved in separate and
joint efforts. We present a methodological discussion and make the results of our data
consolidation efforts available to the innovation research community via a website.1

Innovation studies have made good use of a variety of data types in order to evade the
aforementioned data constraint. A first avenue is the collection from secondary sources of
information on different qualitative dimensions of innovation. Examples include prizes as a
measure of successful innovation, newswire (e.g., ad-hoc) announcements as a paper trail of
collaboration among firms or of acquisitions, licensing and R&D agreements (Moser, 2005;
Giarratana and Torrisi, 2006; Greenhalgh and Rogers, 2007; Fosfuri and Giarratana, 2007;
Powell et al., 2000; Arora et al., 2001). By choosing data from particular contexts, sometimes
using quasi-experimental features, researchers have been able to sort out competing
explanations of particular innovation phenomena and to generate results with a high degree of
internal validity and reliability. Recent attempts to search for well-defined quasi-experiments
in particular areas (Stern and Furman, 2009; Murray et al., 2008) also belong to this group.

The second approach is based on the collection of information through surveys of innovating
entities (organizations or individuals) and has produced many important datasets and results.
With respect to U.S. data, two widely cited surveys are the Yale Survey (Levin et al. 1987)
administrated in the early 1980s and the sequel conducted by scholars at the Carnegie Mellon
University in the 1990s (Cohen et al. 2000). Both covered the sources and strategies of
innovation at the firm level by eliciting information from R&D managers. These surveys
were followed by the development of various innovation surveys in Europe, culminating in
the Community Innovation Survey (Mairesse and Mohnen 2010). More recently, European
scholars have conducted inventor surveys based on the individuals named in patent
applications which provide very detailed information on the factors driving innovation at the
level of the individual inventor and within invention processes (Gambardella et al., 2008;
Giuri, Mariani et al., 2007). Their example has been followed by Japanese, Korean, US and

1
    See http://www.epip.eu/datacentre.php




                                               2
Australian researchers (Nagaoka and Tsukada, 2007; Nagaoka and Walsh, 2008; Um 2005;
Heong et al. 2007).

Finally, the third approach is to rely on publicly available administrative and financial
databases such as patent and accounting information, or in some cases on confidential firm
level data that resides in National Statistical Offices, Central Banks or institutions which have
been commissioned by government agencies to perform surveys and data collections on a
regular basis.2 In our application, we focus on this third type of data, which are useful
because it provides comprehensive coverage of industries, technologies and countries. In
addition, this kind of data is usually collected on a regular basis allowing for replication and
updating of studies.

The distinction made here may be overly stylized. Indeed, data of different types and from
different sources are often combined. For example, the inventor surveys undertaken in
various countries depend critically on inventor information as contained in official patent
data. Moser’s 2005 study combines historical patent data, entries in exhibition catalogues and
innovation award data. Moreover, it is frequently the case that innovation-related data is
complemented with information from accounting sources or other forms of financial data. In
most cases, a large number of observations in each dataset need to be merged in the absence
of a common identifying code, which means that researchers have to rely only on the entity
names to do the match. The problems that arise in this case and possible ways to solve them
are the subject of this paper.

The matching and harmonization problem we address is usually present for any of the
datasets described in the above, and it becomes more complex as the size of the dataset (the
number of entities) increases. It is important to note that the problem may also exist even if
just one type of data is being used. Variations in the spellings of names routinely occur within
large-scale datasets such as patent and trademark data.3 The problem can usually be handled
manually in smaller datasets, but requires some form of automated approach in larger
datasets. The exact nature of the problems to be addressed is described in section 2.3.

Turning to the types of data of particular interest to us, we note that the most often
encountered ones are i) data on R&D expenditures as collected by statistical agencies or
revealed in accounting data and stock market reports; ii) data from regularly performed
innovation surveys; iii) data on intellectual property rights, such as from patent and trademark
offices; iv) data on firm inputs and value added, such as is collected by various national
statistical agencies; and v) corresponding data on the financial status of firms, such as P&L
data, balance sheet data and so forth. We discuss these here before turning to IP and financial
data as our particular focus in this article. This list is not complete, but presumably covers the
most frequently used data for which a name matching problem occurs.




2
  What distinguishes the second and third approach is that in the second case, data collection often represents a
singular research effort yielding a cross-sectional database. The results are of considerable value, but typically
not suited to provide representative data on innovation over time.
3
    For example, uncleaned USPTO patent data contain several hundred versions of the name of IBM Corporation.


                                                        3
R&D data. Data on R&D expenditures have been collected for many decades by statistical
agencies and other entities commissioned by government agencies.4 The foundation for these
surveys is the Frascati Manual (OECD 2002) which contains definitions of R&D and related
terms and detailed hints for the surveys. The results of R&D surveys are summarized on an
annual basis in national and in OECD reports, but the firm-level data are usually not available
publicly for use in micro-econometric studies. Under US and UK accounting rules, firms
listed in the stock market have to report their R&D expenditures if they are “material” and
under revisions to the International Accounting Standards Board, the practice of reporting
such data is spreading. However, especially in the case of European firms, data on R&D
expenditures are often missing because reporting these expenditures is not currently required
by accounting and fiscal regulations. The definition of R&D used for accounting purposes
can also differ from that in the Frascati Manual; for the US example, see Hall and Long
(1999).

Innovation survey data. In many European and non-European countries these are now being
undertaken on a regular (usually annual) basis. Innovation surveys seek to elicit information
not only on R&D, but also on the broader innovation process as described in the
OECD/Eurostat - Oslo Manual (2005).5 Although R&D is a good indicator of the
commitment of a firm to inventive activities because it is chosen by the firm, it does not tell
us much about their ‘success', technical and economic, which is rather reflected in the notion
of innovation (which is an invention reaching the stage of implementation, either as a new
process, a new product or a new marketing approach). Moreover, not all inputs into
innovation processes are covered by the classical Frascati Manual definition.

In the European context, European National Statistical Offices have conducted a series of
Community Innovation Surveys (CIS), collecting detailed data on innovation and other firm
characteristics.6 The integration of CIS and other survey data with information from other
databases, such as patents and accounting data is made difficult by the limitations to the use
of CIS data imposed by confidentiality laws in all countries. Innovation survey data continue
to generate important findings, but the difficulty of matching CIS databases to other
databases have limited their use for the purpose of research in economics, management and
public policy (Mairesse and Mohnen, 2010). 7


4
  In Germany, the R&D surveys are performed by Wissenschaftsstatistik GmbH, a branch of Stifterverband, an
association of German industry which supports research and science. In this case, the performer of the survey is
not an official statistical agency. In most other countries such as Austria, the UK, France, Italy and the
Netherlands, the statistical agencies carry out the surveys. In the US, the survey is carried out by the Bureau of
the Census under a contract from the National Science Foundation.
5
    Available at the following link http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/35/61/2367580.pdf
6
  See Arundel (2001) for details. A large number of countries outside of Europe and North American have
followed this lead, with innovation surveys now having been conducted in Asia, Latin America, and other
locations. The United States does not perform a government innovation survey, although similar private NSF-
funded surveys have been done in the past (Levin et al. 1987; Cohen et al. 2000) and a major new initiative is
now underway, directed by Wesley Cohen.
7
  There are a few exceptions to this rule. The German government has commissioned innovation surveys on a
regular (annual) basis (of which the CIS survey is a part) and the resulting cross-sectional and panel data have
been used in a large number of studies. This dataset has also been combined with patent data and other external
information. See the survey by Janz et al. (2001) for a detailed description.


                                                        4
Patent data. Due to the wider availability of computer-ready datasets, an increasing number
of studies use patent counts and patent-related indicators to measure the quantity and the
‘quality' of inventive output. Patents as a measure of inventive success have their own
drawbacks, but they constitute a detailed measure of innovation (Griliches, 1981 and 1990;
Pavitt, 1988). However, crude patent counts are an extremely noisy indicator of inventive
output because they do not account for differences in the value of patented inventions. For
this reason, many innovation scholars have introduced various patent-related indicators as a
measure of the importance or “quality” of the inventive output (Harhoff et al. 2003, Hall et al.
2005).

Trademark data. Comprehensive studies on the economic role of trademarks are still rare,
but recent studies confirm that trademarks can be economically important, explaining a
significant share of the market capitalization of firms (Greenhalgh and Rogers, 2006; Sandner
2009). Trademarks have also been used as proxy for firm’s diversification activities
(Mendoça et al, 2004), processes of market entry and survival (Fosfuri and Giarratana, 2007),
appropriability strategies (Graham, and Somaya, 2004) and firm’s reputation and
advertisement efforts (von Graevenitz, 2004).

Accounting and other economic data. In some cases, the isolated use of any of the data may
be sufficient to undertake a study on innovation. But frequently, R&D, innovation survey, or
IP data need to be combined with accounting or financial data for the firm in question,
especially if we wish to measure outcomes such as productivity or profitability. Databases
that contain such data (Amadeus, Compustat, Reuters and others) usually have their own
system of entity identification that does not match up with the sources of IP and innovation
data.

Therefore, studies that seek to employ data from different sources (for example, financial
data jointly with patent and trademark data) have to merge multiple types of firm
identification. Since inaccuracies in data merging and integration can lead to measurement
errors, biased results or lack of sufficient statistical power, correct matching is an important
but neglected issue. This is a particularly important issue in studies of patenting at the firm
level because patent data never comes with firm-level identifiers that match to other sources
of data, and researchers must rely only on the names of the firms to combine datasets.

Earlier solutions to this problem have relied on manual matching of firm names across
datasets (e.g., the small samples of US patenting firms used by Griliches, 1981) and partially
computer-based ad hoc methods combined with manual matching (e. g., Bound et al., 1984
and Hall et al., 2005). But methods involving even a small amount of manual matching have
limits when confronted with the large datasets that are common today.

Researchers are therefore forced to apply one or several automated methods. The first group
of approaches are dictionary-based methods, essentially based on large collections of names
that serve as examples for a specific entity class, such as the DERWENT Patentee Index, and
the USPTO and EPO standard patent-holder codes. More recently, automatic methods have
been suggested for generating a dictionary (Magerman, Van Looy and Song, 2006). The
second group are rule-based approaches that build up a set of rules for the comparison of
similar names. A pioneering exercise was performed by Thoma and Torrisi (2007) using
approximate matching based on string similarity functions. Their analysis was based on two
data sources: the PATSTAT patent database (USPTO and EPO patents) and the Amadeus

                                               5
accounting and financial dataset which contains 2,197 parent firms and their 151,979
subsidiaries. Doing a good match requires using a combination of the two approaches, as
neither one is sufficient on its own.

The contribution of this paper is the development of a more comprehensive and automated
methodology for company name standardization and the matching of two data sources using
the resulting standardized names: IP-related databases and company business directories. Our
methodology utilizes recent advances in automatic Named Entity Recognition (NER)
systems. NER systems have been applied successfully in bioinformatics, while their
deployment in social sciences is still at an early phase. Thus this study is among the first
attempts to use these methods in empirical studies in economics and management. We do not
rely on a single NER approach, but experiment with several techniques in parallel. We find
that a combination of dictionary-based and rule-based approaches produces the most
favorable results in our application.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we start by describing the data sources
currently available for large-scale studies on patenting and other IP information. Using
examples from these data, we then describe various types of problems researchers are facing.
In section 3, we then describe two fundamental approaches to solving the problem: the
dictionary based approach, which relies on the collection of large datasets of names and their
variants, and the rule-based method, which builds on the articulation of rules to establish a
similarity link across different entity names. Additionally, we discuss how the value of
existing dictionaries could be enhanced by using other methods to query their entries. We
propose a novel method relying on priority links among the patents that enables the
combination of distinct dictionaries of entity names originating from patent data of different
offices.

In section 4, we describe the software prototypes for the different approaches analyzed in the
section 3. In this section, we combine the different approaches in order to achieve reliable
results for the problem at hand. Finally, in section 5, we conclude by documenting the
harmonization and matching that results from the methodology suggested in this paper and
assessing the type I and type II errors thus achieved. Section 6 concludes.

2     Frequently Used Data Sources and Matching Problems
In this section we briefly review the sources of patents and other IP data frequently used in
economic studies. In particular, we will consider their content, time coverage, mode of
access, complementary search and management tools and potential integration with other
sources. We also provide a description of typical matching problems arising from the use of
these data.

2.1    Online databases
US granted patents

Freely available from www.uspto.gov, this database includes information on all US patents
(including utility, design, reissue, plant patents and others) from the first patent issued in
1790 to the most recent issue week.

Full searchable text is offered for patents issued from January 1976 to the present, including
all bibliographic data, such as the inventor's name, the patent's title, and the patenter's name

                                               6
(called the assignee at the USPTO), the abstract, the full description of the invention, and the
claims. Patents issued prior to December 1975 are only searchable through the patent
number, issue date, and current US patent classification.

US published applications

As in the case of granted patents, the application database is freely searchable at the USPTO
and consists of the full text of US applications that have been published since its inception in
March 2001. After that date patent applications could be kept secret if protection was
requested in the US only; otherwise the application is published within 18 months from
filing.

The full text of a published application includes all bibliographic data, such as the inventor's
name, the published application's title, and the applicant, as well as the abstract, the full
description of the invention, and the claims. All of the textual words in the publication are
searchable.

IIP Japan database

This database contains information on all 9 million published Japanese patent applications
between 1964 and 2004, along with 2.6 million patent registrations (grants). The information
provided consists of the application and registration numbers, dates of application, exam
request, grant, and expiration, the number of claims, IPC codes, applicant and rights holder
information including geographic location, and citation links. The dataset is provided freely
online and documented in Goto and Motohashi (2007).8

USPTO Trademarks

The USPTO website at http://www.uspto.gov/main/trademarks.htm provides complete
electronic information about trademarks since the birth of the USPTO. The database contains
more than 4 million pending, registered and dead trademarks and it provides complete free
searchable access to the text and image database of trademarks.

ESPACE on-line

The ESPACE database contains freely searchable information on published patent
applications from over 80 different countries and regions. It is based on the PCT minimum
documentation, which is defined by WIPO as the minimum requirement for patent collections
used to search for prior-art documents for the purpose of assessing novelty and inventiveness.
As of March 2007, esp@cenet® held data on 60 million patents. A total of 30.5 million of
these patents have a title, 19.5 million have an abstract in English, and 29.5 million have an
ECLA class.9




8
    See http://www.iip.or.jp
9
  ECLA is a European Patent Classification that is about twice as detailed as the IPC (International Patent Class)
classification.


                                                        7
                                       Table 1:
       ESP@cenet coverage: Starting year of availability for the main patent offices


                            Patent Office Facsimiles Full Text ECLA
                                DE          1877       1970     1877
                                 EP         1978       1978     1978
                                 FR         1900       1970     1902
                                GB          1859       1893     1859
                                US          1836       1970     1836
                                WO          1978       1978     1978
                     Source: Own analysis based on http://ep.espacenet.com/?locale=en_EP

CTM – on line

CTM–ONLINE provides free access to information on EU Community trade mark
applications and Community Trademarks, updated on a daily basis regarding: the trademark
number, name, type, owner, Nice10 classification codes, status, filing date, registration date,
date of international registration, publication date, expiry date etc.

2.2    Off-line databases
While the on-line databases provide real time and constantly updated information, researchers
are often more interested in off-line databases in spite of higher costs and difficulties of
updating. Off-line databases allow easier generation and manipulation of innovation
indicators for statistical analysis. Moreover, ex-post scalability and integrability with other
sources of information is significantly higher. The most important current sources of such
data that are easy and low cost are the NBER patent citation database and the EPO-OECD
PATSTAT database. However, before describing those two sources we will mention at least
two other earlier efforts to generate such data, which contain historical data and are still
available.

The pioneering work using patent data in economic studies can be found in Jacob
Schmookler’s (1966) major book entitled Invention and Economic Growth. Schmookler
classified patents manually by the industry of their potential use, finding that the top three
user industries of patents during the first half of the 20th century were the railroad,
petrochemical and building sectors.

The seminal work of Schmookler was followed by that of Griliches and co-workers at the
NBER (Bound et al., 1984, which constitutes the first major effort to combine patent counts
with economic and financial data, such as sales, capital stocks, research and development,
income, at the firm level. The accounting information is drawn from Standard and Poor’s
Compustat files, which contain data for all firms traded in the major US stock markets. The
linking was done mostly manually and it involved about 2,700 US corporations and their
subsidiaries as reported in the year 1976. The authors used this dataset to estimate patent
production functions and valuation equations.



10
  See http://www.wipo.int/classifications/nice/en/classifications.html (last download Oct. 15th, 2009) for details
on the classification.


                                                        8
The NBER patent database

The NBER patent dataset on USPTO data represents a path-breaking effort of providing
additional bibliographic information that could be used to account for differences in the
‘value’ of patents (Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2001 and 2005). Hall and colleagues have
made these data freely available via the NBER website allowing a surge of new wave of
research in innovation studies. For a partial set of contributions, see Jaffe and Trajtenberg
(2002) and Cockburn et al. (2004).

The database comprises detailed information on almost 3 million US patents granted between
January 1963 and December 1999. Available data fields in the NBER database consist of four
main building blocks. First, it includes application and publication numbers and dates and
technological classifications. Second, detailed and harmonized information is supplied on
inventor names, address, city, zip code, and state and country code. The database is
accompanied by a file containing the link between the names of USPTO patent assignees and
the names of US companies listed in the Compustat dataset. This match is a more complete
and updated version of the one described in Bound et al. (1984).11 Recently these data have
been updated to 2006 by Cockburn and co-workers at the NBER (Cockburn et al., 2009).12

The fourth building block consists of the citation links, in particular all US patent citations
made to these patents between 1975 and 1999, constituting over 16 million citation links.
Although useful for the analysis of US-based questions, the drawback to using the NBER
citation data is that it does not currently include information on citations to and from other
patent databases, so citation counts are likely to be downward biased, especially for foreign-
owned patents.

PATSTAT

Creation of a worldwide statistical patent database was initiated by the OECD task force on
patent statistics; in response, PATSTAT was developed by the EPO in 2005 on the basis of
the DOCDB database. It includes bibliographic details on patents filed to 80 patent offices
worldwide, covering more than 60 million documents. Hence filings in all major countries
and the PCT filings at the World International Patent Office are covered.13 Available fields of
PATSTAT are listed below and a fuller discussion of these indicators can be found in
(OECD, 2009):14

       • Application and publication details such as authority, number, kind and dates;

       • Technical information and descriptions such as title, abstract, international and
         national classification;

11
 The match of patents to Compustat for the 1999 database is based on the 1989 universe of companies. For
more details see Hall et al. (2001) and http://www.nber.org/patents/
12
     Beta versions of the new datasets are available at https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home .
13
   Having complete coverage of PCT-WIPO filings is important because their counts allow for interesting
international comparisons.
14
  A comprehensive data catalog is provided along with the tables, describing the fields’ codes. An additional
document lists the currently available fields and the time period covered for each country.


                                                           9
      • Applicant and inventor name, address, and country code;

      • Identification of claimed priority, designating international application, parent
        application and technically related application;

      • Identification of cited publication including patent and non-patent prior art, category
        and origin of the citation.

PATSTAT is released by the EPO twice a year, early spring and early autumn. Each version
presents a snapshot of the source databases at a single point in time.15 However, the content
and design of PATSTAT is not intended to be static: a “change management procedure” has
been put in place by the EPO to allow task force members to request changes in the data
catalog (i.e. including additional information, variables, etc.) within a reasonable time before
each release. Currently around 100 institutions have subscribed to PATSTAT and this
database is expected to be widely used for innovation studies.

2.3     Typical Matching Problems
The matching and consolidation problems faced by researchers typically fall into three broad
classes:

      1) variations in spelling, some of which are simply typographical errors, within a given
         list or database; see the examples in Box 1.

      2) variations in the way names appear in two or several different lists, in many cases
         caused by different naming conventions; see the examples in Box 2.

      3) the problem of matching firm subsidiaries in one list to ultimate owners in another
         (Box 3). This problem is especially important when matching firm financial data
         (reported at a consolidated level) to patent data (which is often at the subsidiary
         level).


Box 1. Different spellings and misspellings

SYNRES INTERNATIONAL B.V.
SYRNES INTERNATIONAL B.V.

BSH BOSCH UND SIEMENS AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT
BSH BOSCH UND SIEMENS AKTINGESELLSCHAFT
BSH BOSCH UND SIEMENS HANSGERAETE GMBH
BSH BOSCH UND SIEMENS HAUS-GERAETE GMBH
BSH BOSCH UND SIEMENS HAUSERATE GMBH

MINNESOTA MINING AND MANUFACTURING COPANY
MINNESOTA MINING AND MANUFACTURING COPMANY

15
  Much of the data is extracted from the EPO’s master bibliographic database – DocDB, also known as the EPO
Patent Information Resource. However, depending on the patent office, the coverage of data may be partial or
delayed over time.


                                                    10
MINNESOTA MINING AND MANUFACTURING CORP

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES, CORPORATION
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION
INTERANTIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION
INTERANATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION
INTERANTIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION
INTERNAIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION
INTERNAITONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION
…..and so forth


RÜTGERSWERKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT
RUTGERSWERKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT
RUETGERSWERKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT
R_TGERSWERKE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

REGIE NATIONALE DES USINES RENAULT Société Anonyme
REGIE NATIONALE DES USINES RENAULT (Societe Anonyme)
REGIE NATIONALE DES USINES RENAULT Societé Anonyme
REGIE NATIONALE DES USINES RENAULT (SociTtT Anonyme dite)


Box 2. Variations in naming conventions

ABITIBI PRICE CORPORATION
ABITIBI PRICE INC

SMITH (JOHN) LTD
JOHN SMITH LTD

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES – IBM
IBM CORP. (INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES)
IBM CORPORATION (INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES)

MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
3M CORP
MINNESOTA & MINING MANUFACTURING

FLUID COMPONENTS INTL.
FLUID COMPONENTS INTERNATIONAL

SENETAS CORP. LTD. (USA)
SENETAS CORP.




                                          11
Box 3. Assignment to aggregate entities (ownership issues)

Subsidiary                                          Ultimate Owner

ADHESIVE TECHNOLOGIES INC                           MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
AVI INC                                             MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
D L AULD CPY                                        MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
DORRAN PHOTONICS INCORPORATED                       MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
EOTEC CORPORATION                                   MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
NATIONAL ADVERTISING CPY                            MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
RIKER LABORATORIES INC                              MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO
TRIM LINE INC                                       MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO



3     Methods for name matching
In this section we describe recent developments in methodologies for integrating different IP
databases and company directories, methods that have been inspired by some interesting
insights from bioinformatics.

Over the past years, biological science has become increasingly concerned with the analysis
of large amounts of information. Consequently, the way that information is stored, managed,
visualized, and searched has increased in importance. Named entity recognition (NER) for
biomedical applications, i.e. the task of identifying gene, protein, diseases, and other names
in natural text, has become a crucial means to extract highly valuable and sometimes hidden
is hard-to-find information. The NER approach has the potential for interesting applications
to economics and management science, especially in the area of the information integration
of company-level data.

In the following sections we will discuss the two different approaches to dataset merging: the
dictionary-based approach, which relies on the collection of large datasets of names and name
variants, and the rule-based approach which builds a set of rules for similarity links across
different entity names. The latter uses some of the methods gleaned from bioinformatics.

3.1    The dictionary-based approach
Dictionaries essentially are large collections of names, serving as examples for a specific
entity class. Matching dictionary entries exactly against text is a simple and very precise NER
method, but typically yields a low level of match when applied to firm names. To
compensate, one can either use approximate matching techniques, or try to ‘fuzzify' the
dictionary by automatically generating typical spelling variants for every entry. The extended
dictionary is then used for exact matches against the text.

Previous attempts have addressed this issue by implementing ad-hoc matching procedures to
reduce the cost of data standardization and integration. For example, Thomson Scientific's
Derwent World Patent Index (2002) is constructed by assigning a code to about 21,000
patenters. This index accounts for legal links between parent companies and subsidiaries thus
achieving a legal entity standardization. This task requires substantial manual, labor-intensive
work. Moreover, the matching is only available to subscribers of the Derwent service.



                                              12
Drawing on the Derwent methodology, Rachel Griffith and colleagues at the Institute of
Fiscal Studies (IFS) have standardized the names of a sample of UK patenters of Triadic
patents and matched them with the standardized names of companies contained in Bureau
van Dijk’s Amadeus database (Griffith et al. 2006). Only identical standardized names found
in the two datasets are matched by the IFS using this procedure.

Another example of a dictionary of patenter names is the USPTO CONAME file compiled by
the USPTO. This uses a semi-automatic standardization procedure which focuses on the first-
named patenter reported in the patent document. For patents granted after July 1992 the
patenter name is standardized and matched automatically with other standardized names in
the same dataset. New patenters that are not matched automatically with standardized names
in the dataset are matched manually. For instance, the entry of a new patenter whose
standardized name does not match any previously standardized names can be matched by
investigating the names and locations of the inventors. The CONAME file accounts for
changes or variations in patenter names but does not account for legal links between patenter
names. Moreover, similar names with a different legal form or the same legal entity from
different countries are not matched.

The EPO has developed its own dictionary by assigning a standard code to each patenter
filing a patent to the office. This index is created by taking into account not only the patenter
name and country but also her postal address. According to some interviews we did with EPO
representatives this dictionary tries to maximize precision vis-à-vis recall rate for each entry:
for example two patenters with the same name but having different addresses will constitute
separate entries in the EPO dictionary and they are linked to two different standard codes that
identify them.

More recently, a group of researchers from the Katholike Universiteit Leuven (KUL) have
developed an automatic methodology based on the detailed standardization of patenter names
and perfect matching of names. This methodology, like the CONAME file and EPO standard
codes, does not try to establish legal links among patenters. The main advantage of this
procedure is high precision, i.e., a limited number of false matches. The KUL methodology
has been used to standardize and match patenter names from EPO patent applications
published between 1978 and 2004 and USPTO granted patents published between 1992 and
2003 (Magerman, Van Looy and Song, 2006).

According to the KUL methodology the creation of a dictionary for company names can be
articulated in preprocessing and names standardization. Names standardization requires a
series of tasks like punctuation standardization (e.g., from FERRARI ,& C. to FERRARI, &
C.) and company name standardization (from FERRARI, & C. to FERRARI, AND
COMPANY). The main standardization operations suggested by Magerman, Van Looy and
Song (2006) can be summarized as follows: i) character cleaning; ii) punctuation cleaning;
iii) legal form indication treatment; iv) spelling variation standardization; v) umlaut
standardization; vi) common company name removal; vii) creation of an unified list of
patenters.

For US patent assignee names, a major effort to update the existing NBER patent citations
database and match to the Compustat files is now underway (Cockburn et al. 2009). The
matching of patent assignee names with the names of firms on the Compustat files is part of




                                               13
this project.16 A number of enhancements to the original (1999 and 2002) databases have
been made. First, the semi-automatic standardization procedure of this file has been extended
to all the assignee names in the case of multi-owner patents. Second, using external sources
originating from business directories information was collected on the timing of name and
ownership changes of the assignee. The data now provided contains information that allows
tracking of the assignee changes of ownership over time. Third, there is progress on
standardizing the firm names supplied by the USPTO and correcting cases where the USPTO
had coded the type of entity (individual, firm, government) incorrectly. The list of entity
types has been expanded to include universities, non-profit research institutions, and medical
institutions including hospitals. However, much of the standardization work in the current
(2009) version of the database is still incomplete, especially that involving non-US patent
assignees.

3.2    The rule-based approach
Rule-based approaches build on the definition of rules to compare the similarity of names.
Early systems used hand-crafted rules to describe the composition of named entities and their
context. For instance, some core words and components of words might be used to extract
candidates for more complex names. These core terms are expanded according to a set of
syntactic rules. Similarly, starting from more complex names one could invert the process to
identify some discriminating core words using the same rules.

In the following, we will focus our discussion on the potential usefulness of names similarity
functions based on the so-called approximated string matching (ASM) algorithms (Thoma
and Torrisi, 2007). However, it is worth remembering that the ASM method constitutes only
a specific class of similarity rules. The applicability of other matching methods to company
name matching should be analyzed in future research.

The first category of ASM similarity functions is based on the edit distance. For instance, the
Levenshtein distance between two strings is defined as the minimum number of operations
needed to transform a string into another one. The transformation of a string can be obtained
by character inserting, substituting, swapping or deleting (Levenshtein, 1966). An extension
of the Levenshtein edit distance was developed by Smith and Waterman (1981). The main
difference is that character mismatches at the beginning and the end of strings are ignored in
the calculation of distance. For instance, the two company names ‘Dr Michal White Plc' and
‘Michael White Plc, Dr' have a short distance using the Smith-Waterman distance.

The similarity between two strings x and y of length n x and n y can be computed as 1-d/N,
where 1 is the maximum similarity, d is the distance between x and y and N = max{nx , ny}.
To calculate the distance between two strings we need to assign a cost c to each operation
required to transform the string x into string y (or vice versa). The cost is assumed to be 1 for
substitution and deletion of a character and 0 for perfect matching characters. For instance,
the edit distance between IBM and INTEL is the following:



16
  The original 1999 database is at http://www.nber.org/patents with 2002 updates at
http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~bhhall/patents.html .
The latest (2006) version is at https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home .
The match documentation is at http://www.nber.org/~jbessen/matchdoc.pdf .



                                                        14
           1 - [c( I , I ) + c( B , N ) + c( M , T ) + c(φ , E ) + C (φ , L )] / 5 = 1 - 4 / 5 = 1/ 5.

The second category of ASM similarity functions relies on token-based distance. Measures of
token distance, like the J similarity index, are based on the division of strings into tokens or
sequences of characters. Token-based distance functions account for differences due to the
position of the same tokens between otherwise identical strings (e.g., Peter Ross and Ross
Peter). In particular, the J token distance computes the fraction of common tokens, after
breaking up the strings into words at the blank spaces. The J token distance is simply given
by the number of common tokens in two names and the count of total number of tokens in
those names, that is:

                               X ∩Y   X ∪Y − X ∩Y
             J ( X ,Y ) = 1−        =                                                             (1)
                               X ∪Y      X ∪Y

where X ∩ Y measures the number of common tokens between strings X and Y while X ∪ Y
measures the total number of distinct tokens.

To account for common tokens, we multiply each token by a weight that is inversely
proportional to its frequency in the dataset. Formally, each token i has a weight wi given by

                                                                 1
                                                     wi =
                                                             log(ni ) + 1

where ni is the frequency of the token in the dataset. This weighting method is a simplified
version of the tf–idf weight (term frequency–inverse document frequency) of Salton and
Buckley (1988).

To reduce the computational complexity of the J similarity index we approximate the second
term of equation (1) as follows:

         2 X ∩Y
                                                                                                        (2)
          X +Y

where the denominator is the sum of all tokens, including those tokens that are contained in
both strings. This may result in some double counting. On the other hand, it would be
extremely costly from a computation viewpoint to find tokens common to two strings
(company names). To maintain the same approximate scale we have multiplied the index by a
factor of 2.

Thus, the weighted Jw distance is equal to the following expression:

                                                 ∑
                                             k | xk ∈X ∩Y
                                                            wk
                   w
                 J ( X ,Y ) = 1 − 2                                                         (3)
                                       ∑w+∑
                                      i| xi ∈X
                                                 i
                                                       j| y j ∈Y
                                                                   wj


Where xi∈X and yi∈Y and wi and wj are the weights inversely correlated with the frequency of
tokens xi and yi in the dataset; the terms xk and wk are respectively the kth token and relative
weight belonging to the intersection set X ∩ Y .


                                                                 15
3.3    Enhancing the value of existing dictionaries
In the previous sections we discussed the drawbacks of the dictionary approach due to the
low match rate when perfect matching is implemented using the dictionary entries. One
suggestion for overcoming the drawbacks of perfect matching is the use of approximate
matching based on the string and token similarity functions described earlier. In this section
we discuss an additional source of standardization of patent holder names that relies on the
priority links across patent offices.

A priority link emerges when a patenter claims a priority date antecedent to the filing date of
a given patent. Typically priority links refer to patent documents in other patent offices and
the set of patents (or applications) filed in several countries which are related to each other by
one or several common priority filings is generally known as a patent family.17 A patent
family is sometimes also defined as all patents that protect the same basic invention. The
rapid growth in the number of patent documents in recent years have been accompanied by
the growth of priority links and resulting patent family size, and hence the total number of
inventions has grown a than the total number of patent documents.

Thus, if a patenter has filed a document in two or more offices claiming a common priority
date, it is possible to trace a link from an entry in the patenter names dictionary in one patent
office to the corresponding entry in another patenter names dictionary in the other patent
offices, on the assumption that the ultimate owner of the patent will be the same at both
offices.18 Based on this assumption, in this section we describe an additional harmonization
method for patenter names using priority links across USPTO and EPO patent databases. The
objective of the analysis is to assess whether the priority links between US and EPO patents
can improve the accuracy of harmonization of two existing dictionaries of patenter names:
the USPTO CONAME file and EPO standard names. This methodology may allow us to
propagate the matching done with one dictionary to the other, reducing the cost of
implementation of such matching across the two dictionaries.

Figure 1 shows how we link these two dictionary files. In TASK 1 we start from the USPTO
CONAME file made up of 237,666 distinct patenter names. The file has information on all
patent-holders that have been granted at least one patent by the USPTO over the period 1963-
2007. The USPTO CONAME file can be easily interfaced with the PATSTAT database
through the patent publication number (TASK 2). Subsequently in TASK 3, using the
PATSTAT database we can identify the priority links from and into the EPO patent database;
in particular we rely on the INPADOC patent family definition. In TASK 4 we use the
priorities compiled from PATSTAT by linking each EPO application to the US priority date


17
  Patents that refer to earlier patents in the same patent office as their priority are called continuation (at the
USPTO) or divisional patents (at the EPO and the USPTO). Because patents are sometimes divided in different
ways at different offices and members of a family at one office may claim different priorities elsewhere, there is
more than one definition of a patent family. See Harhoff (2008) for a fuller discussion of this issue. We have
used the INPADOC definition, which has been included in PATSTAT for the first time in the release of October
2008.
18
   It is important to note that this assumption will not always hold. A patent-holder with headquarter in one
region may decide to sell patents held in another region. We have no firm data on the extent to which this is the
case. However, our manual inspections of the data have shown that in the vast majority of cases, the patents are
under the ownership of the same entity or at least the same multinational firm (with subsidiaries in the
respective regions).


                                                       16
patent via the publication number. Finally, we deal with the identification of the proper link
to the EPO patent-holder names in TASK 5, which takes account of the number of priority
links and number of patenters per EPO patent. We used a string similarity algorithm and also
manual checking to ensure the proper association across the USPTO assignee codes and EPO
applicant codes.

    TASK 1:           TASK 2:           TASK 3:           TASK 4:           TASK 5:
    Retrieval of      Retrieving        Merging           Retrieving        Merging
    USPTO             the USPTO         using             the EPO           to obtain
    assignee names    patent            priority links    patent            EPO/PCT
                      publication       across EPO        publication       standard names
                      numbers           & USPTO           numbers
                                        patents
    Source:           Source:
    USPTO             PATSTAT           Source:           Source:           Source:
    standardized      April 2009        PATSTAT           PATSTAT           EPOLINE
    assignee          Table tls211      April 2009        April 2009        source files
    names file                          Table tls219      table tls201      April 2008

    3,758,421         11,132,167        4,492,601         2,309,079         3,480,628
    patents           patent            priority links    patent            patent
    238,344 names     documents                           application       documents
                                                          documents         588,525 names
Figure 1. Harmonization tasks based on priority links: data and sources



The final list of EPO applicant codes with a US standardized name includes around 158
thousands patenter names corresponding to about 70 thousands names on the USPTO
CONAME file. This USPTO/EPO dictionary contains about 77.1% of the EPO patent
applications filed by business organizations and 77.7% of the US granted patents filed by
business organizations. The overall gain in the harmonization of the EPO applicant code is
about 55.8%. Thus this approach significantly increased the quality of the EPO standard
name codes file by using the USPTO CONAME file.

4     Implementation

4.1     Software prototype
In this section we summarize the structure of the software prototype for the creation of the
dataset.

The first software module regards the cleaning phase, i.e., the development of a dictionary.
We built on the previous contributions by Magerman et al. (2006) and Cockburn et al. (2009),




                                              17
adding some additional cleaning operations. The final list of operations is summarized by the
following sequence:19

       1. Transformation into upper case to simplify matching. Addition of a blank space at the
          beginning and end of the string to facilitate word-based tests.

       2. SGML and HTML codes substituted by the ASCII/ANSI equivalent, such as for
          example “&OACUTE;” replaced by “O” etc.

       3. Proprietary character codes replaced by the ASCII/ANSI equivalent.

       4. Each of the accented characters is replaced by its unaccented version.

       5. Removal of frequent comma, double quotation mark irregularities and other period
          irregularities and non-alphanumeric characters.

       6. The conjunction ”and” and its translations into other languages are standardized as
          “&”.

       7. Umlaut harmonization by reducing variations such as “ue”, “ae”, and “oe” to
          respectively “u”, “a”, and “o”.

       8. Removal of common company words like INC and AB in descending order of their
          length.

       9. Replacement of spelling variations with their harmonized equivalent for some
          frequent words (such as INTL for INTERNATIONAL and its variants).

       10. Removal of the round parentheses and cleaning their content; typically this content
           consists of geographical information or former company names.

       11. Removal of multiple blank spaces, replacing with a single space.

       12. Generation of a unique list of patenters by removing duplicates after cleaning.

       13. Linkage and indexing to the USPTO20 and EPO standard name codes.21 The goal of
           this operation is to achieve consistency and interoperability of the harmonization and
           matching files generated in this paper and future updates of the USPTO and EPO
           patent files that rely on these codes.

The second software module deals with the matching phase. We relied on a rule-based
approach based on the approximate string-matching algorithms discussed above and in
Thoma and Torrisi (2007). In particular we adopted the Jaccard weighted distance operator as


19
  We implemented these operations in a Java software prototype. An equivalent SQL query including these
operations is available under request.
20
     We extracted USPTO assignee names the so-called CONAME file. Source: USPTO, CD version March 2007.
21
   The source of the EPO standard name codes for EPO and WIPO/PCT patent dataset is the weekly EPOLINE
files (up to July 2008 in our case). http://ebd2.epoline.org/jsp/ebd1.jsp


                                                   18
described by equation (3). Compared to the edit distance this operator has several
improvements. Firstly, it is easier to deploy in software and it is characterized by a faster
computation time. Secondly, it is more conservative than edit distance in establishing a
similarity link across two different names because it allows for variation across tokens but not
those within the tokens: we think that in the case of business entity names variation across
tokens are more frequent with respect of those within tokens. Indeed we operated a deeper
cleaning phase in the first software module – compared to by Magerman et al. (2006) and
Cockburn et al. (2009) - in order to solve the business entity name variations within tokens.
Thirdly, the operator described by equation (3) ensures an interesting trade-off of statistical
relative weights for discriminating and non-discriminating tokens which makes it more
suitable than edit distance for solving name variations as those described by Box 1 and 2.

The third software module consists of some fine tuning operations included the refinement
of predicted matching candidates, the resolution of abbreviations and of multiple matching
occurrences of the same patenter, and formatting of the output files to be easily processed by
electronic spreadsheets and statistical software packages.

4.2     Dictionary creation
We used our software prototype to create and integrate a large dataset of patenters originating
from a high number of countries. The final results of the procedure for the creation of a
patenter names dictionary for EPO and PCT/WIPO dataset are depicted in the accompanying
tables:

      • Table 2 reports the country distribution of the business applicants and applications in
        the EPO/PCT dataset.

      • Table 3 reports the country distribution of the non-business organization (NBO)
        applicants and applications in the EPO/PCT dataset.

      • Table 4 reports the country distribution of the individual applicants and applications
        in EPO/PCT dataset.22

      • Figure 2 reports the distribution across the top 18 countries of the reduction in the
        number of applicants after name harmonization using the software prototype
        described in the previous section. The overall reduction of the size of the dictionary is
        about 28.8%.

                                            [Tables 2-4 about here]

                                             [Figure 2 about here]


22
   Unlike the USPTO, the EPO does not provide a standardized identifier for this kind of applicant. Typically
the names of individual applicants are supplied in the format “Surname”, “First name” “Middle name(s)” if any.
Hence, the identification of the individual applicants has been based on a stepwise heuristic procedure. Starting
from all the applicants that include a “,” in their name and have more than one token, we first excluded those
applicants which had a typical common company word in their name such as INC, LTD and AB. Second, we
removed those applicants with tokens related to non-business organizations. Third, we removed applicants with
generic words such “technology”, “system”, etc. Fourth, we inspected all the applicants with more than two
tokens and a case sensitive format such as “Smith, John” (for example) by hand.


                                                      19
4.3       Matching with business directories
In this section we report the results of the merge of patenter names with business directories.
In particular, we retrieved business and ownership information for the companies from
Amadeus by Bureau Van Dijk, which collects information from approximately 10 million
European firms and their subsidiaries at the worldwide level.

We extracted all the historical information included in the Amadeus CD version files during
the period 1998-2006. For each December release we retrieved information on:

           •    company demographics such as country, city, region, zip code, date of
                incorporation, industry 3 digits core code.

           •    unique identification number, which relies on national company identifiers such as
                VAT number, Chamber of Commerce numbers, etc.

           •    ownership structure such as subsidiaries and shareholders

           •    changes in the company names and some additional information.23

We start with the EPO/PCT applicant names for two reasons: First, thanks to the US/EP
dictionary described in the previous section we can transfer the matches to a large share of
the patenters at the USPTO. Second, exploiting the PCT links we can propagate this
dictionary to a significant number of patenters, those holding a large majority of the patent
documents in PATSTAT.

In matching EPO/PCT patenter names to the business directories we focused only on the
business patenters, which constitute about 63.4% of the patenter names in the EPO and about
54.8% in the PCT system. Overall they encompass about 337 thousands original names that
have been harmonized to about 240 thousands names according to the dictionary described in
the previous section. About 43.3% of the patenters have just one application in the EPO and
about 0.6% have more than 100.

We matched patenter names only if they also came from the same country, that is, the same
nationality of the patenting entity in the EPO/PCT dataset and company in Amadeus. The
results of the matching to the Amadeus business directories are depicted in the following
figures:

       • Table 5 and Figures 3a and 3b report the share of the business applicants in the EPO
         and PCT dataset that have been matched to Amadeus.

       • Figures 4a and 4b report the share of the business applicants in the EPO and PCT
         dataset that have been matched to Amadeus, weighted by their number of patent
         applications.

We also matched the USPTO patenters to the Amadeus dataset. This task was in two steps: in
the first we identified the matched EPO/PCT patenters (Table 5) that have been active also in
the USPTO using equivalents link file discussed in section 3.3. In the second step, for the


23
     Additional information has included website, emails, telefax numbers, and sales size class.


                                                         20
residual USPTO patenter names not matched using this file we matched directly to Amadeus
using the software prototype described in section 4.1.

      • Figure 5 shows the share of the business assignees in the USPTO dataset that have
        been matched to Amadeus, unweighted and weighted by their number of patent
        applications.

                                       [Table 5 about there]

                                   [Figures 3, 4, 5 about here]

5     Robustness checks and quality analysis
In this section we present some quality measures for the dataset developed in the previous
section in the hope of quantifying potential false positives (Type I error) and false negatives
(Type II error). A full-fledged analysis of this topic is beyond the scope of this paper and will
be addressed by future research. Indeed, it requires not only a broader theoretical discussion
about the entity matching process but also a deeper investigation of the generation of business
directories such as Amadeus. Phenomena that potentially could influence the matching
process include: relocation and reincorporation of the business activities, a firm’s ownership
structure, mergers and acquisitions, and others. In this direction we limit the discussion to
some aspects that could enable a more efficient use of the dataset developed in section 4.

5.1     False positives
For every matched pair we computed a quality of match score based on the similarity of the
name and location of the information in our patent data and the data in the Amadeus business
directory. The name similarity is measured as share of the total tokens over the total number
of tokens in the two names, whereas the location is given either by the city or zip code
correspondence. Table 2 shows the match score definitions.

                                           Table 6
                              The quality of entity match score
                   Score        Name                           Location
                   0            Manual check                   Manual check
                   1            Similarity >= 50%              Same
                   2            30% <= Similarity <= 50%       Same
                   3            Similarity >= 50%              Unknown
                   4            Similarity >= 50%              Different
                   5            30% <= Similarity <= 50%       Unknown
                   6            10% <= Similarity <= 30%       Same
                   7            30% <= Similarity <= 50%       Different
                   8            10% <= Similarity <= 30%       Unknown
                   9            10% <= Similarity <= 30%       Different


For the EPO/PCT dataset the distribution of the match quality scores is reported in Figure 6.
90% of the applicants are characterized by a high matching score, that is a value less than or
equal to 4. Similarly, Figure 7 shows the distribution of the match quality scores for the
USPTO dataset, where a similar proportion of 89% have a matching score less than or equal
to 4.

                                               21
                                      [Figures 6 and 7 about here]

A second quality measure is given by the patenting lag, that is the number of years since the
birth date of the patenting firm before it files its first patent application. We would expect this
lag to be greater than or equal to zero. A large negative patenting lag could be a symptom of
potential false positive matching. However, performing this check is hampered by the fact
that the company birth date information is not usually reported in business directories such as
Amadeus. Often business directories give the date of incorporation, which is when the
company took the limited liability legal form. This date can be later than the founding date if
the business venture started with self-employment or other legal company forms.

In spite of this limitation we created a patenting lag distribution relying on the incorporation
date. This lag was computed as the difference between the filing year of the earliest patent
and the incorporation year in Amadeus plus one year. Table 7 reports the distribution of the
patenting lag for the different levels of the match score. Overall we have a negative patenting
lag for about 7.4% of all the matched patenters and for 6.1% of the patenters that are active
after year 2000, which is when Amadeus began its very wide pan-European coverage.
Moreover, for patenters with a low match score there are visibly smaller proportion of
negative patenting lags (values 1, 2 and 3). On the one hand, this finding shows the validity
of the matching performed in section 4.3 and usefulness of the match score indicator. On the
other hand, it invites further investigation of the matched names having a negative lag in
order to check for the presence of potential false positives.24

                                          Table 7
                Negative patenting lag by different levels of the match score
                              All Patenters           Patenters active after 2000
              Score         obs            %              obs             %
                0          1,385         13.9%           1,188          10.9%
                1          32,748         5.2%          29,748           4.6%
                2          3,819          9.1%           3,470           8.5%
                3          1,189         10.0%           1,081           6.8%
                4          11907         19.9%           9,846           7.4%
                5           164          25.0%            138           18.1%
                6           390          13.1%            360           11.4%
                7          2,098         15.2%           1,745          12.6%
                8            4            0.0%             4             0.0%
                9            0            0.0%             0             0.0%
              Overall      53,704         7.4%          47,580           6.1%


A third and final analysis of the Type I error problem was performed by analyzing manually a
sample of a hundred firm names drawn randomly from among the European business
applicant names at the EPO.25 The dataset developed in section 4 identified 76 matched


24
  A preliminary analysis revealed that negative patenting lag was often associated with the re-incorporation of a
company after the decision to relocate its business activities or with a merger or acquisition.
25
  The harmonization and matching operations were performed only within the sample of business applicant
names at the EPO. Hence we used the same population to draw a random sample.


                                                       22
applicants to Amadeus, whereas 24 names were not matched. Out of these 76, three were
false matches, that is 3.9%. In particular, they were the following:

      i) Patenter DRALORIC ELECTRONIC GMBH matched with company
             ELECTRONICS (DE715000111). Location zip or city is unknown (match score
             3).

      ii) Patenter COPRECI S COOP LTDA matched with company BATZ S COOP
              (ESF48037600). Location zip or city is matched (match score 1).

      iii) Patenter VAN BUUREN VAN SWAAY matched with company VAN SWAAY
               BEHEER (NL09085054 ) Location zip or city does not match (match score 4).

Example i) is characterized by a high Jaccard similarity although the company name consists
of only one non-discriminating token. In addition, the correspondence location zip and city
were unknown and hence the value of the match score was equal to 3. In this example, adding
further quality criteria, the user of the dataset could reduce the ambiguity of the name
similarity. In particular names with no discriminating tokens might need to be treated
separately.

Example ii) is a false positive because the match is identified by one common company word
(“COOP”) and one non-discriminating token (“S”). Moreover the correspondence of the
location was verified so the match score was 1. This example is similar to the previous in that
the names matched only on non-discriminating tokens.

Example iii) shows that the match is made up by one discriminating token (“SWAAY”) and
one not discriminating (“VAN”). However, the non-discriminating token is repeated two
times in the patenter name which increases artificially the similarity of the two names. This
example suggests that it might be useful to remove duplicate tokens in the names before
matching.

5.2     False negatives
In general, the assessment of the Type II error (failing to match an applicant that should be
matched) is more difficult because it requires broader definition of matching criteria. In this
section we describe two approaches.

The first approach deepens the analysis of the one hundred patenter names that were
examined in the previous section. We reported that 24 patenter names out of 100 were not
matched to any company in Amadeus. First, we found that among them were 2 individual
applicant names and one non-business organization name, that is about 10% of the
unmatched applicants. On the one hand, this finding shows some drawbacks in the
identification method of the institutional type of patenter names used in Figure 3.26 On the
other, it suggests that the real coverage of the matching depicted in Figure 4 could be even
higher; in particular for the European patenters the actual matching to Amadeus could be as
high as 80% of the EPO standard codes.


26
  Indeed we noted that the format “Surname, First name Middle name(s)” has not been strictly followed by the
EPO. A full-fledged methodology could therefore be based on the matching of the individual applicant names
with inventors of the same invention. This is left for future development.


                                                    23
Second, we found only one case of a false negative, that is:

       -   Patenter name DISTEC should have been matched with DISTEC VERTRIEB VON
           ELEKTRONISCHEN BAUELEMENTEN (DE8330189835)

This example could be explained by the presence of the non-discriminating token “DISTEC”.
This common word generates a low similarity score in the expression of eq. (3) because
company name is made up of four other tokens, two of them discriminating and hence with
high statistical score. This example suggests that it might be worth exploring other token
based similarity functions.

Thirdly, there were 20 patenter names that could not be found in Amadeus business directory.
The full-fledged identification of the origin of these applicants in terms of sector, age and size
is beyond the scope of this paper. There are several explanations for the fact that these firms
are not found in Amadeus (1998-2008). First, they may have been included in Amadeus after
the date of our version. Second, some of these patenters are probably not limited liability
firms. Third, their names may have changed since the patent was applied for but before they
incorporated. Fourth, they have been incorporated in a different country from the one given
on the patent. Fifth, they could have exited, merged and been acquired by another firm before
the year 1998.

The second approach for the assessment of Type II errors analyzes the names of some large
EU firms which have reported R&D activities. Typically, the R&D process is accompanied
by patenting activities and a large share of patenting is done by large R&D performers. Thus
focusing on firms with R&D reduces the cost of searching for false negatives. This analysis
involved extracting some uniquely identifying keywords from the names of some large R&D
performers and checking whether they were matched.

Table 8 reports a list of discriminating tokens that identify uniquely about a hundred large
R&D firms from Europe. These tokens have been extracted from the company names of the
top 2,197 European R&D doers.27 We selected these tokens randomly from the single token
company names that were highly discriminating.

The fact that these tokens are discriminating does not necessarily mean that the similarity
measure of equation (3) scores high. For example the token “ABB” is discriminating but it is
also statistically very frequent in the dataset, which dwarfs the weighted Jaccard similarity
distance of equation (3). Secondly, while these words are extracted from single token
company names in Amadeus, in the patenter names they could occur jointly with other words
– such as generic, geographical, etc – that lower the size of the similarity index of equation
(3).

We report the statistical distribution of these tokens in the EPO/PCT matched dataset and the
dataset that contains the remaining unmatched applicants – confining ourselves to patenters
from European countries. Among the unmatched patenter names, about 6.5% of the names
could be associated to these discriminating tokens. In other words, for about 6.5% unmatched
patenter names, these discriminating tokens are in their words or subwords.

                                              [Table 8 about here]

27
     For more information about the dataset from which they were extracted, see Hall et al. (2007).


                                                         24
Broadly speaking, this percentage could be a potential proxy for Type II error. However,
when we restricted the search only to location in the same country this percentage falls to less
than 1%. Similarly, focusing on the patentees that have more than 2 patents the percentage is
about 2.1%.

Put differently, if we condition for the same country location – as we did in all the matching
tasks – false negatives are probably a small number. In general, some false negatives could be
associated with a discrepancy in the nationality of the patenter and the country location of the
company in the business directory. One solution to overcome this drawback could be the
relaxation of the matching condition requiring the same geographic location. In the current
version of the dataset we opted for a conservative approach, assuming that there is one-to-one
correspondence of a patenter from a given country and the legal business entity recorded in
Amadeus in that country.

An additional robustness check weighted the false negatives by patent counts (see again
Table 8). The overall percentage is very small about 0.5%. In some few cases of companies
the share of missing patent counts due to false negatives is high such as “SAFEWAY”,
“ALPHAFORM”, “INGENTA”, “PENNON”, “SOGEFI”. However these companies are
characterised by a limited patenting activity, that is a patent portfolio of about a dozen
patents.

In conclusion, the two tests conducted in this section point to consistent estimates and a small
relative share of false negatives – less than 5% in general. Further analysis could be done by
adjusting the distance measure described in equation (3) and complementing it with other
similarity functions in order to improve the false negative rate further. In addition, a deeper
investigation of the generation of business directories database such as Amadeus could
contribute to the understanding of the unmatched patenter names. In particular, phenomena
that have not been explored here are the relocation and reincorporation of business activities,
firms’ ownership structures, the effects of mergers and acquisitions, and other name changes
or reorganizations.

6   Conclusions
In this paper we drew on NER methods from bioinformatics and applied two different
approaches to data integration in the context of patent information. The dictionary-based
approach relies on the collection of large datasets of names and their variants, while the rule-
based approach articulates a set of rules to establish similarity links across different entity
names. Additionally, we discussed how the value of existing dictionaries could be enhanced
by using other methods to retrieve original data. Then we applied our methodology to several
data sources, including major patent databases and business directories such as Amadeus.

The resulting data contains around 131 thousands patent applicant names from 46 countries,
covering approximately 58.8 percent of EPO applications and 50.6 percent of PCT
applications by business organizations during the time period 1979 to 2008. For the US, the
resulting dataset includes about 54 thousands assignee names and 51.3 percent of US granted
patents during approximately the same time period.

There are several novel elements associated with this paper and dataset. First, this paper is
among of the first attempts to adopt insights from other domains such as bioinformatics in the
field of the information integration of company-level data. Second, we focus on patenter
names of major patent offices, including the EPO and the USPTO, but also the WIPO/PCT

                                              25
database which has been rarely employed in innovation studies. Third, we relied on a pan-
European business directory (Amadeus by Bureau Van Dijk) to trace the patent-holder names
to owning entitities. Fourth, we created a more comprehensive dataset than has been available
hitherto that constains all the patenting activity of European firms at the EPO, USPTO and
PCT since the 1970s. Fifth, we developed a matching methodology that relies not only on the
name similarity of business entities, but also on such criteria as location information, age, etc.

There are also limitations to this work that will have to be addressed in future research. First,
our focus has been on European patent-holders and their subsidiaries whereas a large share of
patents are filed by North American firms – US and Canada – and those from Asia – such as
Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and increasingly China. The methodology developed in this paper
could be extended to patenting entitites in these countries, but there are some caveats. For US
and Canadian firms extensive business directories such as Dun & Bradstreet files or Icarus
and Orbis by Bureau Van Dijk report data by firm establishments and not by legal business
entities: thus for the same legal business entity there could be several establishments. The
different structure of the business directories will require a slightly different approach to
consolidation to the parent firms. For Asian firms we noticed that often the patenter names
are characterised by transliteration errors at the level of a single word, which hampers a direct
implementation of the token-based similarity measures. In this case other similarity measures
could be used to pre-process the patenter names such as the edit/Levenshtein distance,
Hamming distance, and others.



7   References
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A. and Gambardella, A. (2001), Markets for Technology: The Economics of
        Innovation and Corporate Strategy. MIT Press, Cambridge MA
Arundel, A. (2003), Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy, Report of the KNOW Survey, MERIT,
       University of Maastricht.
Belenzon, S., Berkovitz, T. and J. M. Van Reenen (2007), AmaPat - Innovation, Ownership and
       Financials for European Firms: Data Overview, Presentation at the 2007 Kauffman
       Symposium on Entrepreneurship and Innovation. Data Available at SSRN:
       http://ssrn.com/abstract=1022044
Bound, J., Cummins, C., Griliches, Z., Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B. (1984), Who Does R&D and Who
       Patents? In Griliches Z. (ed.) R&D, Patents, and Productivity. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press, 21-54.
Cockburn, I. M., A. Agrawal, J. Bessen, J. H. S. Graham, B. H. Hall, and M. MacGarvie (2009), The
      NBER Patent Citations Datafile Update. Data available at
      https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/Home
Cockburn, I. M., B. H. Hall, W. Powell, and M. Trajtenberg (2004), Patent Data Project – Brief
      Literature Review, section from the proposal to the National Science Foundation. Available at
      http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~bhhall/bhpapers.html
Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, et al. (2000), Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability
       Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not). Cambridge, MA: NBER
       Working Paper No. 7552.
Curran, J. R. and Clark, S. (2003), Language independent NER using a maximum entropy tagger, in
        Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Natural Language Learning, 31st May-1st June,
        Edmonton, Canada, 164-167.


                                                 26
Derwent (2000), World Patents Index - Derwent Patentee Codes, Revised Edition 8 ISBN: 0 901157
      38 4, Thomson Publishers.
Fosfuri, A., and Giarratana, M.S. (2007), Product Strategies and Survival in Schumpeterian
        Environments: Evidence from the US Security Software Industry. Organization Studies 28
        (6): 909-929.
Gambardella, A., D. Harhoff, and B. Verspagen (2008), The Value of European Patents, European
      Management Review 5 (2), 69-84
Giarratana. M. and Torrisi, S. (2004), Entry and Survival in Foreign Markets: Technology, Brand
        Building and International Linkages, Social Science Research Network - Electronic Paper
        Collection, SSRN_ID577401_code386435.pdf (http://papers.ssrn.com).
Giuri, P. et al. (2007), Inventors and Invention Processes in Europe. Results from the PatVal-EU
        Survey, Research Policy 36 (8), 1107-1127
Goto, A., and K. Motohashi (2007), Construction of a Japanese Patent Database and a First Look at
       Japanese Patenting Activities. Research Policy 36(9), 1431-42.
Graham, S. D. Somaya (2004) “The Use of Patents, Copyrights, and Trademarks in Software:
      Evidence from Litigation,” with. In Patents, Innovation and Economic Performance, OECD
      Conference Proceedings.
Greenhalgh, C., and M. Rogers (2007), The value of intellectual property rights to firms and society,
       Oxford Review of Economic Policy 23 (4): 541–567
Griffith, R., R. Harrison, and G. Macartney (2006), Matching patents to firm accounting data for
         European countries. Paper presented at the EPIP Workshop on Patent Data, Universitá L.
         Bocconi, Milan, Italy, February.
Griliches, Z. (1981), Market Value, R&D, and Patents, Economic Letters 7: 183-187.
Griliches, Z. (1990), Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey. Journal of Economic
        Literature XXVIII (Dec.): 1661-1707.
Griliches, Z., Hall, B. H. and Pakes, A. (1991), R&D, Patents. And Market Value Revisited: Is There
        a Second (Technological Opportunity) Factor?. Economics of Innovation and New
        Technology 1: 183-202.
Hall, B. H. (1993), The Stock Market's Valuation of Research and Development Investment During
        the 1980s. American Economic Review 83: 259-264.
Hall, B. H., and W. F. Long (1999), Differences in Reported R&D Data on the NSF/Census RD-1
        Form and the SEC 10-K Form: A Micro-Data Investigation. NBER, UC Berkeley, Oxford
        University, and BPRA. Available at http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~bhhall/bhpapers.html
Hall, B. H., Griliches, Z., and J. A. Hausman (1986), Patents and R&D: Is There a Lag? International
        Economic Review 27: 265-83.
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., and M. Trajtenberg (2001), The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
        Insights, and Methodological Tools. Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 7741.
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., and M. Trajtenberg (2005), Market Value and Patent Citations. RAND
        Journal of Economics 36: 16-38.
Harhoff, D. (2008), “Patent Families, Equivalents and Patent Value,” Paper Presented at the Meeting
       of the NBER Program on Technological Change and Productivity Measurement Dec. 5th,
       2008
Harhoff, D., F. M. Scherer and K. Vopel (2003). “Citations, Family Size, Opposition and the Value of
       Patent Rights - Evidence from Germany,” Research Policy, 32, 1343-1363.




                                                  27
Heong, W. M., D. Page, R. Abello and K. P. Pang, (2007), “Explorations of Innovation and Business
       Performance Using Linked Firm-Level Data,” Research Paper, Australian Bureau of Statistics
       cat. no. 1351.0.55.020, September, Canberra, Australia.
Jaccard, P. (1901), Bulletin del la Société Vaudoisedes Sciences Naturelles 37, 241-272.
Janz, N., G., Ebling, S., Gottschalk, H., and Niggemann (2001), “The Mannheim Innovation Panels
        (MIP and MIP-S) of the Centre for European Economic Research (ZEW),” Schmollers
        Jahrbuch - Zeitschrift für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften 121, 123-129.
Leser, U. and J. Hakenberg (2005), What makes a gene name - Named entity recognition in the
        biomedical literature. Briefings in Bioinformatics 6 (4): 357-369.
Levenshtein, V. I. (1966), Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversal.
       Soviet Physics Doklady 10(8): 707-710.
Levin, R. C., A. K. Klevorick, et al. (1987), Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and
        Development. Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 3: 783-831.
Magerman, T. Van Looy B., and Song X. (2006), Data production methods for harmonized patent
      statistics: Patentee name standardization. Technical report, K.U. Leuven FETEW MSI.
Mairesse, J., and P. Mohnen (2010), Innovation surveys, forthcoming in Hall, B. H., and N.
       Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Elsevier-North Holland.
Mendonca, S. & Pereira, T. S. & Godinho, M. M., (2004). "Trademarks as an indicator of innovation
      and industrial change," Research Policy, Elsevier, vol. 33(9), pages 1385-1404.
Moser, P. (2005), How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth-Century
       World Fairs. American Economic Review 95 (4): 1215-1236.
Murray, F. Aghion P., Dewatrapont M., Kolev J. and S. Stern (2008). "Of Mice and Academics: The
       Role of Openness in Science". MIT Sloan Working Paper.
Nagaoka, S. and J. P. Walsh (2008), How do the innovation systems of US and Japan differ? What are
      the potential implications?: Evidence from the RIETI-Georgia Tech inventor surveys. Paper
      presented at the RIETI Brown Bag lunch, Tokyo, Japan, July.
Nagaoka, S. and N. Tsukada (2007), Innovation process in Japan from inventors’ perspective: results
      of RIETI inventor survey. Tokyo, Japan: RIETI Discussion Paper07-J-046 (in Japanese).
Navarro, G. (2001), A guided tour to approximate string matching. ACM Computing Surveys 33 (1):
       31--88.
OECD (2002), Frascati Manual. OECD, Paris.
OECD (2009), OECD Patent Statistics Manual, OECD, Paris.
OECD and Eurostat (2005), Oslo Manual, The measurement of scientific and technological activities
     Proposed guidelines for collecting and interpreting technological innovation data (3rd edition),
     OECD, Paris.
Patel, P. and K. Pavitt (1991), Large firms in the production of the world's technology: an important
         case of ‘non-globalisation'. Journal of International Business Studies 22 (1): 1-21.
Pavitt, K. (1985), Patent Statistics as an Indicator of Innovative Activities: Possibilities and Problems.
        Scientometrics 7 (1-2): 77-99.
Pavitt, K. (1988), Uses and abuses of patent statistics. In van Raan, A. (ed.), Handbook of
        Quantitative Studies of Science Policy, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Pavitt, K., Robson, M. and Townsend, J. (1987), The Size Distribution of Innovating Firms in the UK:
        1945-1983. Journal of Industrial Economics 35 (March): 291-316.




                                                   28
Powell, W. W., D. R. White, et al. (2005), Network Dynamics and Field Evolution: The Growth of
        Interorganizational Collaboration in the Life Sciences. American Journal of Sociology 110
        (4): 1132-1205.
Salton, G. and Buckley, C. (1988), Term-weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval.
        Information Processing and Management 24(5): 513-523.
Sandner, P. (2009). The Market Value of R&D, Patents, and Trademarks, LMU working Paper,
       mimeo, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1469705
Schmookler J. (1966), Invention and Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Smith, T. F. and Waterman, M.S. (1981), Identification of common molecular subsequences. Journal
       of Molecular Biology 147: 195-197.
Thoma G. and Torrisi S. (2007), Creating Powerful Indicators for Innovation Studies with
      Approximate Matching Algorithms. A test based on PATSTAT and Amadeus databases.
      Paper presented at the Conference on Patent Statistics for Policy Decision Making, 2-3
      October 2007, San Servolo, Venice. Milan, Italy: CESPRI-Bocconi University WP 211
      (December), available at http://www.cespri.unibocconi.it/
Um, M. J, (2005), Korean Innovation Survey: Manufacturing Sector, Policy Research Report
      12/2005, Seoul Korea, available at http://www.stepi.re.kr/eng/
von Graevenitz, G. (2007), "Which Reputations Does a Brand Owner Need? Evidence from Trade
       Mark Opposition", GESY Discussion Paper No. 215.




                                                 29
            Table 2 Business applicants and applications in EPO and PCT dataset
                   (distinct original names, countries with more than 100 EP applicants)
        EP Applicants WO applicants EP applications WO applications                 Average Average
Country  N       %          N        %         N         %         N        % EP portfolio WO portfolio
AN         286 0.1%           66 0.0%          1,096 0.1%            245 0.0%          3.83   3.71
AT       3,404 1.3%        1,936 0.9%         15,707 0.9%          7,893 0.7%          4.61   4.08
AU       4,787 1.8%        8,134 3.7%          9,236 0.5%         14,888 1.4%          1.93   1.83
BB         140 0.1%           69 0.0%          1,134 0.1%            191 0.0%          8.10   2.77
BE       2,892 1.1%        1,513 0.7%         15,421 0.9%          6,992 0.6%          5.33   4.62
BG         111 0.0%           63 0.0%            142 0.0%             80 0.0%          1.28   1.27
BM         107 0.0%           61 0.0%            298 0.0%            168 0.0%          2.79   2.75
BR         343 0.1%          254 0.1%            661 0.0%            352 0.0%          1.93   1.39
CA       5,574 2.1%        6,610 3.0%         18,404 1.0%         17,808 1.6%          3.30   2.69
CH       9,612 3.7%        5,411 2.4%         64,547 3.6%         28,326 2.6%          6.72   5.24
CN       1,337 0.5%        2,200 1.0%          3,501 0.2%          8,292 0.8%          2.62   3.77
CY         129 0.0%          148 0.1%            276 0.0%            318 0.0%          2.14   2.15
CZ         248 0.1%          253 0.1%            452 0.0%            409 0.0%          1.82   1.62
DE      37,564 14.4% 18,733 8.4%             345,386 19.3% 147,941 13.5%               9.19   7.90
DK       3,242 1.2%        3,357 1.5%         11,836 0.7%         11,629 1.1%          3.65   3.46
ES       3,286 1.3%        2,273 1.0%          7,000 0.4%          4,271 0.4%          2.13   1.88
FI       3,096 1.2%        3,209 1.4%         18,467 1.0%         17,846 1.6%          5.96   5.56
FR      21,361 8.2% 10,918 4.9%              125,162 7.0%         46,988 4.3%          5.86   4.30
GB      20,538 7.9% 17,042 7.7%               84,913 4.7%         56,743 5.2%          4.13   3.33
GR         180 0.1%          132 0.1%            274 0.0%            207 0.0%          1.52   1.57
HK         301 0.1%           16 0.0%            436 0.0%             18 0.0%          1.45   1.13
HU         633 0.2%          599 0.3%          1,596 0.1%          1,226 0.1%          2.52   2.05
IE       1,150 0.4%        1,020 0.5%          2,862 0.2%          2,578 0.2%          2.49   2.53
IL       2,500 1.0%        1,704 0.8%          4,845 0.3%          2,703 0.2%          1.94   1.59
IN         439 0.2%          577 0.3%          1,498 0.1%          2,680 0.2%          3.41   4.64
IT      17,024 6.5%        6,542 2.9%         54,688 3.1%         16,345 1.5%          3.21   2.50
JP      23,703 9.1% 17,883 8.0%              350,015 19.6% 163,365 15.0%              14.77   9.14
KR       2,977 1.1%        5,655 2.5%         22,550 1.3%         17,237 1.6%          7.57   3.05
LI         588 0.2%           62 0.0%          2,363 0.1%             78 0.0%          4.02   1.26
LU         659 0.3%          414 0.2%          2,483 0.1%          1,442 0.1%          3.77   3.48
NL       7,502 2.9%        4,460 2.0%         67,101 3.7%         41,232 3.8%          8.94   9.24
NO       2,028 0.8%        2,628 1.2%          4,785 0.3%          5,885 0.5%          2.36   2.24
NZ         598 0.2%          553 0.2%          1,046 0.1%            835 0.1%          1.75   1.51
PL         249 0.1%          195 0.1%            402 0.0%            342 0.0%          1.61   1.75
PT         204 0.1%          142 0.1%            380 0.0%            204 0.0%          1.86   1.44
RU         372 0.1%          467 0.2%            473 0.0%            597 0.1%          1.27   1.28
SE       7,487 2.9%        7,632 3.4%         35,584 2.0%         35,735 3.3%          4.75   4.68
SG         304 0.1%          432 0.2%            856 0.0%            719 0.1%          2.82   1.66
SI         151 0.1%          135 0.1%            428 0.0%            351 0.0%          2.83   2.60
SU         112 0.0%             0 0.0%           227 0.0%              0 0.0%          2.03 #DIV/0!
TR         181 0.1%          219 0.1%            468 0.0%            776 0.1%          2.59   3.54
TW         924 0.4%          101 0.0%          1,826 0.1%            220 0.0%          1.98   2.18
US      70,194 26.9% 87,431 39.3% 503,399 28.1% 423,571 38.8%                          7.17   4.84
VG         267 0.1%          124 0.1%          1,158 0.1%            500 0.0%          4.34   4.03
ZA         649 0.2%          390 0.2%          1,211 0.1%            579 0.1%          1.87   1.48
Others   1,565 0.6%          868 0.4%          3,129 0.2%          1,366 0.1%          2.00   1.57


Overall   260,997 100.0% 222,628 100.0% 1,789,721 100.0% 1,092,169 100.0%        6.86         4.91
     Table 3 Non-business organization applicants and applications in EPO and PCT dataset
                        (distinct original names, countries with more than 100 EP applicants)*
            EP Applicants      WO applicants        EP applications WO applications           Average    Average
Country      N        %           N         %         N          %         N        %      EP portfolio WO portfolio
AT             130 0.7%              97 0.5%            419 0.4%             257 0.2%          3.22        2.65
AU             506 2.7%            671 3.5%           2,535 2.6%           3,708 3.2%          5.01        5.53
BE             332 1.8%            244 1.3%           2,198 2.3%           1,184 1.0%          6.62        4.85
CA             711 3.8%            850 4.4%           2,478 2.6%           3,498 3.0%          3.49        4.12
CH             419 2.3%            355 1.9%           1,767 1.8%           1,227 1.0%          4.22        3.46
CN             345 1.9%            578 3.0%             684 0.7%           1,778 1.5%          1.98        3.08
DE           2,014 10.9%         1,377 7.2%          11,494 11.9%          8,718 7.5%          5.71        6.33
DK             129 0.7%            152 0.8%             420 0.4%             530 0.5%          3.26        3.49
ES             311 1.7%            393 2.1%             909 0.9%           1,653 1.4%          2.92        4.21
FR           1,558 8.4%          1,182 6.2%          14,389 14.8%          9,122 7.8%          9.24        7.72
GB           1,323 7.1%          1,370 7.1%           6,624 6.8%           7,254 6.2%          5.01        5.29
IL             204 1.1%            127 0.7%             956 1.0%             444 0.4%          4.69        3.50
IN             126 0.7%             188 1.0%            727 0.8%           1,093 0.9%          5.77        5.81
IT             491 2.6%            354 1.8%           1,885 1.9%           1,385 1.2%          3.84        3.91
JP           1,683 9.1%          1,485 7.7%           7,320 7.6%           9,541 8.2%          4.35        6.42
KR             409 2.2%            557 2.9%           1,481 1.5%           2,586 2.2%          3.62        4.64
NL             436 2.4%            393 2.1%           2,327 2.4%           1,892 1.6%          5.34        4.81
PL             119 0.6%              87 0.5%            242 0.2%             170 0.1%          2.03        1.95
RU             125 0.7%              87 0.5%            226 0.2%             145 0.1%          1.81        1.67
SE             143 0.8%            151 0.8%             274 0.3%             285 0.2%          1.92        1.89
SU             159 0.9%               2 0.0%            350 0.4%               9 0.0%          2.20        4.50
US           5,892 31.8%         7,618 39.8%         34,777 35.9%         58,106 49.7%         5.90        7.63
Others         980 5.3%            845 4.4%           2,429 2.5%           2,371 2.0%          2.48        2.81


Overall       18,544 100.0% 19,162 100.0% 96,910 100.0% 116,956 100.0%                          5.23       6.10
Notes: *It includes also those individual applicants having the suffix "Prof." in their name.
          Table 4 Individual applicants and applications in EPO and PCT dataset
                   (distinct original names, countries with more than 100 EP applicants)
          EP Applicants WO applicants EP applications WO applications Average              Average
Country     N      %          N        %        N        %         N       % EP portfolio WO portfolio
AR           243 0.2%           69 0.0%          291 0.2%             73 0.0%        1.20    1.06
AT         3,165 2.4%        2,029 1.2%        5,002 2.9%          2,943 1.4%        1.58    1.45
AU         2,991 2.3%        6,713 4.1%        3,530 2.0%          7,878 3.9%        1.18    1.17
BE         1,702 1.3%        1,017 0.6%        2,191 1.3%          1,206 0.6%        1.29    1.19
BG           120 0.1%          283 0.2%          134 0.1%            328 0.2%        1.12    1.16
BR           302 0.2%          506 0.3%          329 0.2%            557 0.3%        1.09    1.10
CA         2,895 2.2%        5,072 3.1%        3,645 2.1%          6,101 3.0%        1.26    1.20
CH         4,687 3.6%        3,121 1.9%        6,937 4.0%         4,166 2.1%         1.48    1.33
CN         1,232 0.9%        4,727 2.9%        1,401 0.8%         5,966 2.9%         1.14    1.26
CZ           267 0.2%          530 0.3%          316 0.2%            626 0.3%        1.18    1.18
DE        25,515 19.3% 15,279 9.3%            39,302 22.5% 21,297 10.5%              1.54    1.39
DK         1,434 1.1%        1,832 1.1%        1,810 1.0%         2,272 1.1%         1.26    1.24
ES         2,791 2.1%        2,791 1.7%        3,384 1.9%          3,219 1.6%        1.21    1.15
FI         1,270 1.0%        1,967 1.2%        1,588 0.9%          2,512 1.2%        1.25    1.28
FR        12,552 9.5%        8,814 5.4%       16,519 9.5%        11,121 5.5%         1.32    1.26
GB         8,481 6.4%        9,863 6.0%       10,392 5.9%        11,955 5.9%         1.23    1.21
GR           619 0.5%          597 0.4%          732 0.4%            736 0.4%        1.18    1.23
HK           134 0.1%           13 0.0%          182 0.1%             13 0.0%        1.36    1.00
HR           109 0.1%          353 0.2%          125 0.1%            422 0.2%        1.15    1.20
HU           837 0.6%        1,472 0.9%          986 0.6%         1,833 0.9%         1.18    1.25
IE           602 0.5%          602 0.4%          740 0.4%            734 0.4%        1.23    1.22
IL         1,265 1.0%        1,141 0.7%        1,523 0.9%         1,283 0.6%         1.20    1.12
IN           384 0.3%        1,099 0.7%          449 0.3%         1,578 0.8%         1.17    1.44
IT         8,263 6.3%        4,780 2.9%       10,637 6.1%         5,853 2.9%         1.29    1.22
JP         6,023 4.6%        7,436 4.5%        9,367 5.4%        10,748 5.3%         1.56    1.45
KR         2,135 1.6%        7,842 4.8%        2,540 1.5%          9,768 4.8%        1.19    1.25
MX           132 0.1%          441 0.3%          142 0.1%            506 0.2%        1.08    1.15
NL         2,495 1.9%        1,784 1.1%        3,216 1.8%           2169 1.1%        1.29    1.22
NO         1,077 0.8%        1,671 1.0%        1,302 0.7%           2068 1.0%        1.21    1.24
NZ           350 0.3%          414 0.3%          401 0.2%            433 0.2%        1.15    1.05
PL           298 0.2%          680 0.4%          351 0.2%            821 0.4%        1.18    1.21
PT           181 0.1%          160 0.1%          202 0.1%            189 0.1%        1.12    1.18
RU           923 0.7%        2,683 1.6%        1,101 0.6%          3472 1.7%         1.19    1.29
SE         4,758 3.6%        5,937 3.6%        6,149 3.5%          7577 3.7%         1.29    1.28
SI           157 0.1%          231 0.1%          195 0.1%            276 0.1%        1.24    1.19
SU           288 0.2%            5 0.0%          348 0.2%              5 0.0%        1.21    1.00
TR           132 0.1%          281 0.2%          156 0.1%            328 0.2%        1.18    1.17
TW         1,431 1.1%          144 0.1%        2,056 1.2%            180 0.1%        1.44    1.25
US        27,442 20.8% 56,118 34.1% 34,846 19.9%                  69714 34.3%        1.27    1.24
YU           159 0.1%          119 0.1%          218 0.1%            130 0.1%        1.37    1.09
ZA           602 0.5%        1,439 0.9%          681 0.4%           1628 0.8%        1.13    1.13
Others      1484 1.1%         2453 1.5%         1823 1.0%           2954 1.5%        1.23    1.20


Overall   131,923 100.0% 164,503 100.0% 174,732 101.4% 203,054 102.3%           1.32         1.23
          Table 5 Matched business applicants and applications in EPO and PCT dataset
                EP Applicants   WO applicants EP applications WO applications Average      Average
Country            N      %       N      %       N       %     N        %    EP portfolio WO portfolio
Not available         5 0.0%         4 0.0%        637 0.1%       66 0.0%        0.01         0.06
AN                    1 0.0%         0 0.0%          2 0.0%        0 0.0%        0.50         4.08
AT                2,502 1.9%     1,343 1.8%     13,462 1.3%    6,744 1.2%        0.19         1.52
AU                  226 0.2%       203 0.3%        565 0.1%      776 0.1%        0.40         3.26
BE                2,526 1.9%     1,238 1.6%     14,081 1.3%    6,423 1.1%        0.18         1.46
BG                    8 0.0%         5 0.0%          5 0.0%        5 0.0%        1.60        13.04
BM                    1 0.0%         1 0.0%          3 0.0%        4 0.0%        0.33        2.72
CA                  437 0.3%       325 0.4%      2,415 0.2%    2,039 0.4%        0.18        1.48
CH                4,329 3.3%     2,372 3.1%     49,654 4.6% 21,334 3.8%          0.09        0.71
CN                   10 0.0%         7 0.0%         46 0.0%       83 0.0%        0.22        1.77
CY                    2 0.0%         2 0.0%          3 0.0%        4 0.0%        0.67        5.43
CZ                  159 0.1%       109 0.1%        267 0.0%      241 0.0%        0.60         4.85
DD                    3 0.0%         0 0.0%         16 0.0%        0 0.0%        0.19         1.53
DE               31,779 24.2%   15,247 20.0% 326,515 30.6% 142,407 25.3%         0.10         0.79
DK                3,016 2.3%     2,518 3.3%     10,702 1.0% 10,534 1.9%          0.28         2.30
EE                   11 0.0%        11 0.0%          7 0.0%       12 0.0%        1.57        12.81
ES                2,455 1.9%     1,334 1.8%      5,371 0.5%    3,078 0.5%        0.46        3.73
FI                2,583 2.0%     2,059 2.7%     16,700 1.6% 15,951 2.8%          0.15        1.26
FO                   10 0.0%         9 0.0%      4,172 0.4%      874 0.2%        0.00        0.02
FR               16,627 12.7%    8,244 10.8% 115,648 10.8% 44,582 7.9%           0.14        1.17
GB               17,260 13.2%   11,551 15.2%    76,166 7.1% 49,473 8.8%          0.23        1.85
GR                  105 0.1%        71 0.1%        159 0.0%      132 0.0%        0.66        5.38
HR                   24 0.0%        15 0.0%        138 0.0%      112 0.0%        0.17        1.42
HU                  187 0.1%       150 0.2%        766 0.1%      581 0.1%        0.24         1.99
IE                  545 0.4%       404 0.5%      1,556 0.1%    1,372 0.2%        0.35         2.86
IL                    1 0.0%         1 0.0%          1 0.0%        1 0.0%        1.00         8.15
IN                   34 0.0%        25 0.0%         25 0.0%       64 0.0%        1.36        11.09
IT               14,100 10.8%    4,837 6.4%     48,675 4.6% 14,106 2.5%          0.29         2.36
JP                1,890 1.4%     1,114 1.5%     55,438 5.2% 21,637 3.8%          0.03         0.28
KR                  265 0.2%       165 0.2%      9,190 0.9%    2,950 0.5%        0.03        0.24
LI                    1 0.0%         0 0.0%          8 0.0%        0 0.0%        0.13        1.02
LT                    5 0.0%         1 0.0%          6 0.0%        2 0.0%        0.83        6.79
LU                  106 0.1%        58 0.1%        859 0.1%      460 0.1%        0.12        1.01
LV                    4 0.0%         3 0.0%          2 0.0%        4 0.0%        2.00       16.30
NL                6,446 4.9%     3,365 4.4%     63,863 6.0% 39,386 7.0%          0.10        0.82
NO                2,427 1.9%     2,187 2.9%      4,386 0.4%    5,325 0.9%        0.55         4.51
PL                  191 0.1%       114 0.1%        353 0.0%      263 0.0%        0.54         4.41
PT                   95 0.1%        48 0.1%        189 0.0%       91 0.0%        0.50         4.10
RO                   18 0.0%        14 0.0%         15 0.0%       14 0.0%        1.20         9.78
SE                6,561 5.0%     5,502 7.2%     32,009 3.0% 32,342 5.8%          0.20         1.67
SI                   94 0.1%        67 0.1%        242 0.0%      174 0.0%        0.39         3.17
SK                   27 0.0%        24 0.0%         29 0.0%       44 0.0%        0.93        7.59
TR                    2 0.0%         1 0.0%          2 0.0%        3 0.0%        1.00        8.15
TW                    1 0.0%         0 0.0%          5 0.0%        0 0.0%        0.20        1.63
US               13,985 10.7%   11,305 14.9% 214,052 20.0% 138,353 24.6%         0.07        0.53
YU                    1 0.0%         1 0.0%          2 0.0%        3 0.0%        0.50        4.08

Overall         131,065         76,054        1,068,407       562,049            0.12         0.14
  Table 8 Discriminating tokens from the company name of the top EU R&D performers
                             Number of names in various datasets      Weighted by patent counts
        Unique
        identifying token                            Unmatched; Unmatched;                         %
Country for company         All   Matched Unmatched same country with 3+ pats Matched Unmatched Unmatched
CH       ABB                599     504       95          6          27         6,839       350   4.9%
DE       SIEMENS            382     371       11          1           6        37,452        69   0.2%
CH       ROCHE              196     165       31          9          14         8,554        71   0.8%
FR       ALCATEL            185     178       7           0          1         10,229        10   0.1%
GB       SMITHKLINE         120     116       4           0          0          5,249         5   0.1%
DE       BASF               118     118       0           0          0         16,161         0   0.0%
FI       NOKIA              117     114       3           5           3         9,521         9   0.1%
FR       AVENTIS            113     113       0           0           0         2,680         0   0.0%
FR       ALSTOM             110     110       0           0           0         1,670         0   0.0%
FR       THALES              96      93        3          0           2         1,374        11   0.8%
FR       RENAULT             83      82        1          1           0         2,744         1   0.0%
BE       SOLVAY              83      76        7          0           4         1,792        30   1.6%
IT       PIRELLI             78      78        0          0           0           743         0   0.0%
DE       THYSSENKRUPP        77      77        0          0           0           617         0   0.0%
SE       VOLVO               74      72        2          1           1         1,559         8   0.5%
DE       DEGUSSA             63      60        3          0           3         3,112        13   0.4%
SE       SANDVIK             49      40        9          4           3         1,115        25   2.2%
CH       CIBA                48      38       10          0           3         6,217        22   0.4%
DK       DANISCO             46      46        0          0           0           294         0   0.0%
CH       NOVARTIS            42      40        2          0           2         4,553        55   1.2%
GB       RECKITT             41      39        2          0           0           632         3    0.5%
FR       PEUGEOT             38      37        1          1           1         2,416        21    0.9%
IT       FIAT                37      36        1          0           0         1,109         1    0.1%
DK       DANFOSS             36      35        1          0           0           322         2    0.6%
CH       SERONO              30      29        1          0           1           325         3    0.9%
GB       UNILEVER            30      30        0          0           0         9,135         0   0.0%
GB       INVENSYS            29      29        0          0           0           106         0   0.0%
GB       KENWOOD             29      28        1          0           0           273         1   0.4%
CH       CLARIANT            28      28        0          0           0         1,299         0   0.0%
GB       ASTRAZENECA         27      27        0          0           0         2,056         0   0.0%
FR       DASSAULT            26      26        0          0           0           182         0    0.0%
GB       COURTAULDS          23      22        1          0           0           187         1    0.5%
IT       EDISON              20      18        2          0           0           293         1    0.3%
FR       DANONE              19      18        1          1           0           125         1    0.8%
DE       VOLKSWAGEN          19      19        0          0           0         2,015         0    0.0%
CH       SYNGENTA            18      18        0          0           0         1,006         0    0.0%
DE       BEIERSDORF          16      16        0          0           0         1,391         0    0.0%
GB       SEVERN              16      16        0          0           0            30         0    0.0%
GB       HAMWORTHY           15      13        2          0           0            14         2   12.5%
FR       GENESYS             14      14        0          0           0           216         0   0.0%
DE       GROHE               13      13        0          0           0           443         0   0.0%
GB       DOLPHIN             12      12        0          0           0            16         0   0.0%
GB       REUTERS             12       9        3          0           0            15         4   21.1%
IT       SAIPEM              12      12        0          0           0            74         0    0.0%
FR       SOMFY               12      12        0          0           0           260         0    0.0%
GB       INNOVATA            11      11        0          0           0            35         0    0.0%
GB       WESSEX              10      10        0          0           0            11         0    0.0%
IT       FINMECCANICA         9       9        0          0           0            83         0    0.0%
GB       HOZELOCK             9       9        0          0           0            30         0    0.0%
BE       BTICINO              8       8        0          0           0           131         0    0.0%
DE       HOCHTIEF             8       8        0          0           0            48         0    0.0%
GB       PLASMON              8       8        0          0           0            32         0    0.0%
IT       DATALOGIC            7       7        0          0           0           112         0   0.0%
GB       DOMNICK              7       7        0          0           0            27         0   0.0%
IT       INDESIT              7       7        0          0           0           111         0   0.0%
GB       LINX                 7       6        1          0           0           151         1   0.7%
CH       LOGITEC              7       7        0          0           0            17         0    0.0%
GB   RENISHAW           7        7      0      0      0         358         0    0.0%
GB   CHIROSCIENCE       6        6      0      0      0           7         0    0.0%
GB   MEDEVA             6        6      0      0      0          26         0    0.0%
IT   SOGEFI             6        5      1      0      1          15         6   28.6%
GB   TEPNEL             6        6      0      0      0          13         0    0.0%
IT   BENETTON           5        5      0      0      0          90         0    0.0%
IT   GEWISS             5        5      0      0      0          60         0    0.0%
GB   KALAMAZOO          5        5      0      0      0           5         0     0.0%
GB   LATCHWAYS          5        5      0      0      0          38         0     0.0%
GB   SPIRENT            5        5      0      0      0          22         0     0.0%
GB   UMBRO              5        5      0      0      0           6         0     0.0%
GB   XENOVA             5        5      0      0      0          27         0     0.0%
GB   ACAMBIS            4        4      0      0      0          23         0     0.0%
IT   BEGHELLI           4        4      0      0      0          37         0     0.0%
GB   INSIGNIA           4        4      0      0      0           2         0    0.0%
GB   PHYTOPHARM         4        3      1      0      0          16         1    5.9%
GB   PROTHERICS         4        4      0      0      0           9         0    0.0%
GB   SAFEWAY            4        3      1      1      0           4         1    20.0%
GB   TRANSENSE          4        4      0      0      0          24         0     0.0%
GB   VICTREX            4        4      0      0      0          30         0     0.0%
FR   VIVENDI            3        3      0      0      0           2         0     0.0%
ES   ACERINOX           2        2      0      0      0           3         0     0.0%
GB   MINORPLANET        2        2      0      0      0           8         0     0.0%
GB   RADSTONE           2        2      0      0      0           2         0     0.0%
GB   SKYEPHARMA         2        2      0      0      0          27         0     0.0%
SE   SWITCHCORE         2        2      0      0      0           3         0     0.0%
IT   TARGETTI           2        2      0      0      0          21         0     0.0%
ES   TELEFONICA         2        2      0      0      0          56         0    0.0%
GB   ZOTEFOAMS          2        2      0      0      0           1         0    0.0%
DE   ALPHAFORM          1        0      1      0      0           0         2   100.0%
GB   CASSIDY            1        1      0      0      0           1         0    0.0%
GB   DATONG             1        1      0      0      0           1         0     0.0%
NL   GETRONICS          1        1      0      0      0           1         0     0.0%
GB   INGENTA            1        0      1      0      1           0         3   100.0%
IT   NATUZZI            1        1      0      0      0           1         0     0.0%
GB   NETCALL            1        1      0      0      0           2         0     0.0%
GB   PENNON             1        0      1      1      0           0         1   100.0%
GB   PIXOLOGY           1        1      0      0      0           4         0     0.0%
FR   AVERYS             0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
DE   AZEGO              0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   BAKKAVOR           0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   FLOMERICS          0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
DE   HOECHST            0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   INTERCLUBNET       0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   KELDA              0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   MERANT             0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   OCTROI             0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   ONCOCENE           0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   QSP                0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   QUADNETICS         0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   SENETEK            0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   SINOVATION         0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   SPECTRIS           0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   STATPRO            0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
GB   UTILITEC           0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.
BE   ZENITEL            0        0      0      0      0           0         0      n.d.

     Overall           3,475   3,264    211    31     73    148,148   734       0.5%
     as % of the total         93.9%   6.1%   0.9%   2.1%
                                         Figure 2
        Reduction in the size of the name file after harmonization of the EPO/PCT
                   dataset (business applicants only, top 18 countries)
45.0%

40.0%

35.0%
                                                         EP applicants
30.0%
                                                         WO applicants
25.0%

20.0%

15.0%

10.0%

5.0%

0.0%
        JP   KR US   FI   CA FR   IL   GB AU CH DE SE      AT    IT      BE ES NL DK
              Figure 3a: Share of business applicant names matched
                              (top 18 EU countries)
100.0%



80.0%



60.0%
                             EP Applicants


40.0%
                             WO applicants

20.0%



 0.0%
         NO   BE   DE   NL   IT   DK    SE   FR   GB   AT   FI   HR   GR   PL   SI   CZ   CH
              Figure 3b: Share of business applicant names matched
                (active in year 2001 or later, top 18 EU countries)
100.0%



80.0%



60.0%
                             EP Applicants


40.0%
                             WO applicants

20.0%



 0.0%
         NO   BE   DE   NL   IT   DK    SE   FR   GB   AT   FI   HR   GR   PL   SI   CZ   CH
          Figure 4a: Share of business applicant names matched, weighted
                  by number of applications (top 18 EU countries)
100.0%



80.0%



60.0%                   EP applications



40.0%                   WO applications



20.0%



 0.0%
         NO   BE   DE     NL     IT       DK   SE   FR   GB   AT   FI   HR   GR   PL   SI   CZ   CH
          Figure 4b: Share of business applicant names matched, weighted
                              by number of applications
                 (active in year 2001 or later, top 18 EU countries)
100.0%


80.0%


60.0%
                        EP applications


40.0%
                        WO applications

20.0%


 0.0%
         NO   BE   DE     NL     IT       DK   SE   FR   GB   AT   FI   HR   GR   PL   SI   CZ   CH
         Figure 5: Share of business assignees in the USPTO dataset matched to
                              Amadeus (top 18 countries)
100.0%



80.0%



60.0%



40.0%                         Share of patentees


                              Weighted by patents
20.0%



 0.0%
         GB   NO   IT   DE   BE   NL   DK      IE   FI   ES   SE   FR   AT   CH   LU   CZ   HU   LI
               Figure 6: Distribution of the match score for EPO/PCT patenter
                     names matched to the Amadeus business directory
60.0%
                    52.6%
50.0%
            50.1%
                                                                         all applicants
40.0%
                                                                         applicants active in 2001+
30.0%


20.0%                                   16.2% 17.3%
                                                      15.7%
10.0%
                            5.2% 5.0%                    4.9%
        3.1% 2.8%                                                          2.8% 2.4%
                                                                  0.6%
0.0%
           0         1         2        3        4            5     6           7         8           9
                                   Matching score values (lower is better)
         Figure 7: Distribution of the match score for the USPTO assignee
                names matched to the Amadeus business directory
30.0%
                26.8%
25.0%
                                   22.1%

20.0%
        16.4%
15.0%                                       13.3%
                        11.9%

10.0%
                                                     7.3%

5.0%
                                                                          1.7%
                                                              0.2%               0.2%   0.2%
0.0%
          0       1      2           3        4        5        6          7      8      9
                                Matching score values (lower is better)
