NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL PRICE SETTING WITH OBSERVATION AND MENU COSTS
Fernando E. Alvarez
Francesco Lippi
Luigi Paciello
Working Paper 15852
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15852

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2010

We gratefully acknowledge the support with the data received by Herve' Le Bihan and Laurent Clerc
(Banque de France), Katherine Neiss, Miles Parker and Simon Price (Bank of England), Silvia Fabiani
and Roberto Sabbatini (Bank of Italy), Ignacio Hernando (Bank of Spain), Heinz Herrmann and Harald
Stahl (Bundesbank). Alvarez and Lippi thank the Banque de France for financial support. We thank
seminar participants at the EIEF, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the University of Amsterdam,
the University of Bologna, Stanford University, UC Berkeley, Yale, MIT and UCLA. We thank Manuel
Amador, Marios Angeletos, Andy Atkeson, Gadi Barlevy, Ricardo Caballero, Matteo Cervellati, Wouter
den Haan, Eduardo Engel, Mike Golosov, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Pierre Olivier Gourinchas, Bob Hall,
Christian Hellwig, Anil Kayshap, David Levine, Giuseppe Moscarini, Mauri Obstfeld, Rob Shimer,
Oleg Tsyvinski, Harald Uhlig, Ivan Werning, Mirko Wiederholt for their comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Fernando E. Alvarez, Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal price setting with observation and menu costs
Fernando E. Alvarez, Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello
NBER Working Paper No. 15852
March 2010
JEL No. E3,E31
ABSTRACT
We model the optimal price setting problem of a firm in the presence of both information and menu
costs. In this problem the firm optimally decides when to collect costly information on the adequacy
of its price, an activity which we refer to as a price "review". Upon each review, the firm chooses whether
to adjust its price, subject to a menu cost, and when to conduct the next price review. This behavior
is consistent with recent survey evidence documenting that firms revise prices infrequently and that
only a few price revisions yield a price adjustment. The goal of the paper is to study how the firm's
choices map into several observable statistics, depending on the level and relative magnitude of the
information vs the menu cost. The observable statistics are: the frequency of price reviews, the frequency
of price adjustments, the size-distribution of price adjustments, and the shape of the hazard rate of
price adjustments. We provide an analytical characterization of the firm decisions and a mapping from
the structural parameters to the observable statistics. We compare these statistics with the ones obtained
for the models with only one type of cost. The predictions of the model can, with suitable data, be
used to quantify the importance of the menu cost vs. the information cost. We also consider a version
of the model where several price adjustment are allowed between observations, a form of price plans
or indexation. We find that no indexation is optimal for small inflation rates.

Fernando E. Alvarez
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu
Francesco Lippi
University of Sassari
Department of Economics
and
Ente Einaudi,
via Due Macelli, 73
00184 Rome - Italy
flippi@uniss.it

Luigi Paciello
EIEF
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
via sallustiana 62, Rome
luigi.paciello@eief.it

1

Introduction

We study a quadratic tracking problem of an agent subject to two types of adjustment costs.
One is a standard fixed cost of adjusting the state, the other is a fixed cost of observing
the state. The effects of each of these adjustment cost have been thoroughly analyzed in
the literature in a variety of contexts. An example of the fixed adjustment cost is the
canonical sS problem. The analysis of the implications of costly observation of the relevant
state is more recent, yet examples abound.1 The model in this paper incorporates both
costs, characterizing the solution of the tracking problem, and studying the implications for
observable statistics on the relevant observation and adjustment decisions.
We develop this model with several applications in mind, ranging from the consumptionsavings, household portfolio choice, to the price-setting problem of a monopolist. Moreover,
the availability of new data sets makes is possible to compare the theory with actual measures
of observations and adjustment frequencies. For concreteness, and because of its importance
in macroeconomics, in this paper we focus on the price setting problem for a firm.2 In this
problem the firm optimally decides when to collect costly information on the adequacy of
its price, an activity which we refer to as a price “review”. Upon each review, the firm
chooses whether to adjust its price, subject to a menu cost, and when to conduct the next
price review. The goal of the paper is to study how the firm’s choices concerning several
observable statistics depend on the level and relative magnitude of the observation cost vs
the menu cost. Among the observable statistics we focus on are: the frequency of price
reviews, the frequency of price adjustments, the size-distribution of price adjustments, and
the shape of the hazard rate of price adjustments.
Our interest in this question is twofold. First, survey data indicates that firms review the
adequacy of their prices infrequently, and that not all price reviews yield a price adjustment.
Such a pattern cannot be accounted for by existing menu cost models, where price reviews
occur continuously, nor by costly observation models, where each price review is also a price
adjustment. The model with both observation and menu costs naturally accounts for the
observed patterns. Second, menu cost and observation cost models have different implications
for the response to aggregate shocks. For instance models with only observation cost, such as
Mankiw and Reis (2002, 2006, 2007), yield “time-dependent” rules, while models with only
menu cost, as Golosov and Lucas (2007), yield “state-dependent” rules. Our theory makes a
1

For examples with a fixed observation cost see Caballero (1989), Duffie and Sun (1990), Reis (2006b,a),
Abel et al. (2007, 2009), and more generally the related rational inattention literature as in Moscarini (2004),
Sims (2003).
2
Alvarez et al. (2009) analyze a version of the consumption-savings and portfolio choice model studied by
Duffie and Sun (1990) and Abel et al. (2007). That paper uses a novel data set to measure the frequency of
observation and adjustment of portfolios for Italian investors.

1

step towards understanding which of these mechanisms is more relevant: with suitable data
the model can be used to quantify the magnitude of the menu vs. the observation cost.
We study a version of the quadratic tracking problem subject to two types of fixed cost.
The starting point of the problem is the static cost of a decision maker, simply modeled as
minimizing a quadratic loss function of the difference between their choice variable (which we
interpret as the log of the current price) and its bliss point (or target price). We interpret this
function as the cost of having a price at a value different from the one that maximizes current
profits, i.e. as the negative of the second order expansion on the (log of the) profit function,
where the target is the price that maximizes the static profits. We let the target value follow
a random walk with drift. We interpret this variation as changes in the marginal cost and
marginal benefit of the monopolist, where the drift is the inflation rate, and the innovations
are idiosyncratic shocks. We refer to the difference between the current price and the target
price as the price gap, which we denote by p̃. Thus the instantaneous loss for a firm is given
by B(p̃(t))2 , where B is a parameter that measures the sensitivity of the price gap deviations
in units of the objective function. We assume that the decision maker faces two fixed costs to
adjust prices. The first is a standard menu cost that applies to any change in prices, which
we denote by ψ. The second, which we denote as φ, is an observation cost that the decision
maker must incur to find the value of the target, or equivalently the value of the price gap.
3
We assume that the decision maker minimizes the expected present value of the quadratic
losses plus the expected discounted sum of the fixed costs incurred. We consider two different
technologies for the price changes: the first one is that an observation cost has to be paid
every time that the price is adjusted, but that the agent can observe without changing the
price (i.e. without paying the menu cost). The second technology allows for price changes
to be done without observing the price gap, a form of indexation to inflation. We show that
if the drift of the target (i.e. the inflation rate) is small enough, the decision rules are the
same in both cases, i.e. there is no indexation. In both cases the optimal policy is found by
solving a dynamic programming problem with one state, namely the price gap right after a
price review.
We spend most of the time on the characterization of the optimal decision rules and its
implications for the case without drift, i.e. with zero inflation. In this case, right after an
observation of the price gap p̃, the agent chooses whether to pay the menu cost and adjust
the price. Additionally the agent chooses the time until the next observation. We give an
analytical characterization for the solution as we let the discount rate and the fixed menu cost
3

If the monopolist faces an isoelastic demand curve and a random marginal cost, using a second order log
approximation, the parameter B is a simple function of this elasticity and the fixed costs are interpreted as
fraction of a period profit.

2

to be small.4 The decision of whether to adjust the price follows an sS rule: price adjustment
are made if the price gap right after an observation is outside the inaction interval (−p̄, p̄),
and in the case without drift the price gap is set to zero. If the price gap is inside the interval
than there is no price adjustment. The optimal time until the next observation, τ (p̃), is also a
function of the price gap: its value is longest, equal to τ̂ , in the range where price adjustment
are optimal. In the inaction interval the function τ (·) has an inverted U-shape: it peaks at
a zero price gap, attaining τ̂ and is otherwise decreasing in the size of the price gap, namely
τ (p̃) = τ̂ − (p̃/σ)2 , where σ is the standard deviation of the innovations on the idiosyncratic
shock on the target price. This is quite intuitive: for price gaps close but smaller than p̄, the
firms realizes that it is likely to cross the threshold p̄ and hence decides to monitor sooner.
To summarize, the optimal decision rules can be expressed as a function of two parameters:
p̄ and τ̂ . We show that in turn these two parameters can be expressed in essentially closed
form solution as simple functions of three structural parameters: the two normalized cost
φ/B, ψ/B and the innovation variance σ 2 . We use this characterization of the decision rules,
as well as the dynamics of the price gap to compute four statistics: the expected number of
price reviews per unit of time, the expected number of price adjustment per unit of time,
the invariant distribution of price changes, and the shape of the hazard rate of price changes.
We find these statistics interesting because they can be computed using available survey and
scanner micro data sets.
The model we develop embeds the two polar cases of menu cost and observation cost only.
We compare our analytical characterization of the mapping from the structural parameters
to the firm decisions, and to the observable statistics in each of three setups: menu cost only,
observation cost only, and the case with both costs.5 Analyzing the outcomes of the different
setups we show the aspects for which the predictions of the model with two costs are similar
to a “weighted average” of the two polar cases, and the ones where the interaction of the two
cost yields novel predictions for e.g. the size distribution of price adjustments and the shape
of the hazard-rate function.
Next, we describe the form of the decision rules as well as the implied statistics produced
by each model. In the observation cost only case, price reviews and price adjustments coincide
and take place at equally spaced time intervals of length τ̂ . Thus, the frequency of reviews
and adjustment satisfies na = nr = 1/τ̂ , which has elasticity 1/2 with respect to Bσ 2 /φ.
Since upon review an adjustment takes place, with no drift the price gap is closed to zero,
and hence price changes are normally distributed with variance σ 2 φ/B. In this case the
4

We confirm the quality of the approximation with extensive numerical analysis.
Most, but not all, of the analysis in the case of one cost only is in the literature in different papers. We
find it useful to collect the known result and to extend some of them in exactly the same framework so that
the effect of the different frictions are easier to compare.
5

3

average change in prices in absolute value, E[|∆p|], has an elasticity 1/4 with respect to
σ 2 φ/B. Moreover, the instantaneous hazard rate h(t) as a function of the time t between
price changes, is equal to zero until just before t = 1/na at which the review and adjustment
take place, where it jumps to infinity. The other extreme case is the one where price reviews
have no cost, but there is a menu cost ψ to change prices. In this case price reviews occur
constantly, i.e. τ (p̃) = 0, and hence have infinite frequency, i.e. nr = ∞. The optimal
policy is a standard sS policy, with optimal return point equal to zero, due to the lack of
drift. The threshold of the symmetric range of inaction is given by p̄, which has elasticity
1/4 with respect to σ 2 ψ/B. By using results from hitting times of a Brownian motion with
two barriers we find the adjustment frequency na as well as the hazard rate. The average
number of adjustments per unit of time na has elasticity 1/2 with respect to B/(σ 2 ψ). The
instantaneous hazard rate h(t) starts at zero, is strictly increasing, and it asymptote to a
value with elasticity 1/2 with respect to σ 2 ψ/B. In the case with menu cost only the time
between price changes is random but price changes takes two values p̄ and −p̄, and hence
E[|∆p|] also has elasticity 1/4 with respect to B/(σ 2 ψ).
The optimal decision rules for the model with two costs combine several of the elements
and elasticities with respect to the structural parameters just described. Recall that with
two costs, τ (p̃) = τ̂ − (p̃/σ)2 , in the range of inaction, and otherwise it equals τ̂ . Thus the
optimal decision rules can be described by two numbers: τ̂ and p̄. We find it convenient to
describe them first fixing the ratio of the menu cost to the observation cost, which we denote
as α = ψ/φ. Fixing α, the elasticity of τ̂ with respect to φ/(σ 2 B) is 1/2, as in the observation
cost model. Likewise, fixing α, the elasticity of p̄ with respect to σ 2 ψ/B is also 1/2, as in the
menu cost model. On the other hand, increasing α = ψ/φ increases the threshold p̄ and the
time until an observation after an adjustment τ̂ . We find these results the natural extension
of each of the models with only one cost.
Once we obtain a characterization of the decision rules as a function of the structural
parameters, we move on to analyze the “observable statistics”. We study the invariant
distribution of the price gap upon a review for a firm following the optimal decision rules.
Using this distribution we characterize na , the expected number of adjustment per unit of
time, as well as nr , the expected number of reviews per unit of time. We also use this
distribution to analyze the distribution of price changes. We use these statistics to make
several point:
First, the baseline model with two costs naturally accounts for the observation that firms
review their prices more often than they adjust them, since the price reviews where the price
gap falls in the inaction region deliver no price adjustment. The feature that price review
happen more often than price adjustment has been documented by Fabiani et al. (2007) for
4

the Euro area.6
Second, the distribution of price changes has no mass between −p̄ and p̄, and outside
these values it has a density with the same tails as a normal, but with more mass close to
p̄ or p̄. For comparison, we recall that the distribution of rpice changes is normal in the
model with observation cost only, and that it is binomial in the case of menu cost only.
Additionally, fixing the ratio of the menu to observation cost α = ψ/φ, the average size of
price changes E[|∆p|] has an elasticity of 1/2 with respect to σ 2 B/φ, or alternatively, σ 2 B/ψ.
Notice that this is the same elasticity than in the case with only one cost. We find the shape
of the distribution of price changes interesting because, depending on the size of adjustment
and observation costs, it gives more flexibility to accommodate both relatively large average
size of price changes and relatively small price changes, which seem to be in the data as
displayed by Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008). Indeed Mankiw and Reis (2010) discuss some
of the difficulties of models of price setting under either adjustment or observation costs to
simultaneously account for these facts. However, a positive menu cost ψ > 0 prevents too
small price changes from occurring. This seems consistent with the evidence in Alvarez et al.
(2006) and Cavallo (2009) about the distribution of price changes in different countries.
Third, we identify two ratio of “observable statistics” that provide direct information
about the ratio of the two costs. First we show that nr /na , the ratio between average
frequencies of review and adjustment is a monotonic function that only depends on the
relative size of observation and adjustment costs α = ψ/φ. This is quite intuitive if one
consider the extreme cases: this ratio is 1 for the observation cost only, and infinity for the
menu cost only. In addition, we show that the ratio between the mode and the average of the
size of price changes is a monotone function of the relative size of observation and menu costs
α. This result is also quite intuitive considering the extreme cases, since the distribution is
normal for the observation cost only model, and binomial for the menu cost model. These
results provide two schemes to identify the size of the two costs using statistics that are, at
least in principle, available.
Fourth, we derive the instantaneous hazard rate h(t) of the baseline model with two costs.
This function shares some properties with the observation cost only, like an initial value of
zero for the hazard rate between times t ∈ [0, τ̂ ), and a spike (infinite) hazard rate at t = τ̂ .
But unlike this model, it has a finite continuos non-zero hazard rate for higher values of
t. Indeed, loosely speaking, the shape of the hazard rate function has some periodicity, in
that it looks like a series of non-monotone functions around duration that are multiples of
τ̂ . The reason for this monotonicity comes from the fact reviews happens at unequal length
6
See also Greenslade and Parker (2008), Blinder et al. (1998) and Alvarez et al. (2006) for survey evidence
about the U.K., U.S. and Canada.

5

of time – given by the function τ (·) and that adjustment happens depending on whether the
price gap at time of review is larger than the threshold p̄ at the time of an observation. The
non-monotonicity of the hazard rate is unique to the model with both costs. We find this
feature appealing because most of the studies fail to find evidence for increasing hazard rates,
which is the implication for the extreme models with only one cost, as well as for most of the
models in the literature.7
Most of our analysis is in the context of the model with π = 0, i.e. zero inflation rate.
We briefly consider the effect of inflation on the rest of the decision rules, first keeping the
assumption that any price change requires an observations. In this case the optimal return
point will naturally be different form the static optimum, i.e. zero price gap. Indeed once
prices are adjusted the firm will set it to a higher value anticipating the effect of inflation:
right after an adjustment the price gap will be positive and roughly equal to the inflation rate
π times half of expected time until the next adjustment. To understand the forces that the
drift in the target price brings relative to its volatility, we consider the extreme case where we
fixed π > 0 and let σ ↓ 0. In this extreme case, the range of inaction becomes asymmetric, as
well as the function τ (p̃) which becomes decreasing in the range of inaction, anticipating that
the price gap has a negative drift equal to −π. Through numerical computation, we show
that these features also show up for small inflation rate, albeit in a tempered form is π is
small. Finally we relax the assumption that every price adjustment requires an observation.
Note that an adjustment without observation is a form of automatic indexation, or what
has been called in the literature, a price path or a price plan. We show that fixing a value
of ψ > 0, for positive but sufficiently small inflation rate all the adjustment will take place
immediately after observation. In words, we show that if inflation is small relative to the
menu cost, indexation is not optimal.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief survey of the related literature.
Section 3 discusses the recent survey evidence on the firms’ decisions concerning the frequency
of price reviews and price adjustments in a number of countries. Section 4 presents our model
of the firm’s price setting problem with observation and menu costs. The section characterizes
the firm optimal policy for each of the two the polar cases (menu or observation cost only)
and for the general case. An analytical solution for the firm’s optimal decision rule in the
case of zero inflation is given in Section 5. This rule is used in Section 6 to characterize
analytically the model predictions for the frequency of price reviews, the frequency of price
adjustments, the size-distribution of price adjustments, and the shape of the hazard rate of
7

Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) estimate a flat hazard rate on U.S. CPI data, while Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008) estimate a downward sloping hazard using a similar dataset but different methodology. Similar
evidence is documented in the Euro area by Alvarez et al. (2005). Cavallo (2009) estimates an upward
sloping or hump shaped hazard rate for four Latin America countries

6

price adjustments. A comparison between the results of our model with those produced by the
polar cases is given. We discuss how these result match against the recent micro evidence on
the distribution of price changes and the shape of the hazard rate of price adjustments. The
results developed so far, under the assumption of zero inflation, provide a good benchmark
for analyzing cases where inflation is small. This is shown in Section 7, where the case of high
inflation is also discussed. Section 7.3 explores the circumstances in which price adjustment
can be made without finding out the information about the state. Proofs and documentation
material is given in the Appendix; a set of Online Appendices provides even more details on
the models discussed in this paper and the findings in the related literature.

2

Related literature on Optimal Price Setting

A vast body of research has studied the price setting decision by firms.8 In fact, understanding
the way firms set the price of their products is an important issue in the macroeconomic
literature as, among other things, price setting behavior has direct consequences for the
response of an economy to nominal shocks and, therefore, for monetary policy. Despite
the large effort, the debate on which model better describes firms’ price setting behavior
is still very much open.9 At the centerpiece of this debate is understanding why and how
much product prices are rigid in response to economic shocks, and why prices change rather
infrequently when compared with predictions of standard models under flexible prices.10 Two
types of frictions have been proposed as main causes behind price rigidity, namely adjustment
costs and observation costs.11
The key element of the model of price setting under adjustment cost is the state dependence of individual decisions: the agent acts when the state crosses some critical threshold,
balancing cost and benefits of adjustment. Within this literature, Dixit (1991) has studied
the problem of a firm that faces a state given by a random walk process. Dixit (1991)’ s
results provide a natural framework to analyze the properties of this class of models with
respect to price setting decisions in presence of adjustment costs.12 In fact, our model nests
Dixit (1991) in the special case of no observation cost. Similarly to our model, the model with
adjustment cost only implies that the firm adjusts its price only infrequently. In particular,
8

For a review of the literature see, for instance, Golosov and Lucas (2007), Klenow and Malin (2010),
Mankiw and Reis (2010) and references therein.
9
See, for instance, Klenow and Malin (2010) and Mackowiak and Smets (2008).
10
See Christiano et al. (1998), Boivin et al. (2009) and Mackowiak et al. (2009) for empirical evidence.
11
See Sheshinski and Weiss (1977, 1979, 1983), Barro (1972) and Dixit (1991) for a review of early results
on price setting behavior under costly price adjustments;
12
There is a large literature studying consequences for aggregate dynamics of price adjustment costs. See
Dotsey et al. (1999), Golosov and Lucas (2007) and Midrigan (2007) for a review.

7

the frequency of price adjustment decreases in the size of the adjustment threshold, while
increases in the volatility of the state. However, from the perspective of models of price
adjustment under ’menu’ cost, our paper contributes to the existing literature on several
important dimensions.
First, not surprisingly, the model with both types of costs is able to generate infrequent
price adjustments as well as infrequent price reviews, with the latter taking place more often
than the former.13 Second, quite interestingly, our model naturally generates moments of
the distribution of price changes as well as the shape of the instantaneous hazard rate of
price adjustments that are consistent with existing micro studies.14 These results are quite
remarkable if one compares to models of price setting under adjustment cost only. In fact,
in these models dispersion in the size of price changes is typically ’built-in’ by assuming
that the price setter faces time-varying adjustment costs, as in Dotsey et al. (1999), or that
multi-product firms face economies of scope in adjusting prices of different products, as in
Midrigan (2007). In our model, these results arise naturally as a consequence of the firms
facing both observation and adjustment costs. In addition, our model with both costs implies
a shape for the hazard rate of price changes that resembles the downward sloping hazard rate
estimated by Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008). In contrast,
the ’menu cost’ model implies an upward sloping hazard rate. Some authors have appealed to
heterogeneity in adjustment costs across different products to reconcile ’menu cost’ models
with the estimated downward sloping hazard rate. However, while Klenow and Kryvtsov
(2008) find empirical support for this hypothesis, Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) show that,
even after controlling for product heterogeneity, the hazard rate is still downward sloping.
Our model provides an alternative explanation of the downward sloping hazard rate which
does not rely on product heterogeneity.
On the other side, our model directly compares to the existing literature studying price
setting decisions under imperfect information. This literature dates back to the seminal work
by Phelps (1969) and Lucas (1972). In these models, the speed with which prices respond to
changes in the state relates to the speed with which information about this shock is embedded
in the price setting decision. This literature has recently been revisited by several authors
looking for alternative models of price setting in order to account for the sluggish response
13

See Section 3 for survey evidence about the relationship between frequency of price adjustment and
review.
14
Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) document that price changes are usually big in absolute terms (averaging
around 10 percent), although a large subset are much smaller (5 percent or less). There is disagreement on the
shape of the hazard rate. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) favors a downward sloping shape, while Klenow
and Kryvtsov (2008) sustain that the hazard rate is flat after controlling for products heterogeneity. See
Alvarez et al. (2006) for equivalent evidence on the Euro area, and Cavallo (2009) for evidence on developing
countries.

8

of prices to nominal shocks. In particular, Reis (2006b) and Mankiw and Reis (2002, 2006,
2007) generalize Caballero (1989) and model imperfect information as arising from a fixed
cost of observing the state.15 In these models, the firm reviews the state infrequently and,
due to the absence of any adjustment cost, adjust prices anytime the state is reviewed. There
is no arrival of new information in between times of reviews. Reis (2006b) shows that, in
standard frameworks, the optimal rule is to review and, contemporaneously, adjust prices at
a constant frequency. By including both observation and adjustment costs, our model contributes to this literature on several dimensions. First, consistently with the survey evidence,
our model implies that not all price reviews yield an adjustment. Second, our model implies
distribution and hazard rate of price adjustments that are more consistent with existing empirical evidence. In particular, our model avoids infinitesimally small price adjustments from
occurring, and allows for richer shapes of the hazard rate of price adjustments than the model
with observation cost only.16 Third, in our model the optimal time between reviews is state
dependent. In addition, while in the framework considered by Reis (2006b) firms can choose
a pricing plan at each observation date and freely adjust prices at any moment between observation dates, in our model due to the adjustment cost this strategy is not optimal unless
the inflation rate is relatively large. In fact, we show that if inflation is small relatively to
the adjustment cost price adjustments only take place immediately after an observation. On
this dimension, our results also differ from Burstein (2006) which studies the case where the
firm reviews its state continuously, but can specify an entire sequence of future prices upon
payment of a fixed cost. In fact, differently from Burstein (2006) we not only assume that
the firm has to pay a fixed cost to review the state, but also that the firm faces a fixed cost
of adjustment anytime it changes its price.
Finally, there is a recent literature that studies price setting decisions, and their aggregate
consequences, within models that incorporates both some combination of imperfect information and sticky prices.17 However, in most of these studies either the frequency of price
adjustment or review is exogenously given. By endogenizing both decisions of reviewing the
information and adjusting the price, our model allows to capture the interaction and existing
complementarity between these two frictions. The closest framework to the one of our paper
15

Woodford (2001) and Makowiak and Wiederholt (2009) model information flows as depending on a signal
about the underlying state which realizes every period. In these models, what prevents the firm from perfectly
observing the state in every period is limited information processing capabilities, as originally proposed by
Sims (2003). Given that in these models new, although partial, information arrives every period, the firm
changes its price continuously. See Matejka (2009) for generalizations of this framework to obtain infrequent
adjustments.
16
See Section 5 for more details.
17
See, for instance, Nimark (2008), Morris and Shin (2006), Woodford (2008), Angeletos and La’O (2009),
Gertler and Leahy (2008) and Bonomo and Carvalho (2004). See Mankiw and Reis (2010) for a review.

9

is the discussion of the work by Woodford (2008) done by Burstein.18 . Similarly to this paper,
Gorodnichenko (2008) studies a model where each firm has to pay a fixed cost to acquire
information and a fixed cost to change the price. Differently from this paper, Gorodnichenko
(2008) studies the price setting problem within a general equilibrium framework where firms
observe the past realization of the aggregate price level at no cost. While this more general
framework allows to address some important questions such as the response of inflation and
output to nominal shocks, it implies that the average frequency of price adjustment is larger
than the average frequency of information acquisition. The latter is at odds with survey
evidence by Fabiani et al. (2006). Moreover, the simple framework of this paper allows for a
quasi-analytical solution of the model which fully characterizes the mapping from observable
statistics to the costs of acquiring information and adjusting the price. More generally, our
model with both observation and adjustment costs contributes to the existing literature by
providing a natural framework within which evaluating and quantifying the impact of each
type of cost on the price setting decision.

3

Evidence on Price Adjustments vs. Price Reviews

Several recent studies measure two distinct dimensions of the firm’s price management: the
frequency of price reviews, or the decision of assessing the appropriateness of the price currently charged, and the frequency of price changes, i.e. the decision to adjust the price. The
typical survey question asks firms: “In general, how often do you review the price of your
main product (without necessarily changing it)?”; with possible choices yearly, semi-yearly,
quarterly, monthly, weekly and daily. The same surveys contain questions on frequency of
price changes too. Fabiani et al. (2007) survey evidence on frequencies of reviews and adjustments for different countries in the Euro area, and Blinder et al. (1998), Amirault et al.
(2006), and Greenslade and Parker (2008) present similar evidence for US, Canada and UK.
This section uses this survey data to document that the frequency of price reviews is larger
than the frequency of price changes. We believe that the level of both frequencies, especially
the one for reviews, are measured very imprecisely. Yet, importantly for the theory presented
in this paper, we have found that in all countries, and in almost all industries in each country, and for almost all the firms in several countries, the frequency of review is consistently
higher than the frequency of adjustment. We will argue that, given our understanding of the
precision of the different surveys, the most accurate measures of the ratio of price reviews to
price adjustments per year are between 1 and 2. In the rest of this section we document this
fact, referring the interested reader to the Online Appendix D for more documentation.
18

This is apparently based in work in preparation by Burnstein,Hellwig and Venki

10

Table 1: Price-reviews and price-changes per year
AT BE FR GE
Review
Change

4
1

Review
Change

54
11

1
1

4
1
Mass
12 53
8
9

IT

NL

PT SP EURO CAN
Medians
3
1
4
2
1
2.7
12
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
of firms (%) with at least 4 reviews/changes
47 43 56 28 14
43
78
21 11 11 12 14
14
44

UK

US

4
2

2
1.4

52
35

40
15

Number of changes and reviews per year. The sources for the medians are Fabiani et al. (2007) 2003
Euro area survey, Amirault et al. (2006) 2003 Canadian survey, Greenslade and Parker (2008) 2008 UK
survey. See the Online Appendix D for a discussion of the sources and the measurement issues involved.

The upper panel of Table 1 reports the median frequency of price reviews and the median
frequency of price adjustments across all firms in surveys taken from various countries. The
median firm in the Euro area reviews its price a bit less than three times a year, but changes
its price only about once a year, and similar for UK and US. 19
These surveys collect a wealth of information on many dimensions of price setting, well
beyond the ones studied in this paper. Yet, for the questions that we are interested in, the
survey data from several countries have some drawbacks. We think that, mostly due to the
design of these surveys, the level of the frequencies of price review and price adjustments
are likely subject to a large amount of measurement error. One reason is that in most of
the surveys firms were given the following choices for the frequency of price reviews: yearly,
quarterly, monthly and weekly (in some also semi-yearly and less than a year). It turns out
that these bins are too coarse for a precise measurement, given where the medians of the
responses are. For example, consider the case where in the population the median number
of price reviews is exactly one per year, but where the median number of price changes is
strictly larger than one per year. Then, in a small sample, the median for reviews will be
likely 1 or 2 reviews a year, with similar likelihood. Instead the sample median for number of
adjustments per year is likely to be one. From this example we remark that the median for
price reviews is imprecisely measured, as its estimates fluctuates between two values that are
one hundred percent apart. The configuration described in this example is likely to describe
several of the countries in our surveys.20 Another reason is that in some cases the sample
19

This evidence about the frequency of price adjustment is roughly consistent with previous studies at the
retail level. See Alvarez et al. (2006) for more details.
20
For example in Portugal the median frequency of review is 2, but the fraction that reviews at one year
or less is 47%, while for price adjustment the median is one and the fraction of firms adjusting exactly once
a year is 49.5%, see Martins (2005). In the UK for 1995 the median price review is 12 times a year, but the
fraction that reviews at most 4 times a years is about 46%, while for price adjustment the median is 2 and

11

size is small. While most surveys are above one thousand firms, the surveys for Italy has less
than 300 firms and the one for the US has about 200 firms. Yet another difficulty with these
measures is that several surveys use different bins to classify the frequency of price reviews
and that one price changes. For instance in France and Italy firms are asked the average
number of changes, instead of being given a set of bins, as is the case for the frequency of
reviews.21
The bottom panel of Table 1 reports another statistic that is informative on the relative
frequency of reviews and adjustments: the fraction of firms reviewing and changing respectively their price at least four times a year. We see this statistic as informative, and less
subject to measurement error, because this frequency bin appears in the questionnaire for
both the review and the adjustment decision for almost all countries. It shows that the
mass of firms reviewing prices at least four times a year is substantially larger than the
corresponding one for price changes.

Frequency of review (log scale)
.5 1
5 10 20 40 80

Figure 1: Average industry frequency of price changes vs. adjustments

.5
France
Belgium

1
5
10
20
Frequency of Adjustment (log scale)
Germany
UK

Italy
Rev=Adj

40

80

Spain
Rev=4*Adj

Note: data for each dot are the mean number of price changes and reviews in industry
j in country i.

the fraction of firms adjusting 2 times or less a year is 66%, see Hall et al. (2000). Indeed, consistent with
our hypothesis of measurement error, in a similar survey for the UK for year 2007-2008, the median price
review is 4 and the median price adjustment is 4, see Greenslade and Parker (2008).
21
Furthermore for Germany firms where asked whether or not they adjusted the price in each of the
preceding 12 months; this places an upper bound of 12 on the frequency of adjustments, while no such
restriction applies to the number of reviews.

12

Figure 1 plots the average number of price reviews against the average number of price
adjustments across a number of industries in six countries. This figure shows that in the six
countries the vast majority of the industry observations lies above the 45 degree line, where
the two frequencies coincide. Most of the industries for Belgium, Spain and the UK have a
ratio of number of reviews per adjustment between 1 and 2 (i.e. lies between the two lower
straight lines). The data for France, Italy and Germany has much higher dispersion in this
ratio. We believe that the reason of the higher dispersion for Italy, Germany and France
is due to the measurement error discussed above. Our belief is based on the fact that the
questionnaire in the surveys for Belgium and Spain treat price reviews and price changes
symmetrically and they record the average frequencies as an integer as opposed to a coarse
bin.
For four countries Table 2 classifies the answers of each firm on three mutually exclusive
categories: 1) those that change their prices more frequently than they review them, 2) those
that change and review their prices at the same frequency, 3) and those that change their
prices less frequently than they adjust them. Table 2 shows that most of the firms respond
that they review their prices at frequencies greater or equal than the one in which change
their prices. We conjecture that the percentage of firms in catergory 1, i.e. those changing
the price more frequently than reviewing it, is actually even smaller than what is displayed
in the table due to measurement error.
Table 2: Frequency of Price Changes and Reviews at Firm Level
Belgium France Germany Italy
Percentage of Firms with:
1) Change > Review
2) Change = Review
3) Change < Review
N of Observations (firms)

3
80
17
890

5
38
57
1126

19
11
70
835

16
38
46
141

Spain∗
0
89
11
194

∗

For Spain is only for firms that review four or more times a year. Sources: Table 17 in Aucremanne
and Druant (2005) for Belgium, and our calculations based on the individual data described in
Loupias and Ricart (2004), Stahl (2005), and Fabiani et al. (2004) for France, Germany, and Italy.
For Spain from section 4.4 of Alvarez and Hernando (2005). See Online Appendix D for details.

4

A price setting problem

We consider a decision maker who faces a period return function given by −B (p (t) − p∗ (t))2
where p(t) is a decision for the agent and p∗ (t) is random target, i.e. the optimal value that
13

she will set with full knowledge of the state of the problem. The target changes stochastically,
and we assume that the agent must pay a fixed cost φ to observe the state p∗ (t), and that
she maximizes expected discounted values. The constant B measures of the strength of the
cost of the deviations from the target relative to φ. Moreover, it is assumed that the agent
faces a physical cost ψ associated with resetting the price (a “menu cost”).
The target price p∗ (t) follows a random walk with drift π, with normal innovations with
variance σ 2 per unit of time, or
p∗ (T + t) = p∗ (T ) + π t + s σ

√

t,

(1)

where s is a standard normal, so that ET [ p∗ (T + t) ] = p∗ (T )+π t, V arT [ p∗ (T + t) ] = σ 2 t,
and ET (p(T ) − p∗ (T + t))2 = (p (T ) − p∗ (T ) − πt)2 + t σ 2 . In the case where the firm sets
the price level p(T ) in nominal terms, the drift π can be interpreted as the inflation rate,
since p∗ (t) denotes a real variable.22
We index the times at which the agent chooses to pay the cost φ and observe the state
by Ti , with 0 = T0 < T1 < T2 < · · · . After observing the value of the state at a date t = T ,
the agent decides whether to pay the cost ψ and adjust the value of its control variable p(t)
that will apply for the times t ∈ (Ti , Ti+1 ).
Appendix A discusses two simple cases that are useful to interpret the coefficient of the
quadratic period cost of the tracking problem described above. In one case it is the second
order term of the profit for a linear demand model, and in the other is the second-order term
from a log approximation of the profit function. In these cases p(t) is either the price or the
log-price of a monopolistic firm, and p∗ (t) its corresponding static optimal level. In the linear
demand case the changes in p∗ (t) are due to both shifts in the demand intercept a and changes
in the marginal cost c. In the log-approximation of the Dixit-Stiglitz monopolist problem
with constant demand elasticity η > 1, they are due to changes in the (log of the) marginal
cost c. The parameter B in the flow return is given by half of the second derivative of the
profit function, so it is given by B = b the absolute value of slope of the linear demand, and
by B = 12 η (η − 1), in the Dixit-Stiglitz case. In the linear case the fixed cost φ is an additive
term to the objective function. In the Dixit-Stiglitz the interpretation for the costs φ and ψ
is that they are measured as a proportion of profits per unit of time.23 The simplification of
using a quadratic approximation to the profit function has been used in the seminal work on
price setting problem with menu cost by Caplin and Spulber (1987) and Caplin and Leahy
22

Another interpretation is that π describes a drift in the target p∗ (t) due to, say, a trend in productivity
or a product life-cycle.
23
Simple algebra shows that in the Dixit-Stiglitz example revenues are η times profits, a relationship that
is useful to interpret the magnitude of the cost.

14

(1991, 1997), as discussed by Stokey (2008), and also by Caballero (1989) and Moscarini
(2004) in the context of costly observation models.
We make two comments about our assumption about the ‘technology’ to change prices.
First, for most of the paper we impose that at the time of an adjustment the agent must also
observe, i.e. it must pay the observation cost. Most of the paper treats the case where the
target price p∗ (t) has no drift, i.e. the no inflation case, in which even if agents could adjust
without observing they will not do so. Instead if the drift is large enough relative to the
volatility, it will be optimal to sometimes adjust without observing. We discuss this issue in
Section 7.3. Second, we assume that, after paying the adjustment cost, firms set a price that
stays fixed until the next adjustment. In Section 4.1 we briefly comment on the possibility
that the firm sets a path for the prices rather than a value.
For a better understanding the nature of the problem with both observation and menu
costs, and to relate to the literature, the next two subsection discuss the polar cases in which
there is an observation cost only (φ > 0, ψ = 0) and a menu cost only (φ = 0, ψ > 0). We
then discuss the problem in the presence of both costs.

4.1

Price Setting with observation cost

In the simpler case where the menu cost is zero (ψ = 0) the agent solves the following cost
minimization problem:
V0 ≡

min

{Ti ,p(Ti )}∞
i=0

E0

"∞
X
i=0

µ

Z

Ti+1

e−ρTi φ + B

Ti

¶#
e−ρ(t−Ti ) ETi (p(Ti ) − p∗ (t))2 dt

(2)

where, without loss of generality, we are starting at time t = 0 being an observation date, so
that T0 = 0.
The term e−ρTi φ is the present value of the cost paid to observe the state p∗ (Ti ) at time
£
¤
RT
Ti . The term Tii+1 e−ρ(t−Ti ) ETi B (p(Ti ) − p∗ (t))2 dt is the integral of the present value of
the expected profits after observing the state at time Ti and setting the price to p(Ti ) to
be maintained from time Ti until the new observation date Ti+1 . The conditioning set is all
the information available up to Ti . The expectation outside the sum of the maximization
problem conditions on the information available at time zero. The notation of this problem
assumes that a price adjustment can only happen at the time of a price review. This is the
assumption we employ in most of the paper, except for Section 7.3 were we relax it.
Given two arbitrary Ti and Ti+1 , define:
Z

Ti+1 −Ti

∗

p̂ ≡ p(Ti ) − p (Ti ) and v(Ti+1 − Ti ) ≡ min
p̂
π

15

µ
−ρt

e
0

p̂
−t
π

¶2
dt .

(3)

Two comments are in order. First, after observing the value of p∗ (Ti ), the firm optimal
pricing decision p̂ concerns the new price in excess of p∗ (Ti ) measured in units of the drift π.
Second, instead of setting a constant price we might consider letting the firm set a path for
p(t) for t ∈ [Ti , Ti+1 ). It is clear from the objective function that the firm would then choose
p(t) = p∗ (Ti ) + πt, and hence the minimized objective function would be identically zero, i.e.
v(Ti+1 − Ti ) = 0. Mechanically, this has the same effect on the solution of the problem in this
section of setting the drift of the state to zero, i.e. setting the inflation rate to π = 0. Thus
we can interpret the model with π = 0 as a problem in which the firm is allowed to set a path
for p(t). Alternatively, we can also consider the problem where the cost φ applies for a price
review, where the firm finds out the value of p∗ (t), but that it has no cost of changing prices
without gathering any new information. In this case the optimal policy is also to change the
prices between reviews at the rate π per unit of time. Hence, in either of these alternative
scenarios the solution of the firm’s problem is equivalent to the one we present in this section,
but setting the drift of prices to zero, i.e. π = 0. We will revisit this issue in Section 7.3, but
we return to the assumption that prices can only be changed in a review.
The first order condition with respect to p̂ of the function v(τ ), defined in equation (3),
gives the optimal reset price
Rτ
ρ 0 te−ρt dt
p̂
τ
=
→ as ρ ↓ 0,
−ρτ
π
1−e
2
using the function v we write the firm problem as:
V0 ≡ min
∞

{Ti }i=0

"∞
X

µ

Z

Ti+1 −Ti

e−ρTi φ + B π 2 v(Ti+1 − Ti ) + B

¶#
e−ρt t σ 2 dt

.

(4)

0

i=0

Comparing equation (2) with equation (4) we notice that in the second expression we have
solved for the expected values, and we have also subsumed the choice of the price into the
function v. We can write this problem in a recursive way by letting τ ≡ Ti+1 − Ti be the
time between successive observation-adjustment dates:
·
Z
2
V = min φ + B π v(τ ) + B
τ

¸

τ

e

−ρt

2

t σ dt + e

−ρτ

V

,

0

where we use the result that the history of the shocks up to that time is irrelevant for the
optimal choice of τ , given our assumptions on p∗ (t). The optimal time between observations
(and adjustments) solves:
V = B σ 2 min
τ

φ̃ + v(τ )

Rτ
+ 0 e−ρt t dt
1 − e−ρτ
π2
σ2

16

,

where φ̃ ≡

φ
B σ2

,

(5)

a problem defined by three parameters: φ̃, (π/σ)2 and ρ.
Using this setup, the next proposition provides an analytical characterization of the optimal length of the inaction period for the case of small discounting (ρ → 0) and for the case
without drift (π = 0). Both cases provide very accurate approximation of the solution with
non-zero drift and discounting provided these are small, as is likely the case in our data.
∗
Proposition 1.
The optimal decision
³ rule τ 2 for
´ the time between observations when
φ
π
∗
ρ → 0 is a function of two arguments, τ B σ2 , σ2 , with the following properties:

1. τ ∗ is increasing in the normalized cost φ/(Bσ 2 ), decreasing in the normalized drift π/σ,
and decreasing in the innovation variance σ 2
2. The elasticity of τ ∗ with respect to φ/(Bσ 2 ) is:
1/2 as φ/B → 0, or π = 0;
1/3 for σ = 0.
3. For π = 0 and ρ > 0, then τ ∗ solves φ̃ = 12 τ 2 − 16 ρτ 3 + o(ρ2 τ 3 ) , so that τ ∗ is increasing
in ρ provided
that ρ or φ̃ are small enough; for ρ = 0 we obtain the square root formula:
q
τ∗ =

2 φ̃

4. The derivative of τ ∗ with respect to π is zero at zero inflation if σ > 0.
The proposition shows that for small values of the (normalized) observation cost φ̃ the
square root formula gives a good approximation, so that second order costs of observation
gathering give rise to first order spells of inattention. Two special cases are worth mentioning.
First the case with zero drift, i.e. π = 0, which gives a square root formula on the cost φ̃ and
with elasticity −1 on σ. As we discussed above, the π = 0 case can be interpreted as a setting
where the firm is allowed to set a path for its price. The other special case of interest is when
there is no uncertainty, i.e. σ = 0. We can think of this as a limiting case of the observation
problem. When the uncertainty is tiny, the rule becomes even more inertial, switching from
a square to a cubic root. Alternatively, this can be reinterpreted as a deterministic model
with a physical menu cost of price setting (equal to φ), where the firm’s price drifts away
from the optimal level due to the inflation trend.
For future reference we notice that in the case of no drift (π = 0), and when we let
ρ ↓ 0, we have that the time between observations/adjustments τ ∗ , its reciprocal, the number
of observations/adjustments per unit of time n, and the average size of price adjustments
denoted by E[ |∆p| ], and given by the absolute value of normal with zero mean and standard

17

√
deviation σ τ ∗
s
1
n≡ ∗ =
τ

·
¸1
σ2B
2 σ2 φ 4 p
and E[ |∆p| ] =
2/π ,
2φ
B

(6)

h(t) = 0 for t ∈ [0, τ ∗ ], and h(τ ∗ ) = ∞ .
where h(t) is the instantaneous hazard rate of a price adjustment as a function of t, the time
elapsed since the last price change.
While the nature of our approximation is different, several of the conclusions of this
proposition confirm previous findings in Reis (2006b). In particular, in his Proposition 4 the
approximate optimal solution for the inaction interval follows a square root formula, just like
we obtain under point 2. Also, as in his Proposition 5, the length of the inaction intervals
is decreasing in the variance of the innovations, and increasing in the (normalized) cost of
adjustment, as we find under point 1. Finally in this setup the length of the inaction spells
is constant, as in the special case that Reis discusses in his Proposition 5. In both our and
his model the reason behind this result is that the state follows a brownian motion and that
the level of the value function upon adjustment is independent of the state.24

4.2

Price Setting with menu cost

In this section we assume the firm observes the state p∗ without cost, i.e. φ = 0, but that it
must pay a fixed cost ψ to adjust prices. This is the standard menu cost model. The firm
observes the underlying target value p∗ (t) continuously but acts only when the current price,
p(t), is sufficiently different from it, i.e. when the deviation p̃(t) ≡ p(t) − p∗ (t), is sufficiently
large. Thus optimal policy is characterized by a range of inaction. Using p̂ ≡ p(Ti ) − p∗ (Ti )
to denote the optimal reset price at the time of adjustment, and using the law of motion for
√
p∗ in equation (1), the evolution of the price deviation is p̃ = p̂ − π t − sσ t.
The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation in the range of inaction p̃ ∈ [p , p̄] is:
1
ρV (p̃) = B p̃2 − V 0 (p̃) π + V 00 (p̃) σ 2 .
2

(7)

The optimal return point is:
p̂ = arg min V (p̃) =⇒ V 0 (p̂) = 0 ,
p̃

24

(8)

In the sense that the state only affects the value function level but not its shape, so that the optimal
choice of the inaction interval does not depend on it.

18

and the boundary conditions are given by
V (p̄) = V (p̂) + ψ and V 0 (p̄) = 0 ,

(9)

V (p) = V (p̂) + ψ and V 0 (p) = 0 .

(10)

While the standard way to solve this problem is to use the close form solution of the ODE and
use the boundary conditions to obtain an implicit equation for p̄, we pursue an alternative
strategy that will be useful to compare with the solution for the problem with both cost.
Since for π = 0 the value function is symmetric and attains a minimum at p̃ = 0, we use the
following fourth order approximation to V (·) around zero:
1
1
V (p̃) = V (0) + V 00 (0) (p̃)2 + V 0000 (0) (p̃)4 for all p̃ ∈ [−p̄ , p̄],
2
4!

(11)

where the symmetry arond zero implies V 0 (0) = V 000 (0) = 0. Note that the boundary
conditions equation (8), equation (9), and equation (10), imply that V (·) is convex around
p̃ = 0 but concave around −p̄ and p̄. Thus a forth order approximation is the smaller order
that we can use to capture this, with V 00 (0) > 0 and V 0000 (0) < 0. The approximation will be
accurate for small values of ψ, since in this case the range of inaction is small.
Proposition 2. Given π = 0, the width of the range of inaction, 2 p̄, for small ψσ 2 /B
and ρ is approximately given by :
µ
p̄ =

6 σ2 ψ
B

¶1/4
.

(12)

The result for the quartic root is essentially the one in Dixit (1991), who obtained it through
a different argument. The approximation of equation (12) is very accurate for a large range
of values of the cost ψ.
In this case price adjustments take two values only, and hence the average size of price
changes is E[ |∆p| ] = p̄. Instead, the number of adjustments per unit of time is more involved,
but it can be computed using the function defining the expected time until adjustment,
Ta (p̃), i.e. the expected value of the time until p̃ first reaches p̄ or p. The average number of
adjustments, denoted by n, is then 1/Ta (p̂). The function Ta (p̃) satisfies the o.d.e.:
0 = 1 − π Ta0 (p̃) +

σ 2 00
T (p̃) and Ta (p) = Ta (p̄) = 0 .
2 a

For the case of π = 0 the solution is Ta (p̃) =

p̄2 −p̃2
.
σ2

19

(13)

Hence the average number of adjustments

2

per unit of time n satisfies n ≡ Ta1(0) = σp̄2 . Indeed, the distribution of the first times between
subsequent price adjustment is known in closed form, and hence one can use it to characterized
h(t), the instantaneous hazard rate of a price change as a function of t the time elapsed since
the last price change (see Appendix B for details). Future reference we have
s

·
¸1
σ2 B
6 σ2 ψ 4
, E[ |∆p| ] =
and h(0) = 0 ,
6ψ
B
s
2 2
2
π
σ2 B
σ
π
h0 (t) ≥ 0, h(·) is convex-concave with lim h(t) =
=
.
t→∞
8 p̄2
8
6 ψ
σ2
n = 2 =
p̄

where we use the approximation for p̄.

4.3

Price Setting with observation and menu costs

In this section we consider the problem where the decision maker faces two costs: an observation cost φ that is paid to observe the state p∗ (t), and a fixed cost ψ that is paid to change
the price. We first write the corresponding sequence problem:
(
min

{Ti ,p(Ti ),χTi }∞
i=0

E0

∞
X

V (p0 ) ≡
Z
h
−ρTi
φ + (1 − χTi ) B
e

i=0

χTi

Ti+1
Ti

Z

³
+

(14)
e−ρ(t−Ti ) ETi (p(Ti−1 ) − p∗ (t))2 dt

Ti+1

ψ+B
Ti

e−ρ(t−Ti ) ETi

¡

¢2 ´ i
p(Ti ) − p∗ (t) dt

)

where, as in Section 4.1, the sequence {Ti } denotes the stopping times for the observation of
the state p∗ (t), and where χTi is an indicator that the agent will pay the menu cost ψ and
adjust the price to p(Ti ) so that prices evolve according to:
p(t) = p(Ti−1 ) for t ∈ [Ti , Ti+1 ) if χTi = 0 ,

(15)

p(t) = p(Ti ) for t ∈ [Ti , Ti+1 ) if χTi = 1 .
where, without loss of generality, we are starting at time t = 0 being an observation date,
so that T0 = 0. As in the problem of Section 4.1, the notation ETi (·) denotes expectations
conditional on the history of {p∗ (s)} up to t = Ti . The process for {p∗ (t)} follows a random
walk with drift as in equation (1), so the current value of the process is a sufficient statistics
for the distribution of its future realizations. Finally notice that the objective function is
homogeneous of degree one in (B, φ, ψ). Thus the optimal policy will be a function only of the
20

parameters (ρ, π, φ/B, ψ/B, σ 2 ), so that we can normalize B = 1 without loss of generality
where we find it convenient.
Following the same steps as in Section 4.1, we write the Bellman equation for the firm’s
problem excluding all the terms that the firm cannot affect and in terms of the deviations
√
p̃(T + t) ≡ p(T ) − p∗ (T + t) = p̂(T ) − π t − sσ t. We measure the value function just after
paying the observation cost and observing the state p̃:
n
o
V (p̃) = min V̄ (p̃) , V̂ ,

(16)

where V̄ (p̃) is the value function if the firm knows the state, but does not change the price,
and V̂ is the value function if the firm decides to set the optimal price p̂. Thus
Z

τ̂

V̂ = ψ + φ + min B

−ρt

e

p̂,τ̂

£

2

2

Z

¤

−ρτ̂

∞

(p̂ − πt) + σ t dt + e

0

³
√ ´
V p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂ dN (s)

−∞

(17)
where N (·) is the CDF of a standard normal.25 The value function conditional on the firm
not changing the price is:
Z

τ

V̄ (p̃) = φ + min B
τ

e

−ρt

£

¤
(p̃ − πt) + σ t dt + e−ρτ
2

2

0

Z

∞

¡
√ ¢
V p̃ − πτ − sσ τ dN (s) .

−∞

(18)
The next proposition states that the operator defined by the right side of equation (16),
equation (17) and equation (18) is a contraction in the space of bounded and continuous
functions. We will use this for further characterizations. The argument is intuitive but nonstandard, since the length of the time period is a decision variable, potentially making the
problem a continuous time one. Since we assume that φ > 0 revisions should be optimally
spread out. We then have:
Proposition 3.

The value function is uniformly bounded and continuos on p̃. If φ > 0

then the optimal time between observations is uniformly bounded by τ > 0, and thus the
operator defined by the right side of equation (16), equation (17) and equation (18) is a
contraction of modulus exp(−ρτ ).
We conjecture that the form of the optimal decision rule is that there will be two thresholds
25

Equations (17) and (18) use that the expected value:

21

R∞ ¡
−∞

√ ¢2
2
p − πt − sσ t dN (s) = (p − πt) + σ 2 t.

for p̃ that will define a range of inaction, [p, p̄]. These threshold are such that
V̄ (p̃) < V̂ if p̃ ∈ (p , p̄) and that V̄ (p̃) > V̂ if p̃ < p or p̃ > p̄ .
If upon paying the observation cost the firm discovers that the state p̃ is in the range of
inaction, then the firm will decide not to pay the cost ψ and not to adjust the price; moreover
the firm will decide to take a look again at time τ (p̃). If otherwise, the state is outside the
range of inaction, the firm will pay the cost ψ, set the optimal price, and also set the new
interval at which to observe the state τ̂ .

5

Optimal Decision rules for the case with no-drift

In this section we study the case where p∗ has no drift (π = 0) which simplifies the problem.
We show that the value function is symmetric around zero, with a minimum at p̃ = 0. The
optimal choice of p upon paying the cost ψ is p̂ = 0, τ (0) = τ̂ , and τ (p̃) symmetric around
zero. Moreover, τ (·) has a maximum at p̃ = 0, and has an inverted U-shape. The thresholds
for the range of inaction satisfy: p = −p̄.
We begin by showing that V (·) is symmetric around p̃ = 0 and increasing around it. The
Bellman equations for p̃ ∈ (−∞, ∞) are:
Z

τ

V̄ (p̃) = φ + min B
τ

V̂

−ρt

e
0

2

2

Z

¤

∞

−ρτ

p̃ + σ t dt + e

−∞

Z

τ̂

e

= ψ + φ + min B
τ̂ ,p̂

£

−ρt

£

2

2

¤

¡
√ ¢
V p̃ − sσ τ dN (s)
Z

∞

−ρτ̂

p̂ + σ t dt + e

(19)

³

√ ´
V p̂ − sσ τ̂ dN (s) (20)

−∞

0

V (p̃) = min {V̂ , V̄ (p̃)}

Proposition 4.

(21)

Let π = 0. The value function V is symmetric around p̃ = 0, and V is

strictly increasing in p̃ for 0 < p̃ < p̄. The optimal price level conditional on adjustment is
p̂ = 0. The derivative of V̄ (p̃) for 0 ≤ p̃ is given by
µ

0 ≤ V̄ 0 (p̃) = 2 B p̃

1 − e−ρτ (p̃)
+ e−ρτ (p̃)
ρ

Z

∞
0

− 12

V 0 (z)

e

σ

z−p̃
√

¶2

−e

τ (p̃)

σ

µ
− 12

p

σ

τ (p̃) 2 π

z+p̃
√

¶2

τ (p̃)

dz

with strict inequality if τ (p̃) > 0, where τ (·) is the optimal decision rule for the time between
observations. Thus V 0 (0) = V̄ 0 (0) = 0, V 00 (0) > 0, and V 0 (p̃) = 0, for p̃ > p̄ and hence V is
not differentiable at p̃ = p̄.

22

Notice that in this case at the boundary of the range of inaction the value function has
a kink, i.e. there is no smooth pasting. This differs from the model with menu cost only of
Section 4.2, which featured the smooth pasting property, typical of continuous-time fixed-cost
models, see e.g. Dixit (1993) and Stokey (2008).
Next, we compute an analytical approximation to the value function and optimal policies.
The approximation relies on the fact that V (·) is symmetric around p̃ = 0, i.e. V (p̃) = V (−p̃),
and hence all the derivatives of odd order are zero. Hence we approximate
1
V̄ (p̃) = V (0) + V 00 (0) (p̃)2 + o(|p̃|3 )
2
since V 0 (0) = V 000 (0) = 0 and V 00 (0) > 0. The other source of approximation is that we
let ρ converge to zero, although the second source is only to simplify the expressions. The
quadratic approximation for the value function is globally accurate if the range of inaction,
i.e. [−p̄, p̄], is small. Since p̄ converges to zero as the menu cost ψ goes to zero, the
approximation will be accurate for small values of ψ relatively to φ. We will discuss the
accuracy of this approximation more in detail in the following paragraphs. Proposition 5
- Proposition 8 use these approximations to characterize the optimal decision rules, i.e. to
characterize the values of p̄, τ̂ and the function τ (·) in [−p̄, p̄].
Proposition 5.

Let ϕ̂ ≡

p̄
√
,
σ τ̂

then V 00 (0), p̄, and τ̂ solve the recursive system:

σ 2 ψ/B = f (ϕ̂) , σ 2 τ̂ = h(ϕ̂) , and V 00 (0) = 2

ψ
,
p̄2

where f (·) and h(·) are the following known functions of ϕ̂ and of two parameters (σ 2 Bφ , σ 2 Bψ ):
σ2

ψ
ϕ̂2 [h(ϕ̂)]2
³R
´
= f (ϕ̂) ≡
p
ϕ̂ 2
B
1 − 2 h(ϕ̂)
s
dN
(s)
0
r
h(ϕ̂)
( φ + ψ 2(1 − N (ϕ̂))
τ̂ = 2 ≡ 2
.
σ
σ2B

(22)

(23)

Equation (22) and equation (23) can be thought of as the first order conditions for p̄ and
τ̂ . The variable ϕ̂ is the minimum size (in absolute value) of the innovation of a standard
normal that is required to get out of the inaction region [−p̄, p̄] after resetting the price to
p̂ = 0. An immediate corollary of Proposition 5 is that the optimal values of ϕ̂ and σ 2 τ̂ are
only functions of two parameters σ 2 φ/B and σ 2 ψ/B. Notice also that the expression for τ̂
in equation (23) is the same as the square root formula in Proposition 1 for the problem
with observation cost only, except that the cost φ has been replaced by the “expected” cost
23

φ + ψ 2 (1 − N (ϕ̂)). The expression 2 (1 − N (ϕ̂)) is the probability of adjusting the price at
the end of the review period.
The previous proposition gives a recursive system of equations whose solution is the
optimal value of (τ̂ , p̄). The next proposition gives a sufficient condition for the existence
and uniqueness of the system, and provides some comparative statics. In fact, it turns out
that the approximations used in this section can only be used globally – i.e. for all p̃ – if
ϕ̂ ∈ (0, 1), as it will become clear after Proposition 8. Thus, the next proposition restricts
attention to parameter settings so that there is a unique solution in this range.
√
Proposition 6. Let ϕ̂ ≡ p̄/(σ τ̂ ). Assume that ψφ ≥ 1/2 − 2(1 − N (1)) ≈ 0.1827. Then
there exist a unique value ϕ̂∗ ∈ (0, 1) that solves σ 2 Bψ = f (ϕ̂∗ ) defined in equation (22). Also
let τ̂ ∗ be the solution of τ̂ ∗ = h(ϕ̂∗ )/σ 2 defined in equation (23). Then,
1. ϕ̂∗ is decreasing in φ, and τ̂ ∗ is increasing in φ,
2. ϕ̂∗ is decreasing in
2

σ2
,
B

and σ 2 τ̂ ∗ is increasing in

3. ∂ ϕ̂∗ /∂ σB = 0 evaluated at

σ2
B

σ2
B

with an elasticity ≥ 1/2,

= 0,

4. ∂ ϕ̂∗ /∂ψ > 0 if σ 2 Bψ is small relative to φ.
The assumption in this proposition is that the observation cost must be sufficiently large
relative to the menu cost in order for the approximation to be globally valid –i.e. in order for
ϕ̂ < 1– for arbitrary values of σ 2 /B. We can relax this assumption at the cost of imposing
a lower bound on the σ 2 /B, which will depend on ψ and φ. The intuition for why we need
a condition like φ/ψ > 0.1827, is that the formulation of the problem presumes that after
adjusting the price the firm waits for τ̂ > 0 periods before the next review, for which we
require a cost of observation, φ, non-negligible relative to the menu cost ψ. For instance
when φ = 0 the formulation of the problem is incorrect as the model becomes the menu cost
of Section 4.2, where τ̂ = 0 and price reviews happen continuously.
The comparative statics of part 2 shows that, in general, ϕ̂∗ is a decreasing function of
σ 2 /B. Part 3 shows that, in particular, around σ 2 /B ∼
= 0, the value ϕ̂∗ is non-responsive
to σ 2 /B. It is interesting to consider in Proposition 6 the limit case of σ ↓ 0. In this case,
the value of ϕ̂∗ converges to value in (0, 1), but τ̂ ∗ goes to ∞. This is quite intuitive: as the
target price can be predicted arbitrarily well, the time between observations is arbitrarily
large, but given the menu cost, there is still a range of inaction. For future reference we let
ϕ̂0 be the solution to equation (22) and equation (23) when σ 2 /B = 0. Notice that in this

24

case the solution is just a function of the ratio of the two costs α ≡ ψ/φ, which we write as:
µ
2

1 = (ϕ̂0 )

¶
2
ψ
+ 4 [1 − N (ϕ̂0 )] , where α ≡ .
α
φ

(24)

We find that for the values of σ 2 /B that we are interested in the function ϕ̂∗ is approximately constant with respect to σ 2 /B, or putting it differently we are interested in relatively
small values of σ 2 /B. To quantify what we mean by small, we display the values of ϕ̂∗ as a
function of the ratio α = ψ/φ, for three values of σ 2 /B, namely 0, 0.2/20, and 100 × 0.2/20.
Notice that by definition ϕ̂∗ = ϕ̂0 when σ 2 /B = 0. Using the interpretation of the model as
an approximation to the problem of a firm facing a constant demand elasticity, as explained
in Appendix A of the Appendix, we think of the value σ = 0.2 as the annual standard deviation of cost, as well as a value of B = 20, which in this context is implied by a markup
of about 15%, as of the righ order of magnitude. Then, the third value is just 100 times
the values we think of as reasonable. As it can be seen in Figure 2, the values of ϕ̂∗ under
different σ 2 /B are very similar for all values of α.26 We summarize the result that, for the
Figure 2: ϕ̂∗ as a function of α and σ 2 /B
1
σ2/B = 0
σ2/B = 0.22 / 20
σ2/B = 100*(0.22 / 20)

0.9

0.8

0.7

ϕ̂0.6
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

ψ/φ

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Note: in this example we let φ vary, while ψ = 0.03.

range of interesting parameter values, the function ϕ̂∗ does not depend much on σ 2 /B as
follows:
26

As discussed before, the accuracy of our approximation also relies on relative small values of ψ.

25

Proposition 7. Let α ≡ ψ/φ. For small values of σ 2 ψB , the normalized width of inaction
ϕ̂(σ 2 Bφ , σ 2 Bψ ) is well approximated by ϕ̂0 (α) which has elasticity:
∂ log ϕ̂0
1
∂ log ϕ̂0
1
= at α = 0 and
< for α > 0 .
∂ log α
2
∂ log α
2

(25)

The optimal values for the time until next revision after an adjustment, τ̂ ∗ and the width of
the range of inaction, p̄, are then given by
r

r
√
φ
α
φ
τ̂ =
>
2 = τ̂ ∗ |ψ=0
2
2
σ B ϕ̂0 (α)
σ B
·
¸ 14
·
¸ 14
p
2ψ
2ψ
p̄ = σ
ϕ̂0 (α) < σ
6
= p̄ |φ=0 .
B
B
∗

(26)
(27)

Proposition 7 shows that the expressions in equation (26) and equation (27) are the
generalizations of the corresponding formulas for the case in which there is only an observation
or a menu cost, respectively: for a given ratio of the cost α, they have the same exact
functional form. The equations show that the length of time until the next revision, τ̂ ∗ , is
higher in the model with both costs than in the model with observation cost only, and that
the width of the inaction band, p̄, is smaller than in the menu cost model.27 The reason why
τ̂ is higher is that the introduction of the menu cost increases the cost of one price adjustment
(from φ to φ + ψ) but not the benefit. As a consequence firms optimally economize on the
number of times they pay the cost. The reason why p̄ is smaller than in the menu cost case
is more subtle. In the pure menu cost model observations are free, i.e. the firm can monitor
when the state crosses the threshold at no cost. But with an observation cost this is not
true, and when the firm discovers to be ‘sufficiently close’ to the barrier she prefers to adjust
rather than having to pay again for observing when exactly the barrier is crossed. In other
words the barrier (both left and right) shifts inwards.
Finally, notice that the width of the inaction band has elasticity 1/4 with respect to σ 2 /B,
as in the menu cost model, and that the time to the next review after a price adjustment
has elasticity equal to −1/2 with respect to Bσ 2 . Using equation (25) into equation (26) and
27

Also note that, from equation (26) and equation (25) it follows that τ̂ ∗ is weakly increasing in the ratio
of the cost α, with elasticity less than 1/2.

26

equation (27) we obtain the following elasticities with respect to the cost:
∂ log τ̂ ∗
1 ∂ log ϕ̂0
1
∂ log τ̂ ∗
∂ log ϕ̂0
1
= −
≤ and 0 <
=
≤ ,
∂ log ψ
2
∂ log α
2
∂ log φ
∂ log α
2
µ
¶
∂ log p̄
1 1 ∂ log ϕ̂0
1
∂ log p̄
1 ∂ log ϕ̂0
1
0≤
=
+
≤
and 0 >
=−
≥− .
∂ log ψ
2 2
∂ log α
2
∂ log φ
2 ∂ log α
2

0≤

(28)
(29)

Equation (28) says that the time to the next review after a price adjustment is increasing
in both costs. Equation (29) says that the width of the inaction band is increasing in ψ,
with an elasticity smaller than in the menu cost model, and decreasing in φ, since at the
time of an observation an agent facing a higher cost minimizes the chances of paying further
observation cost by narrowing the range of inaction.
We now turn to characterizing the remaining object defining the decision rules, namely
the function τ (·) describing the time until the next review in the range of inaction.
Proposition 8. The optimal rule for the time to the next revision τ (p̃) for prices in the
range of inaction is given by:
µ ¶2
p̃
τ (p̃) = τ̂ −
.
(30)
σ

Figure 3: Policy rule τ (p̃)
Nume.
Appx.

0.46

τ̂
τ(p̃)

τ measured in years

0.44

0.42

Range of Inaction

Adjust p

Adjust p

0.4

0.38

0.36

0.34
−0.08

p
−0.06

p̄

p̂
−0.04

−0.02

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

p̃

Note: parameter values are B = 20, ρ = 0.02, σ = 0.2, φ = 0.06, and ψ = 0.03; the approximated
solution for τ (p̃) is given by Proposition 8; the numerical solution for τ (p̃) is obtained from solving
the model on a grid of points for p̃.

27

Few comments are in order. First, the shape of the optimal decision rule depends only on
σ, and not on the rest of the parameters for the model, i.e. B, φ, and ψ. Second, if the agent
finds herself after a review with a price gap p̃ = 0, she will set τ (0) = τ̂ , since the optimal
adjustment would have implied a post adjustment price gap of zero. Third, the function τ (p̃)
is decreasing in the (absolute value of) p̃. If upon a review the agent finds the price gap close
to the boundary of range of inaction, then she will plan for a review relatively soon, since
it is likely that the target will cross the threshold p̄. Fourth, the price gap is normalized by
the standard deviation of the changes in the target price σ. This is also natural, since the
interest of the decision maker is on the likelihood that the price target will deviate and hit
the barriers, so that for a lower σ she is prepared to wait more for the same price gap p̃.
Figure 3 plots the policy rule τ (p̃) implied by Proposition 8 against the policy rule obtained
from the numerical solution of the model, both evaluated at a set of structural parameters
which we think as equally reasonable. The horizontal axis of Figure 3 displays the deviation
of firm’s price from the target, p̃. The two vertical bars at −p̄ and p̄ denote the threshold
values that delimit the inaction region. The vertical bar at p̂, inside the inaction region,
denotes the optimal return point after an adjustment. As in the case of the approximation
solutions for p̄ and τ̂ , the approximation for τ (·) is very accurate, and we found this result
to be robust to all the economically interesting parameter values.
We discuss briefly the type of error in the decision rules that is produced by our quadratic
approximation. Recall that the nature of the approximation used in this section is that the
value function V̄ is assumed to be quadratic in p̃, and also that we let ρ converge to zero.
Here we focus on the first feature, which turns out to be the most important. Since the
function V̄ is symmetric and has a minimum at p̃ = 0, a quadratic approximation must be
accurate around p̃ = 0. Also, recall that Proposition 4 shows that the function is increasing
for all p̃ < p̄. Thus, since p̄ tends to zero as ψ goes to zero, the relevant range of V̄ , given
by [−p̄, p̄], is very small and hence the approximation very accurate if ψ is small. On the
other hand, when ψ is large relative to φ, the quality of the approximation deteriorates. In
particular, as φ goes to zero, the problem converges to the menu cost model analyzed in
Section 4.2. The value function V̄ in the menu cost model is convex close to p̃ = 0, but then
it must be concave around p̄, to satisfy smooth pasting. As explained in Section 4.2 above,
this implies that V 0000 (0) < 0. Thus, as φ becomes small relative to ψ, the value function V̄
becomes closer to the one of the menu cost, and hence our quadratic approximation of the
value function becames worse, especially for values of p̃ away from zero. In particular, since
our quadratic approximation has V 0000 (0) = 0, it tends to be higher for values of p̃ away from
zero, and consequently the value of p̄ that we obtain tends to be smaller. In Appendix C.6
we compare our analytical quadratic approximation for the value function and the thresholds
28

with numerical solutions obtained of these objects. Finally, we notice that for small values
of φ/ψ the shape of τ (·) will be different for values of p̃ away from zero. In particular, the
approximation that τ (·) is quadratic in the whole range will be less accurate for small values
of φ/ψ. In this case the true value of τ will be larger than the in the quadratic approximation
obtained in Proposition 8.

6

Statistics for the case with no-drift

In this section we characterize the implications for the following statistics of interest in the
case of no drift: frequency of price revisions, frequency of price adjustment, distribution of
price adjustment, and hazard rate for price changes.

6.1

Average frequencies of review and adjustment

First we turn to the development of expressions for statistics of interest implied by this model
the frequency of price adjustments na , and the frequency of price reviews nr . First, we turn to
the characterization of the frequency of price adjustments. Let the function Ta (p̃), describe
the expected time needed for the price gap to get outside the range of inaction [−p̄ , p̄],
conditional on the state (right after a revision) equal to p̃. This function solves the recursion:
Z
σ

Ta (p̃) = τ (p̃) +
σ

p̃+p̄
√

τ (p̃)

p̃−p̄
√

³
´
p
Ta p̃ − σ τ (p̃) s dN (s)

(31)

τ (p̃)

for p̃ ∈ [−p̄ , p̄]. Since after a price adjustment the price gap p̃ is zero, then Ta (0) is the
expected time between price adjustments. By the fundamental theorem of renewal theory,
the average number of price adjustments per unit of time is given by na = 1/Ta (0).
In the next proposition we derive analytical approximation for the expected time between
√
adjustments as function of only two arguments: ϕ̂ ≡ p̄/(σ τ̂ ) and τ̂ . The nature of the
approximation is that we replace the function Ta (p̃), that is symmetric around p̃ = 0 and has
zero odd derivatives at p̃ = 0, by a quadratic function; moreover, based on Proposition 8, we
use τ (p̃) = τ̂ − (p̃/σ)2 .
p
Proposition 9.
Let ϕ̄ ≡ ϕ̂/ 1 − ϕ̂2 and let τ (p̃) be given by Proposition 8. The
frequency of price adjustments is na = 1/Ta (0), where Ta (0) = τ̂ A(ϕ̂), and:
´ 
2
2
(
ϕ̄
−
s)
dN
(s)
−
ϕ̄
(1 − ϕ̂ )

1 −
A(ϕ̂) ≈
R ϕ̂
2
1.5 − N (2ϕ̄)
1 − N (ϕ̂) + 0 s dN (s) + ϕ̂n(ϕ̂)


2

1/2

29

³R

2ϕ̄
0

(32)

where A(0) = 1, the approximation for A(ϕ̂) is strictly increasing for 0 ≤ ϕ̂ ≤ ϕ̂sup , ϕ̂sup ≈
0.75, and where A(ϕ̂sup ) ≈ 1.8.
The value ϕ̂sup delimits the range over which the approximation is accurate. Clearly
Proposition 9 implies that keeping ϕ̂ fixed the expected time between price adjustments is
increasing in τ̂ . The higher ϕ̂, the larger the expected time between price adjustments for
given τ̂ .
Next we turn to the expected time between reviews. As an intermediate step we write
a recursion for the distribution of the price gaps upon review (and before adjustment), for
which we use density g(p̃) and CDF G. The recursion is akin to a Kolmogorov forward
equation:
Z

p̄

g(p̃) =
−p̄

1
p
n
σ τ (p)

Ã

p̃ − p
p
σ τ (p)

!

1
g(p) dp + √ n
σ τ̂

µ

p̃
√

σ τ̂

¶ ·

Z

¸

p̄

1−

g(p)dp

(33)

−p̄

for all p̃ ∈ [−p̄ , p̄], where n(·) is the density of a standard normal.28 The first term on the
right side of this equation gives the mass of firms with values of the price gap p that in last
p
review were in the inaction region, and drew shocks to transit from p to p̃ = p − sσ τ (p)
during τ (p) periods. The second term has the mass of firms that in the last review were
R p̄
outside the inaction region, and hence started with a price gap of zero, so that 1 − −p̄ g(p)dp
is the fraction of reviews that end up outside the range of inacion, and hence trigger an
adjustment. For future reference, notice that equation (33) does not use the values of g(·)
outside the range of inaction. With the knowledge of the distribution g, the expected time
between price reviews is given by
Z

·

p̄

Tr =

τ (p) g(p)dp + τ̂
−p̄

Z

p̄

1−

¸
g(p)dp .

(34)

−p̄

Similarly to Proposition 9, we derive analytical approximation for the expected time
√
between reviews as function of only ϕ̂ ≡ p̄/(σ τ̂ ) and τ̂ . In particular, we replace the
density g(p̃), that is symmetric around p̃ = 0 and has zero odd derivatives at p̃ = 0, by a
quadratic function, and use τ (p̃) = τ̂ − (p̃/σ)2 . We establish the following:
p
Proposition 10.
Let ϕ̄ ≡ ϕ̂/ 1 − ϕ̂2 and let τ (p̃) be given by Proposition 8. The
average frequency of price reviews is nr = 1/Tr where Tr = τ̂ R (ϕ̂), and:
Z

ϕ̄

R(ϕ̂) ≈ 1 − 2
0
28

Notice that √1
σ

τ (p)

µ

1
q(0) + q 00 (0) ϕ2
2

¶

ϕ2
dϕ,
1 + ϕ2

n(·) is the probability density of p̃ conditional on p, where p̃ = p − s σ

30

(35)
p

τ (p) .

where q(0) and q 00 (0) are known functions of ϕ̄ given in Appendix C.11, and where R(0) = 1,
the approximation for R(ϕ̂) strictly decreasing for 0 ≤ ϕ̂ ≤ ϕ̂sup where ϕ̂sup ≈ 0.65, and
R(ϕ̂sup ) ≈ 0.96.
Proposition 10 implies that keeping ϕ̂ fixed the expected time between price reviews is
increasing in τ̂ . However, the higher ϕ̂, the smaller R(ϕ̂), and the smaller the expected time
between price reviews for given τ̂ .
Figure 4 plots A(ϕ̂), R(ϕ̂) and nnar as a function of ϕ̂ as defined in equation (32) and
equation (35), against their numerical counterparts. Several results are worth mentioning.
Figure 4: A(ϕ̂), R(ϕ̂) and

A(ϕ̂)
R(ϕ̂)

as a function of ϕ̂

2.5
num.
appx.
2

A
1.5

1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

ϕ̂
1
0.98

R 0.96
0.94
0.92

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

ϕ̂
2.5

nr
na

2

1.5

1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

ϕ̂

Note: A(ϕ̂) and R(ϕ̂) computed numerically on a grid, as described in Appendix C.10Appendix C.11.

First, the approximations in equation (32) and equation (35) are very close to their numerical
counterparts, and basically coincide for ϕ̂ small enough. Second, A(·) is strictly increasing
in ϕ̂, while R(·) is strictly decreasing in ϕ̂.29
An important implication of Proposition 9 and Proposition 10 is that the ratio of the
average number of price adjustment to the average number of reviews per unit of time, i.e.
ϕ̂)
na
= R(
, only depends on ϕ̂. This result is very useful because, according to our model,
nr
A(ϕ̂)
we can directly identify the values of ϕ̂, and τ̂ , from observations of the average frequency of
price adjustment and the average frequency of price review. In addition, from Proposition 6
we know that ϕ̂ is roughly determined by the relative cost of reviewing relative to adjusting
29

This monotonicity of A(·) and R(·) applies for all values of ϕ̂ ≤ 1 that we computed numerically.

31

prices, α = ψφ . Therefore, we have obtained a very tight relationship between the relative
frequency of price review to adjustment and the relative cost of review to adjustment. By
applying these results to the interpretation of observations in Figure D.2, we could attribute
equal increases in the average frequencies of adjustment and review either to an increase in the
volatility of the state, σ, or to an increase in the curvature coefficient of the profit function,
B, or to a parallel decrease in the costs of review and adjustment, ψ and φ. However, changes
in the ratio of the two frequencies could roughly only be due to changes in the ratio of the
costs of review and adjustment.
Proposition 11.
Assume that σ 2 ψ/B is small so that approximating ϕ̂ using ϕ̂0 is
accurate. Then the elasticities of the number of price adjustments and revisions with respect
to the cost satisfy:
∂ log na (α)
∂ log φ
∂ log na (α)
∂ log ψ
∂ log nr (α)
∂ log φ
∂ log nr (α)
∂ log ψ

=
=
=
=

µ
¶
∂ log ϕ̂0 (α)
A0 (ϕ̂0 (α))
1
1
1 − ϕ̂0 (α)
≥ − and = − if α = 0
−
∂ log α
A (ϕ̂0 (α))
2
2
1 ∂ log na (α)
− −
,
2
∂ log φ
µ
¶
∂ log ϕ̂0 (α)
R0 (ϕ̂0 (α))
1
−
1 − ϕ̂0 (α)
≤ 0 and = − if α = 0 ,
∂ log α
R (ϕ̂0 (α))
2
1 ∂ log nr (α)
− −
.
2
∂ log φ

, (36)
(37)
(38)
(39)

Notice that equation (37) and equation (39) imply that an increase of φ and ψ in the
same percentage, decreases the number of adjustments and the number of reviews na and
nr in half of that percentage. Note that this one half elasticity is the one present in the
models described in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 that feature either information cost only or
menu cost only. Furthermore, we remark that while an increase in the information cost φ
decreases the ratio nr /na , so each adjustment corresponds to fewer observations, the elasticity
of na with respect to φ displayed in equation (36) is negative, showing that observations are
complement to adjustments. In Appendix C.12 we report results about the elasticities of nr
and na with respect to ψ and φ evaluated numerically at different values of α. These results
are consistent with Proposition 11.

6.2

Average size and distribution of price changes

Next we derive expressions for the average size of price change, E[ |∆p| ], and for the distribution of price changes. The average size of price adjustment equals the average price-gap

32

upon review, conditional on that average gap being outside the range of inaction. Thus, to
compute this average we extend g(·), defined in equation (33), to the values outside the range
of inaction. Since the distribution of price changes has to be conditional on a price change,
R p̄
and the price change happens with probability [1 − −p̄ g(p)dp], then price adjustments have
a density:
µ

R p̄
g(∆p)
w(∆p) ≡
=
R p̄
1 − −p̄ g(p)dp

¶
∆p−p
√
σ τ (p)

√1
−p̄ σ τ (p)

¶
µ
n
g(p)dp
1
∆p
√
+ √ n
,
R p̄
1 − −p̄ g(p)dp
σ τ̂
σ τ̂

(40)

R∞
for |∆p| ∈ (p̄, ∞). The average size of price change is then given by E[ |∆p| ] = 2 p̄ z w(z)dz.
The distribution of price changes w(·) is composed of two terms: the first term is positive
and strictly decreasing in |∆p|; the second term is the density of a normal distribution with
√
zero mean and standard deviation equal to σ τ̂ . Therefore, conditional on adjusting prices,
w(·) assigns relatively more weight to values of |∆p| that are closer to p̄ than the normal
distribution. Moreover, w(·) is symmetric around zero, as both the normal distribution and
the distribution of the price gaps upon review, g(·), are symmetric. The next proposition
characterizes this distribution, and some related statistics, as a function of the parameters
for the optimal decision rules.
Proposition 12.
Consider an optimal decision rule described by two parameters
(τ̂ , ϕ̂) and where, in the range of inaction, τ (p) is given by the approximation described
p
in Proposition 8, namely τ (p) = τ̂ − (p/σ)2 . Define ϕ̄ ≡ ϕ̂/ 1 − ϕ̂2 , and let x denote the
√
normalized price changes: x ≡ ∆p/(σ τ̂ ). Then
E[ |∆p| ] = σ

√
Z

τ̂ E[ |x| ; ϕ̄] ,

(41)

∞

E[ |x| ; ϕ̄] = 2

x v(x ; ϕ̄) dx ,

(42)

min |∆p|
mode |∆p|
ϕ̄
=
= R∞
∈ [0, 1] .
E[ |∆p| ]
E[ |∆p| ]
2 ϕ̄ x v(x ; ϕ̄) dx

(43)

ϕ̄

where the density v(x; ϕ̄) of the normalized price changes solves:
R ϕ̄ £
v(x; ϕ̄) =

−ϕ̄

³ p
´
¤p
q(0) + 12 q 00 (0)ϕ2
1 + ϕ2 n x 1 + ϕ2 − ϕ dϕ
¤
R ϕ̄ £
1 − −ϕ̄ q(0) + 12 q 00 (0)ϕ2 dϕ

+ n (x) for |x| > ϕ̄, and = 0 otherwise .

33

(44)

This proposition, together with the previous characterization of (τ̂ , ϕ̂) as functions of
the parameters of the problem, completely characterizes the distribution of price changes. In
particular, notice that using the approximations developed in Proposition 7, for ϕ̂, and hence
ϕ̄, in equation (24) and for τ̂ in equation (26), we can write the average price change as:
µ
E[ |∆p| ] =
³
where S(α) ≡

√ ´ 21
α
ϕ̂0 (α)

·
E

|x| ; √

ϕ̂0 (α)

φ σ2
B

¶ 14

S(α)

(45)

¸
. Notice that, holding constant the ratio of the
2

1−ϕ̂0 (α)

two costs, α, this expression has the same comparative static with respect to a change in
both cost (ψ, φ), and to a change in (B, σ 2 ) than the one for the models with observation
cost only or with menu cost only. Finally, notice that equation (44) implies that the ratio of
the mode to the average price change is given by
min |∆p|
mode |∆p|
=
= M(α).
E[ |∆p| ]
E[ |∆p| ]
where M(α) ≡ ϕ̄(α)

(46)

p
± R∞
2 ϕ̄(α) x v(x ; ϕ̄(α)) dx, and where ϕ̄(α) ≡ ϕ̂0 (α)/ 1 − ϕ̂0 (α)2 . Thus

the “shape” of the distribution depends on the ratio of the two cost. This result provides an
additional identification scheme for α from observation of statistics about the distribution of
price changes.
Figure 5 plots the distribution of price changes implied by our model against the one
predicted by the special cases of observation cost and menu cost only, under a parametrization
of the model that we think of reasonable. Table 3 reports some key statistics from the
distribution of the size of price changes in the three models. Parameters are such that the
three models imply the same frequency of price changes, i.e. 1.5 adjustments per year. In
comparing the distributions of price changes from these models, several results are worth
mentioning. First, our model assigns a zero probability to price changes smaller than p̄ in
absolute value, while the model with observation cost only assigns a positive probability mass
also at arbitrary small price changes. Second, our model with both types of costs has a mode
at ±p̄, while the model with observation costs only has a mode at zero. Finally, our model
cannot generate price changes having fatter tails than innovations in p∗ . Therefore, being
innovations normally distributed, our model with both costs implies a platykurtic distribution
of price changes.
We note that the distribution of price changes in our model is obviously different from the
one implied by the model with menu cost only, where price changes occur only at a size equal
to p̄. In fact, the plain menu cost model implies a bi-modal distribution of price changes.
34

Figure 5: Distribution of price changes, conditional on a price change

Observation cost only
Both Costs

8

7

Menu cost only

Menu cost only
6

w (∆ p)

5

4

3

2

1

0
−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0

∆p

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Table 3: Statistics of the invariant distribution of price changes in absolute value across
different models

Both Costs:
Menu Cost:
Observation Cost:
Data:
Midrigan (2007)∗ :
Alvarez et al. (2005)∗∗ :

E[|∆p|]

σ(|∆p|)

0.15
0.16
0.13

0.07
0.00
0.10

0.15
0.12

0.13
0.08

1st
third
quartile quartile
0.09
0.19
0.16
0.16
0.05
0.19
0.06
0.07

0.19
0.15

fraction
< E[|∆p|]
2
0.11
0.00
0.30

fraction
< E[|∆p|]
4
0.00
0.00
0.16

0.34
0.22

0.12
0.05

Note: Benchmark parameter values for the model with two cost are: B = 20, ρ = 0.02, σ =
0.2, ψ = 0.03, φ = 0.06; in the model with menu cost only and observation cost only, we set ψ =
0.06, φ = 0, and ψ = 0, φ = 0.18 respectively, while leaving the other parameters unchanged, so to
obtain the same frequency of price adjustment of the model with both costs, i.e. 1.5 adjustments a
year. ∗ These numbers are obtained from Table 1 in Midrigan (2007) and refer to AC Nielsen data
on non-sale prices. ∗∗ These numbers are obtained from authors’ computations on data displayed
in Figure 8 by Alvarez et al. (2005).

Our model predicts a distribution of price changes that resembles the bi-modal, as it puts
a lot of weight to price changes close to p̄ in absolute value, but also assigns some positive
35

probability to price changes of size larger than p̄. Hence, the average size of price changes in
the model with both observation and menu costs is larger than p̄.
The shape of the distribution of price changes implied by our model resembles in many
aspects the distribution of price changes estimated by several empirical studies.30 . In addition,
statistics in Table 3 indicate that the distribution of price changes in our model is consistent,
at least qualitatively, with some of the statistics reported by Midrigan (2007) and Alvarez
et al. (2005). In particular, at given parameters, our model with both costs does a very
good job at explaining the average size, volatility and percentiles of the distribution of price
changes. The statistics in last two columns of Table 3 are informative about the mass of
small price changes in the distribution. When comparing our model with the menu and
observation costs only models, we notice that our model implies less mass of price changes at
values smaller than a half and a quarter of the average, than the mass implied by the normal
distribution in the model with observation costs only. At the same time however, our model
allows for smaller price changes than the menu cost model would imply. When comparing
these statistics to the data, we see that our model implies too little mass of small price
changes. This does not mean necessarily that our model cannot replicate these statistics, but
just signals that, at the parameter values we choose, there is relatively too much menu cost
than the data would support.

6.3

The hazard rate

Finally we turn to the analysis of the hazard rate of price changes in the model with both
review and menu costs. In Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 we have shown that, for the models
with only one type of cost, the hazard rate of a price change is monotone increasing on the
time elapsed since the last change. We now show that the hazard rate of price changes with
both costs is not monotone on the time elapsed since the last change.
We develop some notation to describe the mechanics of the construction of the hazard
rate of price adjustments. Let t denote the time elapsed since the last price adjustment, and
let S(t) be the survival probability, i.e. the fraction of spells of unchanged prices that are
of length t or longer. The instantaneous hazard rate is then defined as h(t) = −S 0 (t)/S(t).
We fix a value of σ and the decision rule described by p̄ and the symmetric function τ (p)
defined in τ : [0, p̄] → [τ, τ̂ ], where τ = τ (p̄). We construct the hazard rate for the interval
t ∈ [0, τ̂ + min {τ̂ + 2τ }]. We let p(t0 ) ≡ τ −1 (t0 ) be the inverse of τ (·) so that τ −1 (t0 ) : [τ, τ̂ ] →
30

Alvarez et al. (2005) estimate the distribution of price changes for the Euro area and obtain a shape that
is very much similar to ours; Cavallo (2009) finds that the distribution of the size of price changes in four
Latin American countries is roughly bimodal, with few changes close to zero percent;Midrigan (2007) also
finds similar results from AC Nielsen data. See Appendix D.3 for more details on empirical evidence about
the distribution of price changes.

36

[p̄, 0].
To characterize the hazard rate we start with a large set of firms that have that just
adjusted their price and describe the sequence of events that will take so that they adjust
to a new price. First, notice that until τ̂ period no firm will review its price, and hence no
adjustments will take place, so that S(t) = 1 and the hazard rate is zero for t ∈ [0, τ̂ ). At τ̂ all
the firms review their prices, and a fraction of them adjusts. This fraction is 2(1 − N (ϕ̂)), i.e.
the probability that after the review the target is outside the range of inaction. Thus, there
is a jump down in the survivor function to S(τ̂ ) = 2 N (ϕ̂) − 1, and thus the instantaneous
hazard rate is infinite at this point. For the remaining firms that have review but not adjusted
their price, the time of the next review depends on the current price gap p̃. The next review
among these firms occurs τ periods after the first review, these are the firms that have a price
gap inside the range of inaction but arbitrarily close to its boundary, i.e. very close to p̄ or
−p̄. In general, we describe the number of firms that change prices in their second review,
between times t = τ̂ + t and t + ∆, as approximately ∂S 0 (t0 + τ̂ )/∂dt × ∆, satisfying:
∂S(τ̂ + t0 )
=
∂t

·

µ
1−N

p̄ − p(t0 )
√
σ t0

¶

µ
+N

−p̄ − p(t0 )
√
σ t0

³

¶¸
2

p(t0 )
√
σ τ̂

∂p(t0 ) n
√
∂t
σ τ̂

´
,

for τ < t0 < τ̂ . The first term in square brackets is the fraction of those firms that had price
gap p̃ > 0 at time τ̂ and that after the second review are outside the range of inaction, and
hence adjust their price. 31 The remaining term counts the number of firms that have a price
gap p̃ = p(t0 ) so that they will adjust their price at τ̂ + t0 . This, in turn, is made of two terms.
The second ratio is the density of innovations from time zero to time τ̂ necessary to end up
in the required value of the price gap p(t0 ). The derivative, ∂p(t0 )/∂t, comes from a change
of variables formula, to convert the density of prices into a density expressed with respect to
times. If τ̂ + τ > 2τ̂ , the expression for ∂S 0 (t0 + τ̂ )/∂dt is valid for all t ∈ [τ̂ + τ, 2τ̂ ]. In this
case, since the symmetry of τ (·) implies that ∂τ (0)/∂p = 0, then ∂p(τ̂ )/∂t = ∞, and thus
the hazard rate tends to infinity at the end of this interval, and reverts to zero afterwards. If
this conditions is not satisfied, the expression for the derivative of S for values higher than
τ̂ + 2τ is more complex because a price change can occur at exactly the same time after two
or three reviews. We summarize these results in the next proposition:
Proposition 13.
The hazard rate of price adjustments starts flat at zero, it jumps to
infinity at t = τ̂ , it returns flat to zero in the segment t ∈ (τ̂ , τ̂ + τ ), it jumps to a positive
value at τ̂ +τ . In the segment [τ̂ +τ, τ̂ +min {τ̂ , 2τ }) stays strictly positive and, if τ > (1/2)τ̂ ,
31

This expression is multiplied by 2 to include the firms with p̃ < 0 at time τ̂ .

37

tends to infinity at the end of this segment and returns to zero:
h(t) = 0, for t ∈ [0, τ̂ ),
h(τ̂ ) = ∞,
h(t) = 0, for t ∈ (τ̂ , τ̂ + τ ),
lim h(t) > 0,

t↓ τ̂ +τ

0 < h(t) < ∞, for t ∈ [τ̂ + τ , τ̂ + min {τ̂ , 2τ })
if τ̂ ≤ 2τ : lim h(t) = ∞,
t↑ 2τ̂

if τ̂ < 2τ : h(t) = 0, for t ∈ (2τ̂ , τ̂ + 2τ ) .
The previous proposition does not characterize the survivor function or the hazard rate
when durations are longer than τ̂ + min {τ̂ , 2τ }. While an expression can be developed for
the remaining values of elapsed times it becomes increasingly complex because, for higher
values of the elapsed time t, a price change can happen after several combinations of previous
reviews. Indeed the larger the value of t, the larger the number of combinations of different
duration of previous reviews that can happen. The effect of this feature is that the hazard
rate for larger values of elapsed time t will tend to be lower but without the ’holes’, i.e.
stretches with zero values that we have identified for low values of t in Proposition 13. We
illustrate these features in Figure 6 that displays the weakly hazard rate based on a large
number of simulations of the decision rule for the model. The red step-function like is the
weekly hazard rate obtained through simulations. In the simulations we compute a weekly
hazard rate, i.e. the fraction of price changes that occur during a week. We use this period
because it is the shortest time unit that can be estimated in actual price data, and that
avoids the infinite hazard rate at τ̂ . 32 The black line is the analytical counterpart of the
hazard developed in Proposition 13 rate and expressed at weekly frequencies. We include
dotted vertical lines every τ̂ periods to note that every τ̂ periods there is a ”wave” of price
adjustments. At t = τ̂ all the adjustments occur simultaneously, so the hazard rate has a
spike. In the subsequent waves, i.e. for larger values of t, they are less concentrated around
a single value, and hence the hazard rates have smaller spikes, but are higher in a wider
range.33 We compare the shape of the hazard rate function with the ones of the models with
observation cost only, which is given by a single spike (in green) and the model with menu
32

Since at τ̂ there is a fraction of firms adjusting all at that instant, in any finite interval, such as a week,
the hazard rate will be finite.
33
We note that if the hazard rate where computed for changes during a month, as opposed to changes
during a week, the differences will be smaller.

38

cost only (in blue).34 The latter is characterized by an increasing hazard rate in the first
weeks, but quickly converging to a constant rate.
Figure 6: Hazard Rate of Price Changes, weekly rates

0.8
Both costs: nume
Both costs: analy
Menu cost

Hazard with
obser. cost only

0.7

0.6

hazard per week

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

weeks

Note: Benchmark parameter values for the model with two cost are: B = 20, ρ = 0.02, σ =
0.2, ψ = 0.03, φ = 0.06; in the model with menu cost only and observation cost only, we set ψ =
0.06, φ = 0, and ψ = 0, φ = 0.18 respectively, while leaving the other parameters unchanged, so to
obtain the same frequency of price adjustment of the model with both costs, i.e. 1.5 adjustments
a year.

There is no consensus in the existing literature about the shape of the hazard function.
For instance, both Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) show
that the hazard rate computed on U.S. CPI data is downward sloping, being at odd with menu
cost models of price adjustment. Similar evidence is reported by Alvarez et al. (2005) for
the Euro area. However, when adjusting for heterogeneity Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) and
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) reach opposite conclusions. The former finds a flat hazard
rate, while the latter finds a downward sloping hazard despite adjusting for heterogeneity.
Finally, a recent study by Cavallo (2009) shows that the hazard rate is upward sloping in
four Latin America countries.35 As shown above, a model with menu cost only produces an
upward sloping hazard. However, heterogeneity could account for the observed downward
sloping hazard rate if data was generated by this model. Our model with both observation
34
35

The examples plotted for the three models have the same average number of 1.5 price changes per year.
See Appendix D.4 for more details on empirical evidence about the hazard rate.

39

and menu costs predicts a non-monotone hazard. Among other things, this implies that an
econometrician estimating the product level hazard rate on data generated from our model
could obtain an upward sloping or a downward sloping hazard rate depending on the length
of the sample, and on the frequency of observations within that sample, even in absence of
heterogeneity. For instance, an econometrician observing prices every τ̂ units of time would
estimate a downward sloping hazard rate. However, if for instance the econometrician were
only observing prices at any frequency between τ̂ + τ and 2τ̂ he would obtain an upward
sloping hazard.

7

The case of positive inflation

In this section we briefly discuss the effect of inflation π > 0, the drift of the (log of the )
target price p∗ into the solution of the problem studied above. First we establish that in the
presence of inflation, immediately after an adjustment the price gap will be positive, i.e. the
agent will set a price higher than value of the target at the time of the adjustment. This is
quite intuitive, since the agent expect to adjust in the future and hence it compensate for
the forecastable part of the deviation due to inflation. Indeed, the optimal value for p̂ is to
exceed the current value of the target p∗ by an amount that is approximately equal to the
expected value that p∗ (t) will take at approximately half of the expected time until its next
adjustment.
For the next proposition set, without loss of generality, the current time at t = 0, and
assume that the agent will adjust the price at this time. Also, without loss of generality we
set p∗ = 0. Let T̄ be a stopping time indicating the time of the next price adjustment. Notice
that T̄ is the sum of the time elapsed between consecutive reviews with not adjustment plus
the time until review and adjustment.
Proposition 14.
Let p̂ be optimal price set after an adjustment exceeds the value of
∗
the target p , and let T̄ the time elapsed between price adjustments. As ρ goes to zero, the
optimal value of the initial price gap satisfies:
³
p̂ =

πE

T̄ 2
2

´

hR
i
T̄
+ σ E 0 W (t) dt
¡ ¢
,
E T̄

(47)

where W (t) is a standard Brownian motion, with W (0) = 0. Thus, fixing φ > 0, for
sufficiently small ψ, the value of p̂ is strictly positive.
The terms in equation (47) are intuitive if you first consider the case where the time to
the next adjustment is deterministic, so that T̄ has a degenerate distribution. In this case
40

we obtain: p̂ = π T̄ /2, so that the initial gap is equal to the value that the target will have
exactly at half of the time until the next adjustment, so the first half of the time deviations
are positive, and the second negative. To understand the expression for p̂ in the case in which
T̄ is random and unrelated with {W (t)}, consider the following simple example. Let T̄ = T̂
with probability q and otherwise T̄ = ² where we let ² to go to zero. In this case there is an
immediate adjustment with probability 1 − q and otherwise the next adjustment happen in
exactly T̂ periods. Notice that the value of p̂ is irrelevant in the case that the adjustment is
immediate, so its determination should be governed by T̂ . But in this case the same logic
than the one in the purely deterministic case applies, and hence we should set p̂ = T̂ /2.
Finally, notice that the general expression in equation (47) gives the correct answer in this
particular case, since E[T̄ ] = q T̂ and E[T̄ 2 ] = q T̂ 2 , and hence we obtain again that p̂ = T̂ /2.
In our model the stopping time for adjustment T̄ is a function of the path of {W (t)}. Thus,
the condition that ψ is small, reduces the depedence of T̄ on its path, ensuring that the first
term in equation (47) dominates the expression of p̂. Notice that if ψ = 0, the value of T̄ is
indeed deterministic, and hence the second term is exactly zero.

7.1

“Low Inflation”

In this section we give a partial characterization of the effect that a low inflation rate has in
the decision rules. We focus on the effect of a low inflation rate on the value of τ̂ , the optimal
time until the next revision decided right after a price adjustment and show that this feature
of the decision rule changes very little for small inflation, i.e. that its derivative with respect
to the inflation rate is zero when evaluated at zero inflation rate. This is to be contrasted
with p̂, the value of the price gap right after a price adjustment, which has a strictly positive
derivative with respect to the inflation rate. Thus, loosely speaking, the effect of a small
inflation rate is concentrated on the size of the price changes rather than on the frequency
of changes.
Proposition 15. Let τ̂ be optimal time until the next observation set right after a price
adjustment, and let p̂ the optimal price gap set right after a price adjustment, both as a
function of the inflation rate. We have:
∂ τ̂
∂ p̂
|π=0 > 0 and
|π=0 = 0 .
∂π
∂π

(48)

We note that the zero derivative of τ̂ with respect to inflation at zero inflation is also a feature
of the problem with observation cost only, as shown in Proposition 1. Below we illustrate
this proposition by computing the decision rule for some numerical examples displayed in
41

Figure 7 and Table 4 for different inflation rates.

7.2

“High” Inflation

In this section we consider the case where π is large relative to σ. I particular, we consider
the limit when σ ↓ 0 and π > 0. We study this case as an approximation of the solution
when inflation is large relative to the volatility of the idiosyncratic shocks.
In such a case, i.e. when there is no uncertainty the optimal policy is to review once,
and after the first price adjustment the optimal policy is to adjust prices every τ ∗ periods,
by exactly the same amount. This is version of the classical price adjustment model by
Sheshinski and Weiss (1977). The optimal policy can also be written in terms of the price
gap, following a sS band, adjusting the price when a lower barrier p is reached, to a value
given by p̂. We can also add a function τ (p̃) function indicating the time of the next review
when the current price gap is p̃.
Proposition 16.
µ

Let σ = 0 and π > 0. As we let ρ ↓ 0 the optimal decision rule satisfy:

µ
¶1/3
µ
¶1/3
1 6 π (ψ + φ)
1 6 π (ψ + φ)
na =
, p=−
, p̂ =
,
2
B
2
B
√
p̂ − p
p̃ − p
=
3 , τ (p̃) =
if p̃ ∈ [p, p̄] and τ (p̃) = 1/na otherwise.
(49)
p̄ − p̂
π
B π2
6 (ψ + φ)

¶1/3

In the deterministic case with φ > 0, the reviews will never be conducted unless there
is an adjustment, and this is precisely the logic behind the linear decreasing shape of the
function τ (·) in the proposition. In the range of inaction, τ (p̃) is exactly the time it takes
until the next adjustment. This is in stark contrast with the symmetric shape of τ (·) in
the case with no drift. In this deterministic case the cost of each adjustment is given by
the sum φ + ψ, due to our assumption that a review has to be conducted at the time of an
adjustment. In the limit case of Proposition 16 the frequency of adjustments has an elasticity
of 1/3 with respect to the cost φ + ψ. This is different from the the case of zero drift, where
the number of adjustment have 1/2 elasticity with respect to an equal proportional change in
the costs φ and ψ. The optimal return point is strictly positive, and increasing in inflation,
an application of the general result of Proposition 14. The optimal return point p̂ and the
lower bound of the range of inaction p are at the same distance of the value that minimizes
the static price gap, i.e. p̂ = −p. This feature is very intuitive, since for ρ = 0 the agent
gives the same weight to the deviations that occur just after adjusting as those just before
the next adjustment. This also differs from the optimal return of zero of the model with no
42

√
drift. The boundaries of the range of inaction are asymmetric: (p̂ − p)/(p̄ − p̂) = 3 > 1.
This asymmetry is due to the fact that p̂ > 0 already takes into account the effect of positive
inflation, and hence at p̄ the deviation from the static optimum value of p̃ are very large.
Our interest in the function τ (·) and the thresholds p̄, p̂ and p in this limit is that it should
be informative about the shape of τ (·) for very small, but strictly positive, values of σ, and
in general for the forces that operates in the general case of π and σ strictly positive.
Figure 7: Policy rule τ (p̃) under different values of drift, π = 0.05, 0.2, 0.6

π = 0.20

π = 0.05
τ̂

0.45

π = 0.60

0.45

0.45

τ̂

τ measured in years

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.35

0.35

τ̄ (p̃)

0.35

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.25

0.25

0.25

p

p

p̄

p̂

0.2
−0.05

p̂

p

p̄

0.2
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Pric e gap: p̃ = p −p ∗

−0.05

τ̄ (p̃)

τ̂

p̂

p̄

0.2
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Pric e gap: p̃ = p −p ∗

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Pric e gap: p̃ = p −p ∗

Note: Benchmark parameter values are: B = 20, σ = 0.2, ψ = 0.03, ρ = 0.02, φ = 0.06; each
panel shows optimal τ (p̃) under a given value of π.

To evaluate the extent to which the features discussed in this limit are present in the
case of strictly positive π and σ Figure 7 displays three panels where, for fixed values of all
the parameters –including σ = 0.2–, we display the shape of the optimal decision rules for
three strictly positive levels of the inflation rate. It is clear that for inflation rate of 4% the
difference with the shape for zero inflation is very small, but already we can see that the range
of inaction starts being asymmetric, that the optimal return point is positive, and that τ (·)
is asymmetric, with a peak at the right of the optimal return point, and with τ (p) < τ (p̄).
These features are more apparent for 20 % inflation rate, and very descriptive for 80 % annual
inflation rate.

43

7.3

Price adjustments with no observations

In this section we relax the assumption on the ‘technology’ to change prices that at the time
of a price adjustment agents must observe the state. We show that in the case where the
state has no drift it is indeed optimal to observe every time a price is adjusted. On the other
hand, as the volatility goes to zero relatively to the drift it is optimal to do some adjustments
without observing the state.
We consider an extension of the problem where upon paying a cost φ, and finding the
value of the price gap p̃ in a review the firm can decide whether to immediately change the
price, paying the cost ψ or not. The extension consist of allowing the firm to consider to
adjust several times it price until the next review. For these adjustments the firm pays only
the cost ψ. In this case the Bellman equations for a firm just after finding the value of price
gap p̃ satisfy:
Z
Vn (p̃) = φ +
+

min n

τ0 ,{p̂i ,τi }i=1

n ·
X
i=1
−ρτn

−ρτi−1

e

Z

τ0

£
¤
e−ρt B (p̃ − πt)2 + σ 2 t dt

0

Z

τi

ψ+

−ρt

e

¸
¤
B (p̂i − πt) + σ t dt
£

2

2

τi−1
∞

+e

√
V (p̂n − πτn − s τn σ) dN (s) ,

(50)

−∞

V (p̃) = min Vn (p̃)

(51)

n≥0

where 0 ≤ τi ≤ τi+1 and where for n = 0 we denote p̂0 = p̃. The function Vn (p̃) gives the
optimal value conditional on making n price adjustment before the next review, which will
take place τn units of time from the current review. The first term in the right hand side of
Vn (p̃) corresponds to the losses incurred if there is no immediate price adjustment. Notice
that if the firm chooses τ0 = 0, the time for which this loss is incurred is nil, and hence a price
adjustment is conducted immediately. The next sum contains the losses corresponding to the
n price adjustments. These n price adjustments are conducted using only the information of
the initial price gap p̃. Notice that V0 (p̃) is the value of conducting a review and no price
adjustment.36 The value function V minimizes the cost by choosing whether to have an
immediate price adjustment or not, and by minimizing on the number of price adjustments
conducted between reviews. If we restrict this problem to have to have n = 1 every time
τ0 = 0, we will obtain exactly the same value functions as considered in the previous sections.
As a preliminary step we discuss the sense in which multiple price adjustment between
price observations looks like indexation. Consider the case of equation (50) for n ≥ 3. In
36

In the previous section we refer to this as V̄ .

44

particular, fixing the other choices for this problem, consider the first order condition for p̂i ,
p̂i+1 and τi for 0 < i < n. The restriction that 0 < i < n means that the price adjustments
p̂i and p̂i+1 take place at times τi−1 > 0 and τi , and that there is still one more adjustment
before the next observation. After some algebra the following expressions, as we let, for
simplicity, ρ ↓ 0:
p̂i = π

τi+1 + τi
τi+2 + τi+1
τi+1 + τi−1
, p̂i+1 = π
and τi =
,
2
2
2

thus the price chosen increase exactly with accumulated inflation, and the adjustment are
equally spaced in time.
We discuss two extreme cases that imply infinitely many adjustments between observations. First, let the adjustment cost ψ ↓ 0. In this case the firm will be adjusting infinitely
often, so that the optimal number of adjustment between reviews will have n → ∞ and the
adjustment will be converging to p̂i = πτi . In this case the value function will converge to
the value function for the problem with observation cost only of Section 4.1 and no drift on
the state, i.e. π = 0. Thus, as the menu cost is small, and the drift is large, the optimal
policy will involve more adjustments than reviews, contrary to what is found in the survey
evidence discussed in Section 3. The second case is one where σ ↓ 0. This case coincides
with the model in Section 7.2, whose solution is characterized in Proposition 16, except that
we now set φ = 0. The intuition is clear, if there is no uncertainty, there is no need to pay
the cost φ to observe the state.
The next proposition shows that if π is sufficiently close to zero, there is at most one price
adjustment between reviews, i.e. the firm will not find optimal to adjust without observing
the price gap. Moreover, in such a case price adjustment will happen immediately upon
a observation. The logic of the result that there is at most one price adjustment between
reviews is simplest in the case of π = 0. In this case, it is immediate to see that the value
function V is symmetric around zero. Using this symmetry it is easy to see that, if a price
adjustment will take place in the problem for Vn (p̃), the price gap will be adjusted to zero.37
Notice that in the absence of drift the expected price gap until the next observation remains
zero. Thus it is not optimal to have any further price adjustments as long as ψ > 0, i.e.
Vn (p̃) > min {V0 (p̃), V1 (p̃)} for n ≥ 2. By a continuity argument, along the lines of the
Thoerem of the maximum, the value function for π positive, but small, is close to the one
for zero inflation, and hence p̂ is also close to zero. Again, having more than one adjustment
between reviews will increase the cost by a discrete amount ψ, unrelated to π, and thus
the argument extend to the case of small but positive inflation. A more subtle point is to
37

This can be seen as a straightforward modification of the argument in the proof of Proposition 14.

45

argue that for small but positive inflation optimal price adjustments occur immediately upon
review. The argument against the optimality of a delayed adjustment is that during the first
part of the period, of length τ0 in the notation of this section, the firm is having a loss of
the order of the price gap. Since this case is only relevant outside the range of inaction, the
price gap is non trivial and thus the loss is large relative to π. We have sketched the proof
of the following proposition:
Proposition 17.

Fix all the parameters, including ψ > 0 and σ > 0. Then there is a

strictly positive inflation rate π̄ > 0 such that for all inflation rates |π| < π̄ it is optimal to
adjust prices at most once between successive reviews, and when it is optimal to adjust the
price changes take place immediately after a price review.
In words, Proposition 17 shows that the decision rules computed in Section 7.2 are optimal for the problem defined in equations (50)-(51) for a small enough inflation rate. One
interpretation of adjusting several times between observations is that the firm is indexing its
price, or setting a plan, or a price path. Notice that in our set up, setting a plan or a path
is costly, since it involves several price changes, each of them costing ψ. But also notice that
menu cost are not the only cost, there are also observations cost ψ. Thus we find this set
up a useful benchmark to think about the benefit of indexation. In this sense, the previous
proposition just says that if inflation is small relative to the menu cost, indexation is not
optimal.
A simple calculation may help understand why relatively high inflation is required for
more than one adjustment to take place between observations. Let V be the value function
obtained in the problem where firms have to pay the observation cost at the time of an
adjustment. Consider the benchmark case where the firm is paying the observation cost and
changing the price for π > 0. We want to compare the value of the minimization of the
Bellman equation when the firm is allowed to change the price several times until the new
observation, paying the cos ψ each time. We will compute an upper bound on the savings
of such policy. The upper bound is computed assuming that, until the next observation at
τ̂ the firm adjusts the price continuously. We will compare that with the cost that will be
incurred if the price gap will be set to zero right after the observation and until the next
observation at time τ̂ . The cost savings will then by
Z

Z

τ̂

B

e

−ρt

τ̂

2

(tπ) dt ≤ B

0

0

(tπ)2 dt = π 2 B

τ̂ 3
3

where the inequality comes from disregarding discounting, i.e. setting ρ = 0. For the
parameter values we use, say B = 20, ψ = 0.03, φ = 0.06, σ = 0.2, and π = 0.1 we obtain
46

τ̂ ≈ .45, see Figure 7, and hence the savings from adjusting continuously will be about
3
π 2 B τ̂3 ≈ 0.006 for 10 % inflation rate. Thus these savings are not even enough to pay the
cost of one extra adjustment ψ = 0.03 for this example. In fact, the cost savings are most
surely smaller, since p̂ in the benchmark case will be set at a slightly positive value.
Table 4 computes numerically the value for π̄ for three set of parameter values, for which
we also report statistics about the average frequencies of price changes and reviews as well
as the time to next review after an adjustment. The three cases are our baseline parameterization and two other ones with either half the menu cost or half the volatility. For each of
these three cases we report the statistics for zero inflation, five percent, and π̄, as defined in
Proposition 17.
Table 4: Statistics of the model as a function of π

Baseline:
Low σ:
Low ψ:

π̄
0.20
0.05
0.12

na
1.47
0.74
1.77

π=0
nr
2.31
1.14
2.41

τ̂
0.45
0.89
0.42

na
1.51
0.79
1.79

π = 0.05
nr
τ̂
2.31
0.44
1.19
0.86
2.42
0.42

na
1.65
0.79
1.84

π = π̄
nr
2.45
1.19
2.47

τ̂
0.42
0.86
0.41

Note: Baseline parameter values are: B = 20, σ = 0.2, ψ = 0.03, ρ = 0.02, φ = 0.06; the
’Low σ’ case corresponds to σ = 0.1, everything else being equal; the ’Low ψ’ case corresponds to
ψ = 0.015, everything else being equal.

Table 4 shows that the statistics are not very sensitive to changes in the level of inflation,
for each of the three parametrization of the model. This low sensitivity is consistent with the
zero derivative of τ̂ for low inflation shown in Proposition 15. In addition, π̄ decreases both
in σ and ψ, as suggested by the two extreme cases analyzed above where these parameter
where set to zero. Additionally is worth mentioning that the level of inflation π̄ where the
agents are indifferent between following the policies outlined in the previous section and the
one allowed in this section, agent’s don’t find advantageous to adjust multiple times between
observations. What they are indifferent to do at π = π̄ is for some values of p̃ to observe,
don’t adjust for τ0 > periods, make an adjustment at τ1 , and observe at τ2 > τ1 . It will take
even higher inflation rates so that firms will like to adjust prices more than once between
observations.

47

References
Abel, A. B., J. C. Eberly, and S. Panageas (2007, May). Optimal inattention to the stock
market. American Economic Review 97 (2), 244–249.
Abel, A. B., J. C. Eberly, and S. Panageas (2009, May). Optimal inattention to the stock
market with information costs and transactions costs. Mimeo - The Wharton School of
the University of Pennsilvania.
Alvarez, F., L. Guiso, and F. Lippi (2009). Durable consumption and asset management with
transaction and observation costs. EIEF Working Papers Series 1001, Einaudi Institute
for Economic and Finance (EIEF).
Alvarez, L. J., P. Burriel, and I. Hernando (2005, April). Do decreasing hazard functions for
price changes make any sense? Banco de Espaa Working Papers 0508, Banco de Espaa.
Alvarez, L. J., E. Dhyne, H. L. Bihan, G. Veronese, D. Dias, J. Hoffmann, N. Jonker,
P. Lnnemann, F. Rumler, and J. Vilmunen (2005, September). Price setting in the euro
area: some stylized facts from individual consumer price data. Working Paper Series 524,
European Central Bank.
Alvarez, L. J., E. Dhyne, M. Hoeberichts, C. Kwapil, H. L. Bihan, P. Lunnemann, F. Martins,
R. Sabbatini, H. Stahl, P. Vermeulen, and J. Vilmunen (2006, 04-05). Sticky prices in
the euro area: A summary of new micro-evidence. Journal of the European Economic
Association 4 (2-3), 575–584.
Alvarez, L. J. and I. Hernando (2005, October). The price setting behaviour of spanish firms
- evidence from survey data. Working Paper Series 538, European Central Bank.
Amirault, D., C. Kwan, and G. Wilkinson (2006). Survey of price-setting behaviour of
canadian companies. Working Papers 06-35, Bank of Canada.
Angeletos, G.-M. and J. La’O (2009, May). Incomplete information, higher-order beliefs and
price inertia. NBER Working Papers 15003, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Aucremanne, L. and M. Druant (2005, March). Price-setting behaviour in Belgium - what
can be learned from an ad hoc survey? Working Paper Series 448, European Central Bank.
Barro, R. J. (1972, January). A theory of monopolistic price adjustment. Review of Economic
Studies 39 (1), 17–26.

48

Blinder, A. S., E. Canetti, D. Lebow, and J. Rudd (1998). Asking About Prices: A New
Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Boivin, J., M. P. Giannoni, and I. Mihov (2009, March). Sticky prices and monetary policy:
Evidence from disaggregated us data. American Economic Review 99 (1), 350–84.
Bonomo, M. and C. Carvalho (2004, December). Endogenous time-dependent rules and
inflation inertia. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36 (6), 1015–41.
Burstein, A. T. (2006, October). Inflation and output dynamics with state-dependent pricing
decisions. Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (7), 1235–1257.
Caballero, R. (1989). Time dependent rules, aggregate stickiness and information externalities. Discussion Papers 198911, Columbia University.
Caplin, A. and J. Leahy (1991, August). State-dependent pricing and the dynamics of money
and output. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (3), 683–708.
Caplin, A. and J. Leahy (1997, May). Aggregation and optimization with state-dependent
pricing. Econometrica 65 (3), 601–626.
Caplin, A. S. and D. F. Spulber (1987, November). Menu costs and the neutrality of money.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (4), 703–25.
Cavallo, A. (2009, December). Scraped Data and Sticky Prices: Frequency, Hazards, and
Synchronization . Dissertation, Harvard University.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (1998). Monetary policy shocks: What have
we learned and to what end? Technical report, NBER.
Dixit, A. (1991, January). Analytical approximations in models of hysteresis. Review of
Economic Studies 58 (1), 141–51.
Dixit, A. (1993). The art of smooth pasting. Routledge.
Dotsey, M., R. G. King, and A. L. Wolman (1999, May). State-dependent pricing and
the general equilibrium dynamics of money and output. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2), 655–690.
Duffie, D. and T.-s. Sun (1990, February). Transactions costs and portfolio choice in a
discrete-continuous-time setting. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 14 (1), 35–
51.
49

Fabiani, S., M. Druant, I. Hernando, C. Kwapil, B. Landau, C. Loupias, F. Martins,
T. Matha, R. Sabbatini, H. Stahl, et al. (2006). What Firms’ Surveys Tell Us about
Price-Setting Behavior in the Euro Area. International Journal of Central Banking 2 (3),
3–47.
Fabiani, S., A. Gattulli, and R. Sabbatini (2004). New survey evidence on price stickiness.
Working paper, Bank of Italy - Research Department.
Fabiani, S., C. Loupias, F. Martins, and R. Sabbatini (2007). Pricing decisions in the euro
area: how firms set prices and why. Oxford University Press, USA.
Gertler, M. and J. Leahy (2008, 06). A phillips curve with an ss foundation. Journal of
Political Economy 116 (3), 533–572.
Golosov, M. and R. E. J. Lucas (2007). Menu costs and phillips curves. Journal of Political
Economy 115, 171–199.
Gorodnichenko, Y. (2008, July). Endogenous information, menu costs and inflation persistence. NBER Working Papers 14184, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Greenslade, J. and M. Parker (2008). Price-setting behaviour in the United Kingdom. Quarterly Bulletin Q4, Bank of England.
Hall, S., M. Walsh, and A. Yates (2000, July). Are UK companies’ prices sticky? Oxford
Economic Papers 52 (3), 425–46.
Hoeberichts, M. and A. Stokman (2006, April). Price setting behaviour in the Netherlands
- results of a survey. Working Paper Series 607, European Central Bank.
Karatzas, I. and S. Shreve (1991). Brownian motion and stochastic calculus. Springer-Verlag.
Klenow, J. P. and B. Malin (2010). Microeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting. Handbook of
monetary economics –, –.
Klenow, P. J. and O. Kryvtsov (2008, August). State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing:
Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3),
863–904.
Kolkiewicz, A. (2002). Pricing and hedging more general double-barrier options. Journal of
Computational Finance 5 (3), 1–26.
Kwapil, C., J. Baumgartner, and J. Scharler (2005, March). The price-setting behavior of
Austrian firms - some survey evidence. Working Paper Series 464, European Central Bank.
50

Loupias, C. and R. Ricart (2004, December). Price setting in France: new evidence from
survey data. Working Paper Series 423, European Central Bank.
Lucas, R. J. (1972, April). Expectations and the neutrality of money. Journal of Economic
Theory 4 (2), 103–124.
Mackowiak, B. A., E. Moench, and M. Wiederholt (2009, October). Sectoral price data and
models of price setting. Journal of Monetary Economics 56, s78–s99.
Mackowiak, B. A. and F. Smets (2008, September). On implications of micro price data for
macro models. CEPR Discussion Papers 6961, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Makowiak, B. and M. Wiederholt (2009, February). Optimal sticky prices under rational
inattention. Working Paper Series 1009, European Central Bank.
Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2002, November). Sticky information versus sticky prices:
A proposal to replace the new keynesian phillips curve. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4), 1295–1328.
Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2006, May). Pervasive stickiness. American Economic Review 96 (2), 164–169.
Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2007, 04-05). Sticky information in general equilibrium. Journal
of the European Economic Association 5 (2-3), 603–613.
Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2010). Imperfect Information and Aggregate Supply. Handbook
of monetary economics –, –.
Martins, F. (2005, December). The price setting behaviour of Portuguese firms - evidence
from survey data . Working Paper Series 562, European Central Bank.
Matejka, F. (2009). Rationally inattentive seller: Sales and discrete pricing. Discussion
papers, Princeton University.
Midrigan, V. (2007, February). Menu costs, multi-product firms, and aggregate fluctuations.
CFS Working Paper Series 2007/13, Center for Financial Studies.
Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (2006, May). Inertia of forward-looking expectations. American
Economic Review 96 (2), 152–157.
Moscarini, G. (2004, September). Limited information capacity as a source of inertia. Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control 28 (10), 2003–2035.
51

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008, November). Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of
menu cost models. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4), 1415–1464.
Nimark, K. (2008, March). Dynamic pricing and imperfect common knowledge. Journal of
Monetary Economics 55 (2), 365–382.
Phelps, E. S. (1969, May). The new microeconomics in inflation and employment theory.
American Economic Review 59 (2), 147–60.
Reis, R. (2006a). Inattentive consumers. Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (8), 1761–1800.
Reis, R. (2006b). Inattentive producers. Review of Economic Studies 73 (3), 793–821.
Sheshinski, E. and Y. Weiss (1977, June). Inflation and costs of price adjustment. Review of
Economic Studies 44 (2), 287–303.
Sheshinski, E. and Y. Weiss (1979, January). Demand for fixed factors, inflation and adjustment costs. Review of Economic Studies 46 (1), 31–45.
Sheshinski, E. and Y. Weiss (1983, July). Optimum pricing policy under stochastic inflation.
Review of Economic Studies 50 (3), 513–29.
Sims, C. A. (2003, April). Implications of rational inattention. Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (3), 665–690.
Stahl, H. (2005). Price setting in german manufacturing: new evidence from new survey data.
Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic Studies 2005,43, Deutsche Bundesbank, Research
Centre.
Stokey, N. L. (2008). Economics of Inaction: Stochastic Control Models with Fixed Costs.
Princeton University Press.
Stokey, N. L. and R. E. Lucas (1989, October). Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics.
Harvard University Press.
Woodford, M. (2001, December). Imperfect common knowledge and the effects of monetary
policy. NBER Working Papers 8673, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Woodford, M. (2008, December). Information-constrained state-dependent pricing. Nber
working papers, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

52

A

Price Setting in the frictionless case

We consider two simple static problems for a monopolist firm. The first has a linear system,
the second is a log approximation to a general case.

A.1

Linear Demand

Let the demand for a product be q(p) = a − b p where q are quantities and p is the price,
a the intercept, b is the slope. Assume that the marginal cost is constant at the value of c.
Thus profits are Π(p) = (a − b p)(p − c), and the static monopoly price is given by
p∗ =

a+c b
,
2b

and the maximized profits can be written as Π∗ = b (p∗ )2 − c a, or
1
Π(p) = Π∗ + (−2 b)(p − p∗ )2 = b (p∗ )2 − c a − b (p − p∗ )2 .
2

A.2

Log approximation of monopolist profit function

Let Π(P ) be the profit function of the monopolist as a function of the price P . Let P ∗ be
the optimal price, satisfying ΠP (P ∗ ) = 0. Consider a second order approximation of the log
of Π around P = P ∗ obtaining:
¯
¡
¢
1 ∂ 2 log Π(P ) ¯¯
∗
∗ 2
∗ 2
log Π(P ) = log Π(P ) +
(log
P
−
log
P
)
+
o
(log
P
−
log
P
)
.
¯
2 ∂(log P )2 P =P ∗
A useful example for this approximation is the case with a constant elasticity of demand
equal to η > 1 where: q(P ) = E P −η where E is a demand shifter and where the monopolist
faces a constant marginal cost C, where:
¯
η
∂ 2 log Π(P ) ¯¯
∗
P =
C and
= −η (η − 1)
η−1
∂(log P )2 ¯P =P ∗
So, letting B = −η (η − 1), p = log P and p∗ = log P ∗ we obtain the problem in the body
of the paper.

A.3

Non-linear Price Setting Model

In this section we describe a fully non-linear price setting model. Let the instantaneous profit
of a monopolist be as in Appendix A, where the cost C and the relative price is P . We solve
this model numerically and compare its predictions with the simple tracking problem of the
paper. [TO BE REPORTED IN FUTURE DRAFTS]. This model also helps to interpret ψ
and φ in the tracking problem as cost in proportion to the period profit.
At the time of the observation we let the general price level be one. This price level
increases at the rate π per unit of time. The log of constant margnal cost in real terms
53

evolve as a random walk with innovation variance σ 2 and with drift µ. The demand has
constant elasticity η with respect to the price P relative to the general price level.³ Thus ´the
−η

real demand t periods afger observing a real cost C with a price P is given by A P̂ e−πt
where A is a ³constant the determined
the level of demand. The nominal mark-up t period
√ ´
πt+µt+s(t)σ t
after is then P̂ − Ce
, where s(t) is a standard normal random variable. Thus
³
´−η ³
√ ´
P̂ e−πt − Ceµt+s(t)σ t . The profit level, if prices
the real profitst are given by A P̂ e−πt
are chosen to maximize the instantaneous profit when real cost are C and the general price
level is one are given by Π∗ (C) ≡ A C 1−η (η/(η − 1))−η (1/(η − 1)). The corresponding
Bellman equation is:
v(P, C) = max {v̂(C) , v̄(P, C)}
v̂(C) = −(φ + ψ)Π∗ (C) +
Z τ̂
Z ∞ ³
´−η ³
√ ´
−ρt
max
e
A P̂ e−πt
P̂ e−πt − Ceµt+s(t)σ t dN (s(t)) dt +
τ̂ ,P̂
Z0 ∞ ³ −∞
√ ´
+ e−ρτ̂
v P̂ e−πτ̂ , Ceµτ̂ +sσ τ̂ dN (s)
−∞
Z τ
Z ∞
√ ´
¡
¢−η ³ −πt
∗
−ρt
v̄(P, C) = −φΠ (C) + max
e
A P e−πt
Pe
− Ceµt+s(t)σ t dN (s(t)) dt +
τ
0
−∞
Z ∞ ³
√ ´
v P e−πτ , Ceµτ +sσ τ dN (s)
+ e−ρτ
−∞

This Bellman equation is very similar to the one we solve numerically in Alvarez et al. (2009)
for a saving and portfolio problem for households. As in the problem of that paper, it is
easy to show that the value function is homogenous of degree 1 − η. In this case we can
simplfy the problem considering only one state, say P/C. We can develop the expectations
and collect terms to obtain:
v̂(C) = −(φ + ψ)Π∗ (C) +
Ã
Z τ̂
2
max
e−ρt+(1−η)(µ+σ /2)t A C 1−η
τ̂ ,P̂

0

−ρτ̂ +(1−η)(µ+σ 2 /2)τ̂

Z

∞

+ e

!−η Ã
!
P̂ e−πt
P̂ e−πt
− 1 dt
Ce(µ+σ2 /2) t
Ce(µ+σ2 /2) t
³
√ ´
2
e−(1−η)(µ+σ /2)τ̂ v P̂ e−πτ̂ , Ceµτ̂ +sσ τ̂ dN (s)

−∞

and likewise for v̄. Letting a modified discount factor to be ρ̃ ≡ ρ − (1 − η)(µ + σ 2 /2) and

54

using that v is homogeneous of degree 1 − η:
Ã
!−η Ã
!
Z τ̂
v̂(1)
(P̂ /C) e−πt
(P̂ /C)e−πt
−ρ̃t A
= −(φ + ψ) + max
e
− 1 dt
Π∗ (1)
Π∗ (1)
e(µ+σ2 /2) t
e(µ+σ2 /2) t
τ̂ ,P̂ /C 0
Ã
!
Z ∞
√
(P̂ /C)e−πτ̂
1
−ρ̃τ̂
(1−η)(sσ τ̂ −(σ 2 /2)τ̂ )
√
+ e
e
v
,1
dN (s)
∗
µτ̂
+sσ
τ̂
Π (1)
e
−∞
µ
¶−η µ
¶
Z τ
v̄(P/C, 1)
(P/C)e−πt
(P/C)e−πt
−ρ̃t A
= −(φ + ψ) + max
e
− 1 dt
τ
Π∗ (1)
Π∗ (1) e(µ+σ2 /2) t
e(µ+σ2 /2) t
0
µ
¶
Z ∞
√
(P/C)e−πτ̂
1
−ρ̃τ̂
(1−η)(sσ τ̂ −(σ 2 /2)τ̂ )
√
v
,1
dN (s)
+ e
e
Π∗ (1)
eµτ̂ +sσ τ̂
−∞
v(P/C, 1) = max {v̂(1) , v̄(P/C, 1)} .

B

Hazard Rate of Menu Cost Model

In this appendix we described the details for the characterization of the hazard rate of price
adjustments of the menu cost model of Section 4.2. Section 2.8.C formula (8.24) of Karatzas
and Shreve (1991) displays the density of the distribution for the first time that a brownian
motion hit either of two barriers, starting from an arbitrary point inside the barriers. In our
case, the initial value is the price gap after adjustment, namely zero, and the barriers are
symmetric, given by −p̄ and p̄. We found more useful for the characterization of the hazard
rate to use a transformation of this density, obtained in Kolkiewicz (2002), section 3.3, as
the sum of expressions (15) and (16). In our case we set the initial condition x0 = 0 and the
barriers a < x0 < b are thus given by a = −p̄ and b = p̄, thus obtaining the density f (t):
µ
¶
∞
X
π
(2j + 1)2 π 2
j
f (t) =
(2j + 1)(−1) exp −
t .
2 (p̄/σ)2 j=0
8 (p̄/σ)2

(A-1)

The hazard rate h(t) is then defined as:
f (t)
h(t) = R ∞
.
f (s)ds
t

(A-2)

Notice that since equation (A-1) is a sum of exponentials evaluated at the product of −t
times a positive quantity, each of them larger. Thus, for large values of t the first term in
the sum dominates, and hence the expression for f (t) becomes
µ
¶
π
π2
f (t) ≈
exp −
t for large t .
(A-3)
2 (p̄/σ)2
8 (p̄/σ)2
2

π
and hence limt→∞ h(t) = 8 (p̄/σ)
2 . Indeed, the shape of this hazard rate is independent of
p̄/σ, this value only scales it up and down. Moreover, as Figure A-1 shows, the asymptote is
approximately attained well before the expected value of the time.

55

Figure A-1: Hazard Rate of Menu Cost Model

annual instantaneous hazard rate h(t)

1.4

l i m i t h a z a rd ra te
1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

h a z a rd ra te

0.2
Expected time

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

t , e l a p e se d ye a rs si n c e l a st p ri c e a d j u stm e nt

Note: B = 25, σ = 0.1 and ψ = 0.04 .

56

3

C

Proofs

C.1

Proof of Proposition 1.

Proof. We let x∗ = p̂/π. Note that as ρ → 0 we have:
Z
Z τ
Z τ
ρe−ρt
1
1 τ
τ
1
τ2
∗
−ρt
→
so x →
t dt =
, and
e
t dt → τ
t dt =
.
1 − e−ρτ
τ
τ 0
2
τ
2
0
0
Z τ³
Z τ³
´2
´2 1
τ2
τ3
τ
τ
v(τ ) →
− t dt = τ
−t
dt = τ
=
.
2
2
τ
12
12
0
0
Thus
Ã
lim ρV (τ ) = lim

ρ→0

The f.o.c. for τ is:

ρ→0

π2
ρτ 3
ρ τ2
φ̃ρ
+
+
2
−ρτ
−ρτ
σ 12 (1 − e ) 2 (1 − e ) (1 − e−ρτ )

!
=

π2 τ 2 τ
φ̃
+ +
2
σ 12 2 τ

φ̃
π2 τ ∗ 1
π 2 (τ ∗ )3 (τ ∗ )2
=
+
or
φ̃
=
+
(τ ∗ )2
σ2 6
2
σ2 6
2

From here we see that the optimal inaction interval τ ∗ is a function of 2 arguments, it is
increasing in the normalized cost φ̃, and decreasing in the normalized drift (π/σ)2 . Keeping
the parameters B, φ and π constant we can write:
φ
(τ ∗ )3
(τ ∗ )2
= π2
+ σ2
B
6
2
which implies that τ is decreasing in σ.
Note that for π = 0 we obtain a square root formula on the cost φ and with elasticity
minus one on σ:
r
r
q
2 1/2 1
φ
∗
τ = 2 φ̃ = 2
=
φ
.
2
Bσ
B
σ
The total differential of the foc for τ gives:
Ã
!Ã
!
2 ∗
∗
π τ (φ̃)
∂τ (φ̃)
τ ∗ (φ̃)
+1
= 1
2
σ
2
∂ φ̃
since limφ̃→0 τ ∗ (φ̃) = 0, then one obtains the same expression than in the case of π = 0, and
thus the elasticity is 1/2, or: limφ̃→0

φ̃ ∂τ ∗ (φ̃)
τ ∗ (φ̃) ∂ φ̃

φ̃ σ 2 ≡
then we let σ 2 → 0 to get

φ
B

= π2

τ3
6

=

1
2

. To see the result for σ = 0, let us write:

(τ ∗ )3
(τ ∗ )2
φ
= π2
+σ
,
B
6
2
which implies a cubic root formula on the cost φ and

57

with elasticity −2/3 on π:
µ
∗

τ =

6φ
B π2

¶1/3

µ ¶1/3
6
=
φ1/3 π −2/3 .
B

That ∂τ ∗ /∂π = 0 evaluated at π = 0 follows from totally differentiating
Now consider the case when ρ > 0 and π = 0 then ρV (τ ) equals
ρV (τ ) =

φ
B

= π2

∗ 2
(τ ∗ )3
+σ 2 (τ 2) .
6

ρφ̃
τ e−ρτ
1
−
+ .
−ρτ
−ρτ
1−e
1−e
ρ

The first order condition with respect to τ implies that the optimal choice satisfies:
∗

ρτ ∗ − 1 + e−ρτ
φ̃ =
.
ρ2

(A-4)

A third order expansion of the right hand side of equation (A-4), gives:
1
1
φ̃ = τ 2 − ρτ 3 + o(ρ2 τ 3 ).
2
6
The expression shows that if ρ = 0 we obtain a square root formula: τ ∗ =
the optimal τ ∗ is increasing in ρ provided ρ or φ̃ are small enough.

C.2

q
2 φ̃ , and that

Proof of Proposition 2.

Proof. Differentiating the Bellman equation and evaluating it at zero we obtain:
ρV 00 (0) = 2B + σ 2 /2V 0000 (0)

(A-5)

and evaluating this expression for ρ = 0 we have
V 0000 (0) = −

2B
.
σ 2 /2

(A-6)

Differentiating the quartic approximation equation (11), evaluating at p̄ and imposing the
smooth pasting equation (9) we obtain:
0 = V 00 (0)p̄ +

1 0000
V (0) p̄3 .
32

(A-7)

Replacing into this equation the expression for V 0000 (0) in equation (A-6) and solving for V 00 (0)
we obtain
1 2B 2
1 0000
V (0)p̄2 =
p̄ .
(A-8)
V 00 (0) = −
32
3 2 σ 2 /2

58

Using the quartic approximation into the (levels) of equation (9) we obtain:
1
1
ψ = V 00 (0)p̄2 + V 0000 (0)p̄4 ,
2
4!

(A-9)

replacing into this equation V 00 (0) from equation (A-8) and V 0000 (0) from equation (A-6) we
obtain
µ
¶
1
1
2B 4
B 4
−
p̄ =
p̄ ,
(A-10)
ψ=
2
2 3 2 4 3 2 σ /2
6 σ2
thus solving for p̄ we obtain the desired expression.

C.3

Proof of Proposition 3.

Proof. We start with a simple preliminary result to set up the analysis showing that the
fixed point of V coincides with the solution of the sequence problem. Denote by Vinfo,φ+ψ the
solution of the problem with observation cost only of Section 4.1, but where the observation
cost has been set to φ + ψ, and denote the optimal value of the time between observations
and price changes as τi . We interpret this as the value of following the feasible policy of
observing and adjusting (χTi = 1 all Ti ) every τ periods, and hence V (p̃) ≤ Vinfo,φ+ψ . Also
denote by Vmenu,ψ (·) the solution of the problem with menu cost ψ and no observation cost
analyzed in Section 4.2. Since the observation cost is set to zero, this provides a lower bound
for the value function: V (p̃) ≥ Vmenu,ψ (p̃). Letting T the operator defined by the right side
of equation (16), equation (17) and equation (18), and by Tn V0 the outcome of n successive
applications of T to an initial function V0 , we have that for each p̃:
Vmenu,ψ (p̃) ≤ Tn Vmenu,ψ (p̃) ≤ Tn Vinfo,φ+ψ (p̃) ≤ Vinfo,φ+ψ (p̃) ,
and the two sequence of functions converge pointwise. Since they converge to a finite value,
their limit must be the same, by an adaptation of Theorem 4.14 in Stokey and Lucas (1989).
Thus:
V (p̃) = lim Tn Vinfo,φ+ψ (p̃) = lim Tn Vmenu,ψ (p̃) .
n→∞

n→∞

pointwise. Furthermore, since Vinfo,φ+ψ (p̃) is a constant function, i.e. independent of p̃, and
since Vmenu,ψ (p̃) > 0 for all p̃, then we have that the value function V (p̃) is uniformly bounded.
We sketch the argument to show that the value function V is continuous on p̃. Suppose
not, that there is jump down at p̄ so that V (p̄) > limp↓p̄ V (p̄). Then, fixed the policies that
correspond to a value of p > p̄ in terms of stopping times and prices p̂(·) as defined in the
sequence formulation of equation (14). Thus, the agent will observe, starting with p̄, after the
same cumulated value of the innovations on p∗ , and it will adjust to the value Let ² = p− p̄ the
difference between these two prices at time zero, and denote by {p(t)}, {p̄(t)} the stochastic
process for the price that follow from the two initial prices. Notice that p̄(t) − p(t) = ² for
all t > 0. By following that policy when the initial price is p̄, the expected discounted value
of fixed cost paid are exactly the same for the two initial prices. Thus, the difference of the

59

value function at p(0) and at p̄(0) is given by the
hZ ∞
i
²2
−ρt
∗
e (p(Ti ) − p (t)) dt .
+ ² E0
ρ
0
Since this difference is clearly continuous on ² and goes to zero as ² ↓ 0, then the value
function is continuous.
Now we use the fact that V is bounded above uniformly and continuous to show that for
φ > 0, then the optimal policy for τ (p̃), is uniformly bounded away from zero. Here is a
sketch of the argument. Suppose, as a way of contradiction, that for any ² > 0, we can find
a p̃ for which τ (p̃² ) < ². We will argue that for small enough ² it is cheaper to double τ (p̃² ).
The main idea is that this decreases the fixed by e−ρ² φ, and increases the cost due to different
information gathering in a quantity that is a continuous function of ². The reason why the
second part is continuous as function of ² is that the distribution of value of p∗ (t + ²) and
p∗ (t + 2²) have most of the mass concentrated in a neighborhood of p∗ (t). The effect due to
the increase in cost due to evaluation of the period return objective function is small, since
it is the expected value of the integral of a bounded function between 0 and ² or between
0 and 2². Thus, for small ² this difference is small. The effect on the value function of the
mass p∗ (t) is small, because the value function is uniformly bounded and this probability is
small, i.e. goest to zero as ² ↓ 0. For the mass that is in the neighborhood of p∗ (t), the effect
in the value function is small because the value function is continuous.
Using that inf τ (p̃) ≡ τ > 0, by Blackwell’s sufficient conditions, we obtain that T is a
contraction of modulus exp (−τ ρ) in the space of continuous and bounded functions.

C.4

Proof of Proposition 4.

Proof. Under the conjecture that p̂ = 0 and that V (·) is symmetric around zero, and by the
symmetry of the normal density, we can rewrite the Bellman equations (17) and (18) using
only the positive range for p̃ ∈ [0 , ∞) as:38
Z τ
£
¤
V̄ (p̃) = φ + min B
e−ρt p̃2 + σ 2 t dt +
τ
0
Z ∞
Z ∞
¡
¡
√ ¢
√ ¢
−ρτ
−ρτ
e
V
p̃
+
sσ
τ
dN
(s)
+
e
V
−p̃
+
sσ
τ dN (s) (A-11)
√
√
−p̃/(σ τ )

Z

τ̂

V̂ = ψ + φ + min B
τ̂

£ ¤
e−ρt σ 2 t dt + e−ρτ̂ 2

0

Z

p̃/(σ τ )
³
∞

√ ´
V sσ τ̂ dN (s)

(A-12)

0

We use the corollary of the contraction mapping theorem. First, notice that if the V in the
right side of equation (20) is symmetric around p̃ = 0, with a minimum at p̃ = 0, then it is
optimal to set p̂ = 0. Second, notice that if the function V in the right side of equation (19) is
symmetric with a minimum at p̃ = 0, then the value function in the left side of this equation
is also symmetric, and hence V in equation (21) is symmetric. Third, using the symmetry,
we show that if V (p̃) is weakly increasing, then the right side of equation (21) is weakly
38

The second line in equation (A-11) uses that
s)dN (s).

R∞
−∞

60

V (p − s)dN (s) =

R∞
−p

V (p + s)dN (s) +

R∞
p

V (−p +

increasing. It suffices to show that V̄ (p̃) given by the right side of (A-11) is increasing in p̃
for a fixed arbitrary value of τ . We do this in two steps. The first step is to notice that the
expression containing p̃2 in (A-11) is obviously increasing in p̃. For the second step, without
loss of generality, we assume that V is differentiable almost everywhere and compute the
derivative with respect to p̃ of the remaining two terms involving the expectations of V (·) in
(A-11). This derivative is:
·
µ
¶
µ
¶¸
e−ρτ
−p̃
p̃
√ V (0) dN
√
√
− V (0) dN
σ τ
σ τ
σ τ
·Z ∞
¸
Z ∞
√
√
−ρτ
0
0
+ e
V (p̃ + s(σ τ ))dN (s) −
V (−p̃ + s(σ τ ))dN (s)
√
√
p̃/(σ τ )
−p̃/(σ τ )
·Z ∞
µ
µ
¶
µ
¶¶¸
z − p̃
z + p̃
1
−ρτ
0
√
√
= e
dN
− dN
V (z) √
σ τ
σ τ
σ τ
0
¸
µ
·Z ∞
´2
´2 ¶
³
³
1 z+
1
√p̃
√p̃
−
− 12 σz−
−ρτ
0
τ
−e 2 σ τ
dz ≥ 0
= e
V (z) √ √
e
σ τ 2π
0
where the term involving
V (0)
is´ zero due symmetry of dN (s), and where the inequality
³
´
³
x−
√p̃

−1

2

−1

x+
√p̃

2

follows since e 2 σ τ − e 2 σ τ > 0 for x > 0 and p̃ > 0. Notice that the inequality is
strict if p̃ > 0 and V 0 (x) > 0 in a segment of strictly positive length. If p̃ = 0, then the slope
is zero.
Finally, differentiating the value function twice, and evaluating at p̃ = 0 we get
e−ρτ̂
1 − e−ρτ̂
+2 √
V (0) = 2 B
ρ
σ τ̂

Z

p̄

00

C.5

0

1 z2

e− 2 σ2 τ̂
V (z) z √
dz > 0 .
σ τ̂ 2 π
0

Proof of Proposition 5.

Proof. First we notice that using the quadratic approximation into the definition of p̄ given
by V̄ (p̄) = V̂ implies
1
ψ = V 00 (0) (p̄)2 .
(A-13)
2
Second we derive equation (23) as the first order condition for τ̂ . To this end, use the
Bellman equation (20) for a fixed τ̂ > 0 evaluated at the optimal p̂ = 0, the symmetry of
V (p̃) , and the approximation
1
V (p̃) = min{V̂ , V (0) + V 00 (0) (p̃)2 }
2

61

to write:
Z
V (0) = V̂ − ψ = φ + Bσ

τ̂

2

Z

−ρt

e
0

Z

τ̂

= φ + Bσ 2

³ √ ´
V sσ τ̂ dN (s)
−∞
·
µ
¶¸
p̄
−ρτ̂
√
V (0) + ψ e
2 1−N
σ τ̂

t dt + e

e−ρt t dt + e−ρτ̂

0

−ρτ̂

∞

Z √p̄
σ τ̂
V (0)
+e
(σ 2 τ̂ s2 ) dN (s)
p̄
2
− √
σ τ̂
·
µ
¶¸
Z τ̂
p̄
2
−ρt
−ρτ̂
−ρτ̂
√
= φ + Bσ
e t dt + e
V (0) + ψ e
2 1−N
σ τ̂
0
Z √p̄
σ τ̂
−ρτ̂
00
2
+e
V (0) σ τ̂
s2 dN (s)
−ρτ̂

00

0

Thus
ρV (0) =

φ + Bσ 2

R τ̂
0

h
³
´i
R √p̄
e−ρt t dt + ψ e−ρτ̂ 2 1 − N σ√p̄ τ̂ + e−ρτ̂ V 00 (0) σ 2 τ̂ 0σ τ̂ s2 dN (s)
(1 − e−ρτ̂ ) /ρ

letting ρ ↓ 0 gives
h
lim ρV (0) =
ρ↓0

³

φ+ψ 2 1−N
τ̂

p̄
√

σ τ̂

´i
+ Bσ

2 τ̂

2

Z
00

+ V (0) σ

σ

2

p̄
√

τ̂

s2 dN (s)

0

Maximizing the right side of this expression gives
h
³
´i
µ
µ
¶ ³ ´
¶
φ + ψ 2 1 − N σ√p̄ τ̂
p̄
p̄
1
Bσ 2
−3/2
√
0=−
+
+ ψ2n
(τ̂ )
2
τ̂
2
σ
τ̂
σ τ̂
µ
¶2 µ
¶³ ´
p̄
p̄
p̄
√
√
− V 00 (0) σ 2
n
(τ̂ )−3/2
σ
σ τ̂
σ τ̂
where we use n(·) for the density of the standard normal. Using that V 00 (0) = 2 ψ / p̄2 , this
expression simplifies to
h
³
´i
φ + ψ 2 1 − N σ√p̄ τ̂
Bσ 2
0=−
+
τ̂ 2
2
rearranging and using the definition of ϕ̂ gives σ 2 τ̂ = h(ϕ̂) of equation (23).
Third, we obtain an expression for V 00 (0). Differentiating the value function twice, and
evaluating it at p̃ = 0 we get
e−ρτ̂
1 − e−ρτ̂
+2 √
V 00 (0) = 2 B
ρ
σ τ̂
62

Z

p̄
0

1 z2

e− 2 σ2 τ̂
0
V (z) z √
dz
σ τ̂ 2 π

√
With a change in variable s = z/(σ τ̂ ) we have:
1 − e−ρτ̂
V (0) = 2 B
+ 2 e−ρτ̂
ρ

Z

σ

00

0

p̄
√
τ̂

1 2
³ √ ´
e− 2 s
ds .
V σ τ̂ s s √
2π

0

Using the third order approximation V (p̃) = V (0) + 12 V 00 (0) (p̃)2 around p̃ = 0 we obtain:
p̄
√ Z σ√τ̂ 2 e− 12 s2
1 − e−ρτ̂
−ρτ̂
00
V (0) = 2 B
+e
V (0) 2 σ τ̂
s √
ds
ρ
2π
0

00

or collecting terms:

−ρτ̂

V 00 (0) =
1 − e−ρτ̂

2 B 1−eρ
√ R √p̄
2 σ τ̂ 0σ τ̂ s2

1 2

e− 2 s
√
2 π

ds

and letting ρ ↓ 0, using the definition of ϕ̂ and N for the CDF of a standard normal:
V 00 (0) =

2 B τ̂
.
√ R ϕ̂
1 − 2 σ τ̂ 0 s2 dN (s)

(A-14)

00
Using equation (A-13) to replace V√
(0) into equation (A-14), using the definition of ϕ̂, and
2
using σ τ̂ = h(ϕ̂) to replace τ̂ and τ̂ we obtain equation (22).

C.6

Numerical evaluation of Proposition 5.

In this section we evaluate the accuracy of the approximated solution in Proposition 5. To
do so, we solve the model numerically on a grid for p̃ and obtain the numerical counterparts
to the policy rule derived in Proposition 5. In doing so we approximate V̄ (·) through either
a cubic spline or a sixth order polynomial. Results are invariant to the latter.
As Figure A-2 - Figure A-4 show, the solution for p̄ (and as a consequence for ϕ̂) in
Proposition 5 diverges from its numerical counterpart the more, the larger the ratio α ≡ ψφ
is. In particular, the approximated solution tend to understate the value of p̄ relatively to
the numerical solution.
This discrepancy is due to the nature of our approximation which relies on a second
order approximation of V̄ (·), while higher orders (the fourth one in particular) become more
relevant as ψ/φ increases, causing the inaction range to widen. To document this effect, we
show the following computations. We solved the model numerically, assuming a polynomial
of order sixth for V̄ (·), on a grid of values for p̃ for values of α = 0.1 and α = 2. We used the
symmetry property of V̄ (·) to set the value of all the odd derivatives evaluated at p̃ = 0 equal
to zero. We then compared the numerical solution for V̄ (·) with the approximated one given
by Proposition 5, but having an intercept (i.e. V̄ (0)) equal to the constant term in the sixth
order polynomial. As Figure A-5 shows, the quadratic approximation for V̄ (·) works better
for low values of p̃, and more generally for low values of α. The second order approximation
for V̄ (·) tends to overstate the value of the function for values away from zero, as it ignores the
fourth derivative V 0000 (0), which is negative. While the difference in the approximation will
also affect the value of V̂ , we find this effect much smaller in our computations. Therefore,
63

Figure A-2: Numerical and approximated ϕ̂ as a function of α ≡

ψ
φ

0.8
Nume.
Apx.
0.7

0.6

0.5

ϕ̂0.4
0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

α = ψ/φ

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

Note: parameter values are B = 20, ρ = 0.02, σ = 0.2, ψ = 0.03. We let φ to vary.

Figure A-3: Numerical and approximated τ̂ as a function of α ≡

ψ
φ

Nume.
Apx.

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8

τ̂
0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

α = ψ/φ

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Note: parameter values are B = 20, ρ = 0.02, σ = 0.2, ψ = 0.03. We let φ to vary.

64

2

Figure A-4: Numerical and approximated p̄ as a function of α ≡

ψ
φ

Nume.
Apx.

0.08

0.075

0.07

0.065

p̄

0.06

0.055

0.05

0.045

0.04

0.035
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

α = ψ/φ

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

Note: parameter values are B = 20, ρ = 0.02, σ = 0.2, ψ = 0.03. We let φ to vary.

the quadratic approximation tends to understate the inaction range, i.e. to produce values
of p̄ that are smaller. This is consistent with the values displayed in Figure A-4.
Figure A-5: Numerical and approximated V̄ as a function of α ≡
ψ/φ = 0.1

ψ
φ

ψ/φ = 2

36.18

11.66
Vbar nume
Vbar appx
Vhat

Vbar nume
Vbar appx
Vhat
11.65

36.17

11.64
36.16

11.63
36.15
11.62
36.14
11.61
36.13
11.6

36.12
11.59

36.11

36.1
−0.2

11.58

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

11.57
−0.2

0.15

p̃

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

p̃

Note: parameter values are B = 20, ρ = 0.02, σ = 0.2, ψ = 0.03. We let φ to vary.

65

0.15

C.7

Proof of Proposition 6.

Proof. Begin defining
fˆ(ϕ̂) =

ĥ(ϕ̂) ϕ̂2
,
p
R ϕ̂
1 − 2 h(ϕ̂) 0 s2 dN (s)

ĥ(ϕ̂) = 2 (φ + 2ψ (1 − N (ϕ̂))) , so that
2 ϕ̂2 (φ + 2ψ (1 − N (ϕ̂)))
fˆ(ϕ̂) =
,
£
¤1/4 R ϕ̂
2 dN (s)
1 − 2 2σ 2 Bφ + 4σ 2 Bψ (1 − N (ϕ̂))
s
0
and noting that ψ = fˆ(ϕ) is the same as the solution of equation (22) and equation (23).
First we turn to the existence and uniqueness of the solution. We show that it follows
from an appliction of the intermediate function theorem, toghether with monotonicity. We
show that if ψφ > 1/2 − 2(1 − N (1)) ≈ 0.1827 then: there is a value 0 < ϕ̂0 ≤ 1 so that: i)
the function fˆ is continuous and increasing in ϕ̂ ∈ [0, ϕ̂0 ), ii) fˆ(0) = 0, iii) fˆ(ϕ̂0 ) > ψ, iv)
fˆ(ϕ̂) < 0 for ϕ̂ ∈ (ϕ̂0 , 1].
The value of ϕ̂0 is given by the minimum of 1 or the solution to
·

¸1/4 Z ϕ̂0
φ
2ψ
0
s2 dN (s) ,
1 = 2 2σ
+ 4σ
(1 − N (ϕ̂ ))
B
B
0
2

(A-15)

so that if ϕ̂0 < 1, the function fˆ as a discontinuity going from being positive and tending to
+∞ to being negative and tending to −∞.
The rest of the proof fills in the details: Step (1):
ĥ(ϕ̂)2 · (ϕ̂)2 is increasing in
pShow that
R ϕ̂ 2
ϕ̂ if φ/ > ψ0.1667 for ϕ̂ < 1. Step (2): Show that h(ϕ̂) · 0 s dN (s) is increasing in ϕ̂ if
ϕ̂ < 1. Step (3): Using (1) and (2) the function fˆ is increasing in ϕ̂ for values of ϕ that are
smaller than 1, provided that its denominator is positive.
Step (1) follows from totally differentiating h(ϕ̂)2 ·(ϕ̂)2 with respect to ϕ̂. Collecting terms
we obtain that the derivative is proportional to φ + 2 · ψ(1 − N (ϕ̂) − ϕ̂ · N 0 (ϕ̂)). Since the
function 1 − N (ϕ̂) − ϕ̂ ·N 0 (ϕ̂) is positive for small values of ϕ̂ and negative for large values, we
evaluate it at its upper bound for the relevant region, obtaining: φ+2ψ(1−N (1)−N 0 (1)) > 0
or φ > ψ2[N (1) + N 0 (1) − 1] ≈ ψ 0.1667. But notice that this condition is implied by our
previous restriction φ > ψ[1/2 − 2(1 − N (1))] ≈p
φ 0.1827.
R ϕ̂
Step (2) follows from totally differentiating h(ϕ̂) · 0 s2 dN (s) with respect to ϕ̂. ColR ϕ̂
lecting terms we obtain that the derivative is proportional to ϕ̂2 − 0 s2 dN (s) ψ/2(φ + ψ (1 −
R ϕ̂
N (ϕ̂))). This expression is greater than ϕ̂2 − 0 s2 dN (s) /2((1 − N (ϕ̂))), which is obtained
by setting φ to zero. This integral is positive for the values of ϕ̂ in (0, 1).
Now we turn to the comparative statics results. That ϕ̂∗ is decreasing in φ follows since fˆ
is increasing in φ. That σ 2 τ̂ ∗ is increasing it follows from the previous result and inspection of
h. That ϕ̂∗ is decreasing in σ 2 /B follows since fˆ is increasing in σ 2 /B. That σ 2 τ̂ ∗ is increasing
2
it follows from the previous result and inspection of h. That ∂ ϕ̂∗ /∂ σB = 0 at σ 2 /B = 0 follows
from differentiating fˆ with respect to σ 2 /B and verifying that that derivative is zero when
evaluated at at σ 2 /B = 0. That ϕ̂∗ is strictly increasing in ψ when σ 2 /B is small relative to
66

φ it follows from differenting fˆ/ψ with respect to ψ. That derivative is strictly negative and
continuous on the parameters, when evaluated at φ > 0 and σ 2 /B = 0.

C.8

Proof of Proposition 7.

Proof. We rewrite the solution of p̄ and τ̂ using the solution of equation (24) into equation (22)
and equation (23). The approximation in equation (24) is based on the zero derivative found
in Proposition 6 in item 3. We now characterize the elasticity of ϕ̂0 . First we write the
equation defining ϕ̂0 as
¡
¡
¢¢
α̃ = 2ϕ̃(α̃) + log 2 + eα̃ 4N eϕ̃(α̃)
(A-16)
where we let α̃ = log α and ϕ̃ = log ϕ̂0 . Differentiating ϕ̃ this expression with respect to α̃
and collecting terms we obtain:
4α(1−N (ϕ̂0 ))
1 − 2+4α(1−N
∂ ϕ̃
∂ log ϕ̂0
(ϕ̂0 ))
≡
=
4α(1−N
(
ϕ̂
))
n(ϕ̂0 )ϕ̂0
0
∂ α̃
∂ log α
2 − 2+4α(1−N (ϕ̂0 )) (1−N
(ϕ̂0 ))

Since, ϕ̂0 → 0 as α → 0, then

∂ log ϕ̂0
∂ log α

(A-17)

→ 0. For values of α > 0, we have that

∂ log ϕ̂0
1
n(ϕ̂0 )ϕ̂0
<
⇐⇒
< 2,
∂ log α
2
(1 − N (ϕ̂0 ))

(A-18)

which is a property of the normal distribution for values of ϕ̂0 < 1. Finally, the first inequality
follows because 2 ϕ̂0 /α = [1 − ϕ̂20 4(1 − N (ϕ̂0 ))] < 1. The second inequality follows becasue
ϕ̂0 < 1.

C.9

Proof of Proposition 8.

Proof. The expression is based on a second order expansion of τ around p̃ = 0. The first
order condition for τ can be written as:
µ
¶
Z ∞
Z ∞
¡ 2
¢
¡
¡
√ ¢
√ ¢ −s σ
−ρτ
2
0
√ dN (s)
F (τ ; p̃) ≡ e
B p̃ + σ τ − ρ
V p̃ − sσ τ dN (s) +
.
V p̃ − sσ τ
2 τ
−∞
−∞
¯
¯
F
At a minimum F (τ (p̃) ; p̃) = 0 and Fτ (τ (p̃) ; p̃) ≥ 0. We have ∂τ∂(p̃)
= − Fτp̃ = 0 . That
p̃ ¯
p̃=0

∂τ /∂ p̃ = 0 follows from the symmetry of τ (·) around p̃, which is verified directly by checking
that Fp̃ = 0 (see below). Totally differentiating Fτ τ 0 + Fp̃ we obtain:
0 = Fτ τ (τ 0 )2 + Fτ p̃ τ 0 + Fτ τ 00 + Fp̃τ τ 0 + Fp̃p̃ ,
using that τ 0 = 0 we get the second derivative:
¯
Fp̃p̃
∂ 2 τ (p̃) ¯¯
=−
=0
¯
2
(∂ p̃) p̃=0
Fτ

67

To compute this second derivative we first compute:
µ
Z ∞
¡
√ ¢ −sσ
−ρτ
2
√ dN (s)
Fτ (τ ; p̃) = −ρF (τ ; p̃) + e
Bσ − ρ
V 0 p̃ − sσ τ
2 τ
−∞
¶
Z ∞
Z ∞
¡
¡
√ ¢ s2 σ 2
√ ¢ −s στ −3/2
00
0
−
dN (s) +
V p̃ − sσ τ
dN (s)
V p̃ − sσ τ
4
4τ
−∞
−∞
Taking ρ ↓ 0, using that at the optimum F = 0, that in the approximation V̄ 0 (p̃) = V 00 (0) p̃
and that V̄ 00 (p̃) = V 00 (0) we obtain:
Z

Z ∞
¡
¡
√ ¢ −s σ τ −3/2
√ ¢ s2 σ 2
Fτ (τ ; 0) = B σ −
V −sσ τ
dN (s) +
V 00 −sσ τ
dN (s)
4
4τ
−∞
−∞
Z ∞
Z ∞
s2 σ 2
s2 σ 2
2
00
=B σ −
V (0)
dN (s) +
V 00 (0)
dN (s)
4τ
4τ
−∞
−∞
= B σ2 .
(A-19)
2

∞

0

We also have:
µ

¶
Z ∞
¡
√ ¢
√ ¢ −s σ
00
√ dN (s)
Fp̃ (τ ; p̃) = e
2B p̃ − ρ
V p̃ − sσ τ dN (s) +
V p̃ − sσ τ
2 τ
−∞
−∞
¶
µ
Z ∞
Z ∞
¡
¡
√ ¢ −s σ
√ ¢
000
−ρτ
00
√ dN (s)
V p̃ − sσ τ
Fp̃p̃ (τ ; p̃) = e
2B − ρ
V p̃ − sσ τ dN (s) +
2 τ
−∞
−∞
−ρτ

Z

∞

0

¡

Evaluating Fp̃p̃ at p̃ = 0 for ρ ↓ 0 and the approximation with V 000 (0) = 0 gives:
Fp̃p̃ (τ ; 0) = 2B .

(A-20)

Expanding τ (·) around p̃ = 0, using that its first derivative is zero, and that the second derivative is the negative of the ratio of the expressions in equation (A-19) and equation (A-20) we
obtain:
µ ¶2
1 00
1 Fp̃p̃
p̃
2
2
0
τ (p̃) = τ (0) + τ (0) (p̃) + τ (0) (p̃) = τ̂ −
(p̃) = τ̂ −
.
2
2 Fτ
σ
which appears in the proposition.

C.10

Proof of Proposition 9.

Proof. We start by computing the second derivative of Ta (p) at p = 0 (for notation simplicity
we use p in the place of p̃). To further simplify notation rename the extreme of integration
as:
p − p̄
p + p̄
s1 ≡ p
,
s2 ≡ p
σ τ (p)
σ τ (p)

68

which depend on p with derivatives
p
τ 0 (p)
τ (p) − (p − p̄) √
2 τ (p)
∂s1
=
∂p
στ (p)

p
,

∂s2
=
∂p

0

τ (p)
τ (p) − (p + p̄) √
2

τ (p)

στ (p)

.

The first order derivative is:
Ã
!
³
´
0
p
στ
(p)
Ta0 (p) = τ 0 (p) +
Ta0 p − sσ τ (p)
1− p
s dN (s)
2 τ (p)
s1
∂s1
∂s2
− Ta (p̄) n (s1 )
+ Ta (−p̄) n (s2 )
∂p
∂p
Z

s2

where n(s) denotes the density of the standard normal. The second order derivative is:
!2
Ã
³
´
0
p
στ
(p)
s dN (s)
Ta00 (p) = τ 00 (p) +
Ta00 p − sσ τ (p)
1− p
2 τ (p)
s1
Ã
!
Z s2 ³
2
´ sσ
0
p
p
(τ
(p))
+
Ta0 p − sσ τ (p)
dN (s)
−τ 00 (p) τ (p) + p
2τ
(p)
2 τ (p)
s1
Ã
Ã
!
!
0
0
στ
(p)
στ
(p)
∂s
∂s2
1
− Ta0 (p̄) 1 − p
+ Ta0 (−p̄) 1 − p
s1 n(s1 )
s2 n(s2 )
∂p
∂p
2 τ (p)
2 τ (p)
Ã
!
Ã
!
µ
¶2
µ
¶2
2
2
∂s
∂s
∂
s
∂
s
1
2
1
2
− Ta (p̄) n0 (s1 )
+ n(s1 )
+ Ta (−p̄) n0 (s2 )
+ n(s2 )
.
∂p
(∂p)2
∂p
(∂p)2
Z

s2

To evaluate this expression note that at p = 0 we have τ 0 (0) = 0, τ (0) = τ̂ , −s1 = s2 = ϕ̂,
∂s1
2
= ∂s
= σ√1 τ̂ (recall the notation already used above ϕ̂ ≡ σ√p̄ τ̂ ). Hence the second to last
∂p
∂p
1
line in the previous formula is −2Ta0 (p̄) n(s1 ) ∂s
by the symmetry of Ta (p). Note moreover
∂p
that at p = 0
√
∂ 2 s1
∂ 2 s2
p̄ τ 00 (0) τ̂
=−
=
(∂p)2
(∂p)2
2σ τ̂ 2
Thus we get:
Z

Ta00 (0)

Z
³
√ ´
√ ´
στ 00 (0) ϕ̂ 0 ³
−sσ τ̂ dN (s) − √
= τ (0) +
Ta −sσ τ̂ s dN (s)
2 τ̂ −ϕ̂
−ϕ̂
Ã
√ !
00
0
n
(
ϕ̂)
p̄
τ
(0)
n
(
ϕ̂)
τ̂
(A-21)
− 2Ta0 (p̄) √ − 2Ta (p̄) − 2 + n(ϕ̂)
2
σ τ̂
2σ τ̂
σ τ̂
00

ϕ̂

Ta00

Using that τ 00 (0) = −2/σ 2 (from Proposition 8), the last term in the previous equation can be
rewritten as −2 Tσa2(p̄)
(−n0 (ϕ̂) − ϕ̂ n(ϕ̂)), which is zero since n0 (x) + x n(x) = 0 for a standard
τ̂
normal density.
Given that Ta0 (0) = Ta000 (0) = 0, and Ta00 (0) < 0, we approximate Ta (p) with a quadratic
69

function on the interval [−p̄ , p̄] :
1
Ta (p) = Ta (0) + Ta00 (0) (p)2 .
2
Using the first and the second derivative of this quadratic approximation into the right hand
side of equation (A-21), and τ 00 (0) = −2/σ 2 , gives:
Z
Ta00 (0)

= −2/σ

2

+Ta00 (0) (2

N (ϕ̂) − 1) −

2Ta00 (0)

ϕ̂
0

s2 dN (s) − 2 Ta00 (0) ϕ̂ n(ϕ̂)

or
Ta00 (0) =

−1/σ 2
.
R ϕ̂
1 − N (ϕ̂) + 0 s2 dN (s) + ϕ̂n(ϕ̂)

(A-22)

To solve for Ta (0) let us evaluate Ta (p) at p̄ obtaining:
Z 2ϕ̄ ³
´
p
p̄
ϕ̂
Ta (p̄) = τ (p̄) +
Ta p̄ − sσ τ (p̄) dN (s) , where ϕ̄ ≡ p
=p
.
σ τ (p̄)
1 − ϕ̂2
0
Using the quadratic approximation for Ta in the previous equation we get
Z 2ϕ̄ µ
´2 ¶
p
1 00 ³
Ta (p̄) = τ (p̄) +
Ta (0) + Ta (0) p̄ − sσ τ (p̄)
dN (s)
2
0
¶
µ
Z 2ϕ̄ ³
´2
p
1 00
1
Ta (0) + Ta (0)
p̄ − sσ τ (p̄) dN (s)
= τ (p̄) + N (2ϕ̄) −
2
2
0
Replacing Ta (p̄) = Ta (0) + 12 Ta00 (0) p̄2 on the left hand side, and collecting terms gives
µ
¶
´2
p
R 2ϕ̄ ³
1 00
2
τ (p̄) + 2 Ta (0) 0 p̄ − sσ τ (p̄) dN (s) − p̄
Ta (0) =
1.5 − N (2ϕ̄)
¶
µ
´2
R 2ϕ̄ ³
σ2
s
2
00
1 + 2 ϕ̄ Ta (0) 0 1 − ϕ̄ dN (s) − 1
= τ (p̄)
1.5 − N (2ϕ̄)
µ
¶
´2
R 2ϕ̄ ³
s
σ2
2
00
1 + 2 ϕ̄ Ta (0) 0 1 − ϕ̄ dN (s) − 1
¡
¢
2
= τ̂ 1 − ϕ̂
(A-23)
1.5 − N (2ϕ̄)
where the last line uses the equality τ (p̄) = τ̂ −
into equation (A-23) gives

¡ p̄ ¢2
σ

= τ̂ (1 − ϕ̂2 ). Substituting equation (A-22)

´ 
2
2
(
ϕ̄
−
s)
dN
(s)
−
ϕ̄
0
(1 − ϕ̂ )
1 −

Ta (0) = τ̂
R ϕ̂
1.5 − N (2ϕ̄)
1 − N (ϕ̂) + 0 s2 dN (s) + ϕ̂n(ϕ̂)


2

1/2

70

³R
2ϕ̄

(A-24)

which gives the approximation for the expression Ta (0) = τ̂ · A(ϕ̂) in the proposition. A
numerical study of the function A(ϕ̂) shows that A(0) = 1, and that the function approximation is accurate and increasing for ϕ̂ ∈ (0, 0.75), that A(0.75) ∼
= 1.78 and decreasing
thereafter.
Next we show that, given equation (30), the average frequency of price adjustment can
be written as na = 1/Ta (0) where Ta (0) = τ̂ Ã(ϕ̂). Rewrite equation (31) in terms of ϕ(p) =
√p ,
σ

τ (p)

!p
Ã p
τ (ϕ)
τ (ϕ)
T (p̃) = T̃ (ϕ̃) = τ (ϕ̃) +
− ϕ̃ p
dϕ,
T̃ (ϕ)n ϕ p
τ (ϕ̃)
τ (ϕ̃)
−ϕ̄
!p
Ã p
Z ϕ̄
1 + ϕ̃2
1 + ϕ̃2
τ̂
p
p
−
ϕ̃
dϕ,
=
+
T̃
(ϕ)n
ϕ
1 + ϕ̃2
1 + ϕ2
1 + ϕ2
−ϕ̄
Z

ϕ̄

(A-25)
(A-26)

where the first equality follows from strict monotonicity of ϕ(p). Then we can write Ta (0) =
T̃ (0) = τ̂ Ã(0, ϕ̂) ≡ A(ϕ̂), where
!p
Ã p
Z ϕ̄
1 + ϕ̃2
1 + ϕ̃2
1
p
p
Ã(ϕ̃, ϕ̂) =
−
ϕ̃
dϕ.
(A-27)
+
Ã(ϕ,
ϕ̂)n
ϕ
1 + ϕ̃2
1 + ϕ2
1 + ϕ2
−ϕ̄
We use a grid of values for ϕ̃ to solve recursively for Ã(ϕ̃, ϕ̂).

C.11

Proof of Proposition 10.

Proof. Let q(ϕ) and Q(ϕ) be respectively the density and CDF of
p
ϕ (p) ≡ p
.
σ τ (p)
Notice that ϕ (p) is a monotonic transformation of p,

dϕ
dp

= √1
σ

τ (p)

0

τ (p)
− ϕ 2τ
> 0. Notice that
(p)

using p(ϕ) to denote the inverse function, we compute
τ (p) = τ̂ −

³ p ´2
σ

=

τ̂
1 + (ϕ(p))2

which, abusing notation, defines the new function
τ (ϕ) =

τ̂
1 + ϕ2

(A-28)

The monotonicity of the transformation also gives that Q(ϕ(p)) = G(p) at all p, implying
g(p)

dp
dϕ = q(ϕ(p))dϕ
dϕ

71

(A-29)

Using equation (A-29) and the change of variables from p to ϕ in equation (33) we write:
Ã
!
·
¸ µ
¶
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
p̃ − p(ϕ)
1
dp
dp
p̃
1
p
p
√
√
g(p̃) =
g(p(ϕ)) n
dϕ + 1 −
g(p(ϕ)) dϕ n
dϕ
σ τ̂ σ τ̂
σ τ (p(ϕ)) σ τ (p(ϕ)) dϕ
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
Ã
!
·
¸ µ
¶
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
1
p̃
1
p̃
p
p
√
√ .
−ϕ
dϕ + 1 −
q(ϕ)dϕ n
=
q(ϕ) n
σ τ̂ σ τ̂
σ τ (p(ϕ))
σ τ (p(ϕ))
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
For clarity, rewrite the previous equation using the density of p̃ conditional on ϕ:
!
Ã
1
p̃
p
p
−ϕ
f (p̃|ϕ) ≡ n
σ τ (p(ϕ))
σ τ (p(ϕ))
This gives:
Z

ϕ̄

g(p̃) =

·
Z
f (p̃|ϕ) q(ϕ)dϕ + 1 −

−ϕ̄

¸

ϕ̄

q(ϕ)dϕ

f (p̃|0).

(A-30)

−ϕ̄

Now
√ consider the following monotone transformation of the random variable ϕ̃: Φ(ϕ̃, ϕ) ≡
τ (ϕ̃)
ϕ̃ √
, where the function τ (ϕ) is given in equation (A-28).39 Using the definition of ϕ and
τ (ϕ)

the law of motion for p̃ it follows that Φ(ϕ̃, ϕ) − ϕ is a random variable with the standard
normal distribution: n (Φ(ϕ̃, ϕ) − ϕ).
By doing the change in variables from p̃ to ϕ̃ on the left-hand side of equation (A-30),
and from p̃ to Φ(ϕ̃, ϕ) on the right-hand side of equation (A-30), we obtain
¸
·
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
dΦ(ϕ̃, ϕ) dϕ̃
dΦ(ϕ̃, ϕ̃) dϕ̃
dϕ̃
n (Φ(ϕ̃, ϕ) − ϕ)
q(ϕ)dϕ n (ϕ̃)
q(ϕ̃)
=
q(ϕ) dϕ + 1 −
,
dp̃
dϕ̃
dp̃
dϕ̃
dp̃
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
·
¸
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
dΦ(ϕ̃, ϕ)
q(ϕ̃) =
n (Φ(ϕ̃, ϕ) − ϕ)
q(ϕ) dϕ + 1 −
q(ϕ)dϕ n (ϕ̃) .
dϕ̃
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
We notice that q(·) attains its maximum at ϕ̃ = 0, and that it is symmetric, so that
q 0 (0) = q 000 (0) = 0 and q 00 (0) < 0. Furthermore, q(ϕ̄) > 0. Then, for small ϕ̄ = σ√p̄ τ̂ , this
function can be approximated by a quadratic function with
1
q(ϕ) = q(0) + q 00 (0) ϕ2 .
2
The value of q(·) and its first and second derivatives with respect to ϕ̃, evaluated at ϕ̃ = 0,
39

The monotonicity holds since Φ is increasing in ϕ̃.

72

are given by
·
¸
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
dΦ(0, ϕ)
q(0) =
q(ϕ)n (−ϕ)
dϕ + 1 −
q(ϕ)dϕ n(0),
dϕ̃
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
µ
¶2
·
¸
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
dΦ(0, ϕ)
d2 Φ(0, ϕ)
0
0
q (0) =
q(ϕ)n (−ϕ)
dϕ +
q(ϕ)n (−ϕ)
dϕ + 1 −
q(ϕ)dϕ n0 (0),
2
d
ϕ̃
(d
ϕ̃)
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
¶3
µ
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
2
dΦ(0, ϕ)
dΦ(0, ϕ) d Φ(0, ϕ)
q 00 (0) =
dϕ +
dϕ
q(ϕ)n00 (−ϕ)
q(ϕ)n0 (−ϕ) 3
dϕ̃
dϕ̃
(dϕ̃)2
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
·
¸
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
d3 Φ(0, ϕ)
+
q(ϕ)n (−ϕ)
dϕ + 1 −
q(ϕ)dϕ n00 (0).
(dϕ̃)3
−ϕ̄
−ϕ̄
Using equation (A-28) gives
p
dΦ(0, ϕ) p
d2 Φ(0, ϕ)
d3 Φ(0, ϕ)
= 1 + ϕ2 ,
=
0
,
=
−3
1 + ϕ2 .
dϕ̃
(dϕ̃)2
(dϕ̃)3
Using that n00 (−ϕ) = n(−ϕ)(ϕ2 − 1), we rewrite q(0) and q 00 (0) as
µ
¶
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
p
q(0) = 2
q(ϕ)n(ϕ) 1 + ϕ2 dϕ + 1 − 2
q(ϕ)dϕ n(0),
0
0
µ
¶
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
p
00
4
2
q (0) = 2
q(ϕ)n(ϕ) 1 + ϕ (ϕ − 4)dϕ − 1 − 2
q(ϕ)dϕ n(0).
0

0

These two equations and the quadratic approximation for q(·) give a system of 2 equations
in 2 unknowns: q(0) and q 00 (0):
¶
Z ϕ̄ µ
p
1 00
00
2
q(0) + q (0) = 2
q(0) + q (0) ϕ n(ϕ) 1 + ϕ2 (ϕ4 − 3)dϕ
2
¶
µ
¶ ¶
Z0 ϕ̄ µ
Z ϕ̄ µ
p
1 00
1
2
00
2
q(0) = 2
q(0) + q (0) ϕ n(ϕ) 1 + ϕ2 dϕ + 1 − 2
q(0) + q (0) ϕ dϕ n(0) .
2
2
0
0
The equations above imply
p
R ϕ̄
1 − 2 0 n (ϕ) 1 + ϕ2 (ϕ4 − 3)dϕ
q 00 (0)
p
≡ θ(ϕ̄)
=−
R ϕ̄
q(0)
1 − 0 n (ϕ) ϕ2 1 + ϕ2 (ϕ4 − 3)dϕ
q(0) =

1+2

R ϕ̄ ³
0

n(0)
´
´
.
p
p
R ϕ̄ ³
n(0) − n(ϕ) 1 + ϕ2 dϕ + θ(ϕ̄) 0 n(0) − n(ϕ) 1 + ϕ2 ϕ2 dϕ

73

Using these results into equation (34) to obtain
·
¸
Z ϕ̄
Z ϕ̄
R(ϕ̂) = 2
τ (ϕ)q(ϕ)dϕ + 1 − 2
q(ϕ)dϕ τ̂
(A-31)
0
0
¶
¶ ¸
· Z ϕ̄
µ
Z ϕ̄ µ
1 00
1 00
2 −1
2
2
q(0) + q (0)ϕ dϕ
≈ τ̂ − 2τ̂ −
(1 + ϕ )
q(0) + q (0)ϕ dϕ +
2
2
0
0
(A-32)
·Z ϕ̄ µ
¶
¸
1
ϕ2
q(0) + q 00 (0)ϕ2
≈ τ̂ − 2τ̂
dϕ
(A-33)
2
(1 + ϕ2 )
0
where we use the quadratic approximation of q(·), the definition of ϕ(p), and the quadratic
approximation of τ (p).
Notice that, given equation (30), the average frequency of price review can be always
written as nr = 1/Tr (0) where Tr (0) = τ̂ R(ϕ̂). This result follows directly from substituting
equation (30) into equation (A-32).

C.12

Proof of Proposition 11.

In this section we report the numerical solution of the model to the following experiments:
(i) a change in ψ holding φ fixed; (ii) a change in φ holding ψ fixed. These experiments are
meant to capture the elasticities of na and nr with respect to ψ and φ.
Figure A-6: Numerical and approximated p̄ as a function of α ≡

ψ
φ

log(nr)

log(na)
1.5

2.5
B=5
B=20
B=50

1

B=5
B=20
B=50

2
1.5

0.5
1
0
0.5
−0.5
0
−1
−1.5
−6

−0.5

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

−1
−6

0

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

log(φ)

log(φ)
log(na)

log(nr)

1.5

1.4
B=5
B=20
B=50

1

B=5
B=20
B=50

1.2
1

0.5

0.8

0

0.6
0.4

−0.5

0.2
−1
−1.5
−6

0
−5

−4

−3

−2

−0.2
−6

−1

log(ψ)

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

log(ψ)

Note: fixed parameter values are ρ = 0.02, σ = 0.2; ψ = 0.03 when φ is allowed to change;
φ = 0.06 when ψ is allowed to change.

We show results for different parameterizations of B = 5, 20, 50. The first row in
Figure A-6 display results for log(na ), log(nr ) to changes in log(φ) holding ψ = 0.03 as
74

in our benchmark calibration. The larger φ, the closer the value of α to zero. As we can see,
the elasticity of nr with respect to φ is roughly equal to - 1/2, independently of the level of
B and the level of α. Similarly, the elasticity of na with respect to φ is not changing much
to changes in the level of B, however it is sensitive to the level of α, being roughly equal to
- 1/2 for large values of φ, i.e. for α closer to zero, and smaller at smaller values of φ.
The second row in Figure A-6 display results for log(na ), log(nr ) to changes in log(ψ)
holding φ = 0.06 as in our benchmark calibration. The smaller ψ, the closer the value of α
to zero. The elasticities of na and nr with respect to ψ are smaller at smaller values of ψ.

C.13

Proof of Proposition 12.

Proof. Rewrite equation (40) as
1
w(∆p) = √
σ τ̂

R ϕ̄ p
1 + ϕ2 n
−ϕ̄

µ

1−

∆p

R ϕ̄
−ϕ̄

¶

√

1+ϕ2
√
σ τ̂

− ϕ q(ϕ)dϕ

q(ϕ)dϕ

1
+ √ n
σ τ̂

µ

∆p
√
σ τ̂

¶
,

p
usign the change of variable ϕ = p̃/(σ τ (p̃)), using the approximation
p for the optimal
√
τ̂
2
policty: τ (p) = τ̂ − (p/σ) = 1+ϕ2 , which implies that p(ϕ) = σ τ̂ ϕ/ 1 + ϕ2 , and hence
this change of variables gives the density of the normalized prices: q(ϕ) = g(p(ϕ))dp(ϕ)/dϕ.
Thus letting the normalized price changes be:
∆p
x≡ √ ,
σ τ̂

(A-34)

√
we define the density of the normalized price changes x as v(·), satisfying v(x)/(σ τ̂ ) and
then the distribution of normalized
adjustment have density given by the change of
³
´ price
√
∆p
variable formula: v(x) = w σ √τ̂ σ τ̂
R ϕ̄ p
v(x) =

−ϕ̄

1+

ϕ2

³ p
´
2
n x 1 + ϕ − ϕ q(ϕ)dϕ
+ n (x) for |x| > ϕ̄ .
R ϕ̄
1 − −ϕ̄ q(ϕ)dϕ

(A-35)

Finally we can use the approximation for q(ϕ) ≈ q(0) + 12 q 00 (0)ϕ2 and the formulas for q(0)
and q(0)00 developed in the proof of Proposition 10. The expressions obtained there for q(0)
and q 00 (0) are a function of ϕ̄. Thus we can write:
³ p
´
¤p
R ϕ̄ £
1 00
2
2 n x
2 − ϕ dϕ
q(0)
+
q
(0)ϕ
1
+
ϕ
1
+
ϕ
2
−ϕ̄
v(x; ϕ̄) =
(A-36)
¤
R ϕ̄ £
1 − −ϕ̄ q(0) + 12 q 00 (0)ϕ2 dϕ
+

n (x) for |x| > ϕ̄ .

where we include ϕ̄ as an argument to emphasize that this density does not depend on any
other parameter. This is the expression in the proof. Finally, we notice that the mode and
minimum are equal to ϕ̄.
75

C.14

Proof of Proposition 14.

Proof. Consider
ÃZ

T̄

G(p̂ ; T̄ , π) ≡ E

!
e−ρt [(πt − p̂) + σW (t)]2 dt

(A-37)

0

where W (t) is a standard brownian motion. If p̂ and the T̄ are optimal, then G(·; T̄ , π) should
be maximized at p̂. We will show that, provided that the stopping time is positive and finite,
∂G(0 ; T̄ , π)
< 0 if π > 0 .
∂ p̂
We write equation (A-37) as
ÃZ

T̄

G(p̂ ; T̄ , π) ≡ E

e

£
−ρt

(A-38)

!
¤
(πt − p̂) + 2σW (t) (πt − p̂) + σ 2 W (t)2 dt
2

0

and thus
∂G(p̂ ; T̄ , π)
= E
∂ p̂

ÃZ

T̄

!
e−ρt [−2 (πt − p̂) − 2σW (t)] dt

0

ÃZ

T̄

= −E

!
e−ρt 2 (πt − p̂) dt

"Z

T̄

− σ 2E

#
e−ρt W (t)dt

0

0

Equating this first order condition to zero, rearranging, and taking ρ to zero:
³ 2´
hR
i
T̄
T̄
π E 2 + σ E 0 W (t)dt
¡ ¢
p̂ =
E T̄

C.15

Proof of Proposition 15.

∂ p̂
Proof. To show that ∂π
|π=0 > 0 we note that p̂ = 0 for zero inflation, and -by equation (47)
in Proposition 14- strictly positive for positive inflation and strictly negative for negative
∂ τ̂
inflation. To show that ∂π
|π=0 = 0 we let F (τ̂ , p̂, π) = 0 denote the first order condition of
the problem equation (17) with respect to τ̂ :
Z ∞ ³
√ ´
2
F (τ̂ , p̂, π) = B (p̂ − πτ̂ ) − ρ
V p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂ dN (s)
−∞
µ
¶
Z ∞
³
√ ´
sσ
0
+
V p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂
−π − √
dN (s)
2 τ̂
−∞

76

Totally differentiating F (τ̂ (π), p̂(π), π) with respect to π, we can solve for ∂ τ̂ /∂π as function
of ∂ p̂/∂π and derivatives of the function F as:
0=

∂F ∂ τ̂
∂F ∂ p̂ ∂F
+
+
.
∂ τ̂ ∂π
∂ p̂ ∂π
∂π

We now show that ∂F (τ̂ , 0, 0)/∂ p̂ = ∂F (τ̂ , 0, 0)/∂π = 0 and ∂F (τ̂ , 0, 0)/∂ τ̂ > 0, hence
∂ τ̂ /∂π = 0. Direct computations give:
Z ∞
³
√ ´
∂F (τ̂ , p̂, π)
= −2B (p̂ − πτ̂ ) τ̂ + ρτ̂
V 0 p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂ dN (s)
∂π
−∞
¶
µ
Z ∞
Z ∞
³
³
√ ´
√ ´
sσ
00
− τ̂
V p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂
−π − √
dN (s) −
V 0 p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂ dN (s)
2 τ̂
−∞
−∞
and evaluating this expression at π = p̂ = 0, using the symmetry of V (p̃) and of the normal
distribution N (s) around zero, we obtain that this derivative is zero. Likewise we obtain
that:
Z ∞
³
√ ´
∂F (τ̂ , p̂, π)
V 0 p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂ dN (s)
= 2B (p̂ − πτ̂ ) − ρτ̂
∂ p̂
−∞
¶
µ
Z ∞
³
√ ´
sσ
00
+
V p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂
dN (s)
−π − √
2 τ̂
−∞
which evaluated at π = p̂ = 0 also vanishes. Finally
µ
¶
Z ∞
³
√ ´
∂F (τ̂ , p̂, π)
sσ
0
= 2B (p̂ − πτ̂ ) π − ρ
V p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂
−π − √
dN (s)
∂ τ̂
2 τ̂
−∞
¶2
µ
Z ∞
³
√ ´
sσ
00
V p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂
dN (s)
+
−π − √
2 τ̂
−∞
Z ∞
³
√ ´ ³ sσ ´
+
V 0 p̂ − πτ̂ − sσ τ̂
dN (s)
4 τ̂ 3/2
−∞
which is strictly positive evaluated at π = p̂ = 0 since V 00 (0) > 0 and since V (p̃) and dN (s)
is symmetric around zero.

C.16

Proof of Proposition 16.

Proof. It is mathematically simpler to solve the menu cost model as concentrating in the
steady state case, i.e. when ρ = 0. This problem corresponds to the the limit as ρ ↓ 0. Thus

77

when π > 0 and σ = 0 we can write the objective function as:
·Z τ
¸
· Z τ
¸
¡ 22
¢
1
1
2
2
min
B (πt − p̂) dt + (ψ + φ) = min
B
π t − 2p̂πt + p̂ dt + (ψ + φ)
p̂,τ τ
p̂,τ τ
0
0
· µ 2 3
¶
¸
· µ 2 3
¶
¸
1
π τ
2p̂πτ 2
1
π τ
π2τ 3 π2τ 3
2
= min
B
−
+ p̂ τ + (ψ + φ) = min
B
−
+
+ (ψ + φ)
τ τ
p̂,τ τ
3
2
3
2
4
· 2 3
¸
· 2 2¸
1
π τ
π τ
(ψ + φ)
= min
B
+ (ψ + φ) = min B
+
τ τ
τ
12
12
τ
where we use that

τπ
2

= arg minp̂

2p̂τ 2
2

+ p̂2 τ . The first order condition for τ gives

2 B π2 τ
(ψ + φ)
.
=
12
τ2
This implies the following optimal rules:
µ
∗

τ =

6 (ψ + φ)
B π2

¶1/3

µ
, p̂ =

3 π (ψ + φ)
4B

¶1/3

µ
, and p̂ − p = πτ =

6 π (ψ + φ)
B

¶1/3
(A-39)

The value of na is obtained as na = 1/τ ∗ . The values for τ (p̃) are obtained by requiring
that the review happens exactly at the time of an adjustment: τ (p̃)π = p̃ − p in the range
of inaction. The optimal policy has this form because, due to the deterministic evolution of
p̃(t), if φ > 0 it is optimal to review only at the time of an adjustment.
Now consider the menu cost version of this model for ρ > 0, σ = 0 and π > 0. We
use this model to show that for all ρ > 0, the optimal return point and boundaries satisfy
p̄ − p̂ < p̂ − p. In the range of inaction p̃ ∈ (p, p̄) the value function satisfy the ODE:
ρV (p̃) = B p̃2 − πV 0 (p̃)
with value matching, optimality of p̂ and smooth pasting conditions:
V (p) = V (p̂) + ψ + φ, V 0 (p̂) = 0 and V 0 (p) = 0 .
The solution of the ODE in the range of inaction is:
µ ¶2
π
2B
B 2 π2 B
V (p̃) = p̃ −
p̃ +
+ A e−ρ/π
ρ
ρ ρ
ρ
ρ

p̃

for some constant A to be determined. Let a0 p̃ + a1 p̃ + a2 p̃2 be the particular solution of the
ODE. Its coefficients must solve:
¡
¢
ρ a0 + a1 p̃ + a2 p̃2 = B p̃2 − π (a1 + 2a2 p̃)
and thus

B
π2 B
a2 =
, a1 = −
, a0 =
ρ
ρ ρ

78

µ ¶2
π
2B
ρ
ρ

Notice that the quadratic function showing the particular solution of the ODE is the value of
a policy where the fixed cost is never paid. Hence in the range of inaction, where the solution
to this ODE must hold, the value function has to be smaller. This implies that the constant A
has to be negative. We now use that A < 0 implies that p̄ − p̂ < p̂ − p. To see this, denote the
quadratic particular solution of the ODE as Q(p̃), so we have V 0 (p̃) = Q0 (p̃) − A(ρ/π)−ρ/πp̃ .
This derivative is zero at p̂ where the function attains its minimum, and it is positive for
higher values and negative for lower ones. From V 0 (p̂) = 0 we obtain:
2

ρ
B
πB
ρ
p̂ −
2 = A e− π
ρ
ρρ
π

so that

µ
A=

π
p̂ −
ρ

¶
2

B π ρ
eπ
ρ ρ

p̂

p̂

From V (p̄) − V (p̂) = φ + ψ we obtain:
´
³ ρ
ρ
πB
B 2
(p̄ − p̂2 ) −
2 (p̄ − p̂) + A e− π p̄ − e− π p̂ = φ + ψ
ρ
ρρ
and substituting A into this expression we get:
µ
¶
´
B 2
πB
π
B π ³ ρ (p̂−p̄)
2
(p̄ − p̂ ) −
2 (p̄ − p̂) + p̂ −
2
eπ
−1 =φ+ψ
ρ
ρρ
ρ
ρρ
We now obtain an expression for p̄ as a function of p̂ and the parameters π(φ + ψ)/B by
letting ρ to go to zero. To do so, we use that ex − 1 = x + (1/2)x2 + o(x2 ) and apply it to
ρ
e π (p̂−p̄) − 1 obtaining:
µ
¶
µ
¶
ρ
π
π
1 ρ 2
φ+ψ
π
2
2
2
2
2
(p̂ − p̄) + ( ) (p̂ − p̄) + o(ρ ) =
ρ
p̄ − p̂ − 2 (p̄ − p̂) + p̂ −
ρ
ρ
ρ π
2 π
B
In this expression we can simplify the terms that are multiplied by 1/ρ. To see this we can
developed the third term into:
µ
¶
φ+ψ
π
π
2
2
ρ = p̄ − p̂ − 2 (p̄ − p̂) + p̂ −
2 (p̂ − p̄)
B
ρ
ρ
µ
¶
¶
µ
π
π 1 ρ 2
2
2
+
p̂ −
2
( ) (p̂ − p̄) + o(ρ )
ρ
ρ 2 π
or canceling the terms multiplied by 1/ρ
µ
¶
´
π ³ρ
φ+ψ
2
2
2
ρ = p̄ − p̂ + p̂ 2 (p̂ − p̄) + p̂ −
(p̂ − p̄) + o(ρ)
B
ρ
π
developing the parenthesis
ρ
φ+ψ
ρ = p̄2 − p̂2 + p̂ 2 (p̂ − p̄) + p̂ (p̂ − p̄)2 − (p̂ − p̄)2 + o(ρ)
B
π
79

developing the square
φ+ψ
ρ
ρ = p̄2 − p̂2 + 2p̂2 − 2p̂p̄ + p̂ (p̂ − p̄)2 − p̂2 − p̄2 + 2p̄p̂ + o(ρ)
B
π
canceling the common terms
ρ
φ+ψ
ρ = p̂ (p̂ − p̄)2 + o(ρ)
B
π
multiplying π/ρ:
φ+ψ
o(ρ)
π = p̂ (p̂ − p̄)2 +
B
ρ
and taking ρ to zero:
φ+ψ
π = p̂ (p̂ − p̄)2
B
We can write p̄ = a p̂ for a constant a > 1 to be determined:
φ+ψ
π = p̂3 (1 − a)2
B
and replacing the expression for p̂3 :
φ+ψ
π =
B

µ

¶
3φ+ψ
π (1 − a)2
4 B

or solving for the positive value of a:
r

4
+1 = a
3

or
Ãr

!
4
+ 1 p̂
3

p̄ =
Now we compare p̄ − p̂ with p̂ − p:

q
p̄ − p̂
=
p̂ − p

8

80

4
3

1
3

1
=√
3

