                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TWIN PICKS: DISENTANGLING THE DETERMINANTS OF RISK-TAKING IN
                         HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIOS

                                           Laurent E. Calvet
                                             Paolo Sodini

                                         Working Paper 15859
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15859


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2010




We received helpful comments from Manuel Arellano, John Campbell, René Garcia, Mariassunta
Giannetti, Deborah Lucas, Jacques Olivier, David Thesmar, and participants at CEMFI, EDHEC Business
School, HEC Paris, the Stockholm School of Economics, the University of California at Berkeley,
the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Zürich, the 2009 SAET Ischia Conference, and
the 2010 Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. We thank Statistics Sweden and
the Swedish Twin Registry for providing the data. The project benefited from excellent research assistance
by Krister Ahlersten and Tomas Thörnqvist. This material is based upon work supported by the Agence
Nationale de la Recherche under a Chaire d'Excellence to Calvet, BFI under a Research Grant to Sodini,
the HEC Foundation, Riksbank, and the Wallander and Hedelius Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Laurent E. Calvet and Paolo Sodini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TWIN PICKS: DISENTANGLING THE DETERMINANTS OF RISK-TAKING IN
                         HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIOS

                                           Laurent E. Calvet
                                             Paolo Sodini

                                         Working Paper 15859
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15859


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2010




We received helpful comments from Manuel Arellano, John Campbell, René Garcia, Mariassunta
Giannetti, Deborah Lucas, Jacques Olivier, David Thesmar, and participants at CEMFI, EDHEC Business
School, HEC Paris, the Stockholm School of Economics, the University of California at Berkeley,
the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Zürich, the 2009 SAET Ischia Conference, and
the 2010 Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. We thank Statistics Sweden and
the Swedish Twin Registry for providing the data. The project benefited from excellent research assistance
by Krister Ahlersten and Tomas Thörnqvist. This material is based upon work supported by the Agence
Nationale de la Recherche under a Chaire d'Excellence to Calvet, BFI under a Research Grant to Sodini,
the HEC Foundation, Riksbank, and the Wallander and Hedelius Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2010 by Laurent E. Calvet and Paolo Sodini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants of Risk-Taking in Household Portfolios
Laurent E. Calvet and Paolo Sodini
NBER Working Paper No. 15859
April 2010
JEL No. C23,D14,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the determinants of financial risk-taking in a panel containing the asset holdingsRI
Swedish twins. We measure the impact of a broad set of demographic, financial, and portfolio characteristics,
and use yearly twin pair fixed effects to control for genes and shared background. We report a strong
positive relation between risky asset market participation and financial wealth. Among participants,
the average financial wealth elasticity of the risky share is significantly positive and estimated at 22%,
which suggests that the average individual investor has decreasing relative risk aversion. Furthermore,
the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share itself is heterogeneous across investors and varies
strongly with characteristics. The elasticity decreases with financial wealth and human capital, and
increases with habit, real estate wealth and household size. As a consequence, the elasticity of the
aggregate demand for risky assets to exogenous wealth shocks is close to, but does not coincide with,
the elasticity of a representative investor with constant relative risk aversion. We confirm the robustness
of our results by running time-differenced instrumental variable regressions, and by controlling for
zygosity, lifestyle, mental and physical health, the intensity of communication between twins, and
measures of social interactions.


Laurent E. Calvet
Department of Finance
HEC Paris
1 rue de la Libération
78351 Jouy en Josas
France
and NBER
calvet@hec.fr

Paolo Sodini
Department of Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavägen 65
Box 6501
SE-113 83 Stockholm
Sweden
Paolo.Sodini@hhs.se


An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15859
1. Introduction

Does financial wealth drive the share of risky assets in the portfolios of individual in-
vestors? Is the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share homogenous across investors
or does it vary with their demographic, financial and portfolio characteristics? How does
the aggregate demand for risky assets respond to changes in the wealth distribution?
In portfolio choice theory, mechanisms such as habit formation, borrowing constraints,
decreasing relative risk aversion, portfolio insurance, or a “capitalist” taste for wealth,
all imply that richer households allocate a higher fraction of their financial wealth to
risky investments.1 These theories also predict that the financial wealth elasticity of the
risky share should vary with household characteristics, including financial wealth itself.
Furthermore, a growing literature investigates how at the aggregate level, the demand
for risky assets relates to the distribution of household preferences and characteristics.2
    The empirical household finance literature provides only partial evidence on these
mechanisms. In cross-sections, richer and more educated investors are known to allocate
a higher proportion of their financial wealth to risky assets than less sophisticated
households (e.g. Campbell 2006; Calvet Campbell and Sodini, “CCS” 2007, 2009a,
2009b).3 In addition, the risky share has a negative cross-sectional relation to real
estate holdings (Cocco 2005, Flavin and Yamashita 2002), leverage (Guiso Jappelli and
Terlizzese 1996), and internal consumption habit (Lupton 2002). It is unclear, however,
whether these variables directly impact portfolio choice, or simply proxy for latent traits
such as ability, genes, risk aversion, or upbringing. Several recent papers suggest that
panel data oﬀer a possible solution to this identification problem when the characteristic
of interest exhibits suﬃcient time variations (e.g. Brunnermeier and Nagel 2008, CCS
2009a, Chiappori and Paiella 2008). One diﬃculty with the dynamic panel approach is
that the researcher needs to control for household inertia by using instruments, and the
results are sensitive to the validity of the instruments.
    In this paper, we consider an alternative estimation strategy based on the comparison
of the financial portfolios held by twins. The analysis is made possible by a novel dataset
   1
     For instance, a positive relation between financial wealth and risk-taking originates from an in-
ternal habit in Constantinides (1990), an external habit in Campbell and Cochane (1999), borrowing
constraints in Paxson (1990), leverage constraints and housing in Cocco (2005) and Yao and Zhang
(2005), portfolio insurance in Brennan and Schwartz (1988), or a “capitalist” taste for wealth in Carroll
(2000, 2002).
   2
     Examples include Calvet, Grandmont and Lemaire (2005), Constantinides (1982), Gollier (2001),
Hara, Huang and Kuzmics (2007), Jouini and Napp (2007), and Rubinstein (1974).
   3
     See Alessie, Hochguertel and van Soest (2002), Ameriks and Zeldes (2004), Banks and Tanner
(2002), Bertaut and Starr-McCluer (2002), Carroll (2002), Cohn, Lewellen, Lease and Schlarbaum
(1975), Eymann and Börsch-Supan (2002), Friend and Blume (1975), Guiso and Jappelli (2002), Guiso,
Jappelli and Terlizzese (1996), King and Leape (1987, 1998), Lupton (2002), Perraudin and Sørensen
(2000), and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002b).



                                                   1
containing the disaggregated portfolios and detailed characteristics of twins in Sweden.
We observe the worldwide assets owned by each twin at the end of a tax year, including
bank accounts, mutual funds and stocks but excluding retirement accounts. All holdings
are reported at the asset level for the 1999-2002 period.
    Our main results are the following. First, we estimate the average financial wealth
elasticity of the risky share on the set of participants. As in the earlier literature, we
begin by running pooled cross-sectional regressions of a household’s risky share on its
financial wealth and yearly fixed eﬀects. The elasticity of the risky share ranges from
21% in the absence of controls to 23% when a large set of a demographic and financial
variables is included. It is an open question whether these cross-sectional estimates
capture the direct impact of financial wealth on the risky share, or are instead driven
by latent traits that are correlated with financial wealth.
    We next consider linear panel specifications with yearly twin pair fixed eﬀects, which
is our main innovation. These specifications can be estimated by regressing twin diﬀer-
ences in the risky share on twin diﬀerences in characteristics. The financial wealth
elasticity of the risky share is measured at 20% in the absence of controls and at 22%
in the presence of controls. A 10% proportional increase in a household’s financial
wealth is therefore associated with a 2.0 − 2.2% proportional increase in its risky share.
We report that the cross-sectional variance of the twin pair fixed eﬀect is of the same
magnitude as the variance of the predicted component obtained from characteristics.
Moreover, the adjusted R2 coeﬃcient is twice as high in twin panel regressions as in
pooled cross-sections. Twin pair fixed eﬀects are therefore important and explain a
substantial fraction of the observed variation of the risky share.
    Second, we investigate the impact of demographic, portfolio, and other financial
characteristics. In both cross-sectional and twin regressions, the risky share is posi-
tively related to the risky portfolio’s Sharpe ratio, but is negatively related to leverage,
entrepreneurship, the risky portfolio’s systematic exposure, household size, and a mea-
sure of habit. One interesting diﬀerence is that income risk and education, which are
significant in cross-sectional regressions, become insignificant in twin pair regressions.
These findings suggest that in traditional pooled cross-sectional regressions, income risk
and education variables capture a fixed eﬀect, for instance related to risk aversion or
upbringing, that has no direct eﬀect on the risky share.
    Third, we show that the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share itself is het-
erogeneous across households and varies strongly with characteristics. The elasticity
sharply decreases with financial wealth and increases with a measure of habit, as theo-
retical models of habit formation would predict. The financial wealth elasticity of the
risky share is also high for large households with low human capital or high real estate
wealth.
    Fourth, we verify the robustness of our results to alternative estimation methods and


                                             2
interpretations. We assess the role of zygosity by reestimating the regressions separately
on identical and fraternal twins. We obtain similar coeﬃcients, but as one would expect,
the predicted variation of the risky share and the cross-sectional variance of the twin pair
fixed eﬀects are substantially higher for identical twins. We investigate the impact of
communication between twins by separately reestimating the regressions on the group
of twins who communicate frequently with each other and the group of twins who
communicate infrequently. Consistent with intuition, the predicted variation is smaller
for twins who communicate frequently. The financial wealth elasticity of the risky share
is approximately the same in both groups, which suggests that the positive relation
between financial wealth and risk-taking is unlikely to be primarily driven by diﬀerences
in information. We check the robustness of our results to social interactions by including
business and municipality dummies, as well as the average log risky share and financial
wealth of other households in the municipality. We also consider the possibility of a
reverse causality between the risky share and financial wealth, i.e. the possibility that
risk-tolerant investors happened to have both a high risky share and high financial
wealth at the end of the bull market of the nineties. A twin with high financial wealth
in 1999 is found to have a high risky share in 2002, even if one controls for the 1999
risky share. These empirical regularities cannot be explained by constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA) utility or inertia alone, and strongly suggest that individual investors
exhibit decreasing relative risk aversion.
    Fifth, we verify that our results are not contaminated by individual fixed eﬀects
specific to each twin in a pair, such as diﬀerent levels of risk aversion. Since drinking
and smoking habits have been previously related to risk tolerance (e.g. Barsky Juster
Kimball and Shapiro 1997), one strategy is to expand the twin regressions by including
physiological and lifestyle variables on each twin. Another strategy is to dynamically
estimate the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share by following households over
time, excluding twin pair fixed eﬀects from consideration; specifically, we correct for in-
ertia in portfolio rebalancing by running the instrumental variable regression of changes
in a household’s log risky share on changes in its log financial wealth. With either
method, the elasticity has an average of about 22% and decreases with financial wealth,
which suggests that the twin diﬀerence regressions are not severely contaminated by
individual fixed eﬀects.
    Sixth, we use our micro estimates to compute how the aggregate demand for risky
assets responds to exogenous changes in the distribution of financial wealth. When finan-
cial shocks are concentrated on low and medium wealth households, their incremental
demand for risky assets is substantial because their risky shares, which are initially
low, are highly elastic. In proportional terms, aggregate risky wealth grows almost as
quickly as aggregate financial wealth. When instead the wealth shocks are concentrated
on the richest households, which have low elasticities and high initial risky shares, ag-


                                             3
gregate risky wealth grows only slightly faster than aggregate financial wealth. Overall,
the elasticity of the aggregate demand for risky assets to a homogenous wealth shock
is estimated to be slightly above unity. Thus, the negative relation between financial
wealth and the elasticity of the risky share at the micro level implies that the aggregate
demand for risky assets is close to, but does not coincide with, the demand of a CRRA
representative investor.
    Finally, we investigate the decision to participate in risky asset markets. The prob-
ability that a household owns risky assets is found to increase with financial wealth
and human capital, and to decrease with measures of habit, leverage, and income risk.
Education and household size, which are significant in the pooled regression, are insignif-
icant when we control for twin pair fixed eﬀects. We use these results to recompute the
aggregate elasticity of the risky share to exogenous wealth changes when entry to or
exit from risky asset markets is taken into account.
    Twin comparisons are a true and tried method for disentangling family fixed eﬀects
from individual characteristics. In labor economics, they have been frequently applied to
disentangle the relative eﬀect of education and ability on earnings.4 A similar approach
seems fruitful for household finance. In recent studies, Barnea, Cronqvist and Siegel
(2010) and Cesarini et al. (2009a, 2009b) compare the choices of identical and fraternal
twins and show that risk aversion is in part an inherited trait. Their findings suggest
that the results reported in the present paper control, at least partially, for diﬀerences
in risk aversion. More generally, data on siblings can be useful in household finance, as
exemplified by the recent work of Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (2009) on the
positive link between IQ and stockmarket participation.
    The dynamic estimates reported in this paper complement several recent empirical
studies. Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) and Chiappori and Paiella (2008) run ordinary
least squares (OLS) regressions of changes in a household’s risky share on changes in its
financial wealth and other controls, and find no evidence of a link between wealth and
risk-taking. Brunnermeier and Nagel reach the same conclusion when they control for
measurement error and inertia by instrumenting financial wealth with income growth
and inheritance receipts. CCS (2009a) replicate the OLS results of Brunnermeier and
Nagel and Chiappori and Paiella. They also consider a diﬀerent set of instruments,
derived from the returns on the assets held by a household at the beginning of a period,
and instead find evidence of a positive relation between financial wealth and the risky
share. While CCS (2009a) estimate an adjustment model of portfolio rebalancing, the
   4
    See for instance Ashenfelter and Krueger (1994), Ashenfelter and Rouse (1998), Behrman and
Rosenzweig (2002), Behrman and Taubman (1989), Bronars and Grogger (1994), and Taubman (1976).
Another influential line of research considers instead adoptees, as in the work of Björklund, Lindahl,
and Plug (2006), Björklund, Jäntti, and Solon (2007), Plug and Vijverberg (2003), and Sacerdote (2002,
2007). Other contributions on the interplay between genetics and economics include Guiso, Sapienza,
and Zingales (2009) and Murray (2002).


                                                  4
dynamic section of this paper focuses on a slightly more parsimonious, reduced-form
specification.
    The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the Swedish dataset.
In Section 3, we report cross-sectional and twin regressions of the risky share on finan-
cial wealth and other characteristics. In Section 4, we estimate how the financial wealth
elasticity of the risky share varies with financial wealth itself as well as with other vari-
ables. Section 5 investigates the impact of measurement error, lagged financial wealth,
and health and lifestyle variables. We also dynamically estimate the elasticity of the
risky share in a broad panel of households. In Section 6, we investigate the participation
decision in the presence of twin pair fixed eﬀects, and compute the aggregate finan-
cial wealth elasticity of the risky share. Section 7 concludes. An Appendix, available
online (Calvet and Sodini 2010), presents details of data construction and estimation
methodology.

2. The Swedish Dataset

Swedish Twin Registry. The Swedish Twin Registry (STR) was founded to study the
impact of smoking and alcohol consumption on the health of Swedish residents. It
consists of two surveys: SALT for twins born between 1886 and 1958, and STAGE for
twins born between 1959 and 1990. The SALT survey was conducted between March
1998 and March 2002, and STAGE between May 2005 and March 2006. Response rates
for those eligible (still alive and living in Sweden) were 65% for the 1886-1925 cohort,
74% for the 1926-1958 cohort, and 59.6% for the 1959-1990 cohort.
    For each twin pair, we observe zygosity (fraternal or identical),5 and the intensity
of communication between the twins. We have also obtained for each twin in SALT a
set of physiological and lifestyle variables: weight, height, blood pressure, self-assessed
physical health, mental health, and smoking, alcohol and coﬀee habits. We refer the
reader to Lichtenstein et al. (2006) and Pedersen et al. (2002) for detailed descriptions
of the Swedish Twin Registry.

Swedish Wealth Registry. The Swedish Twin Registry allows us to identify twin pairs
in the Swedish Wealth Registry, which we have used in earlier work (CCS 2007, 2009a,
2009b). Statistics Sweden has a parliamentary mandate to collect highly detailed infor-
mation on the household finances of all Swedish residents. The information available on
each resident in the Swedish Wealth Registry can be grouped into three main categories:
demographic characteristics, income, and disaggregated wealth.
  5
    Zygosity is determined by DNA markers or, when not available, by responses to the question:
“During your childhood, were you and your twin partner alike as two peas in a pod or not more alike
than siblings in general?”. The answer to this question has been shown to be consistent with DNA
evidence in 99% of pairs.


                                                5
    Demographic information includes age, gender, marital status, nationality, birth-
place, education, municipality, as well as household composition and an identification
number.6 All tax returns are filed individually in Sweden since the tax code does not
allow the possibility of joint filing. However, the household identification number allows
us to group residents by living units and thus investigate finances at the family level.
The education variables include high school and post-high school dummies for every
household member.
    The income data comprises disposable income, as well as income reported by indi-
vidual source. For capital income, the database reports the interest or dividend that
has been earned on each bank account or each security. For labor income, the database
reports gross labor income and business sector. The household head is defined as the
individual with the highest income.
    The Swedish Wealth Registry contains highly disaggregated information on house-
hold wealth. We observe the worldwide assets owned by each resident on December
31 of each year, including bank accounts, mutual funds and stocks. The information is
provided for each individual account or each security. The database also records contri-
butions made during the year to private pension savings, as well as debt outstanding at
year end and interest paid during the year.
    We have merged the Swedish Twin Registry with the Swedish Wealth Registry.
Because financial theory suggests that investment decisions should be studied at the
household level, the results presented in this paper are based on households with an
adult twin during the 1999-2002 period. In unreported work, we have verified that our
main results are qualitatively similar when we only consider twins living alone.
    Throughout the paper, we group households with an adult twin into pairs, and
conduct our investigation on the set of pairs where all characteristics are available. We
impose no constraint on the risky asset market participation status of these households,
but require that both households in a pair satisfy the following financial requirements
at the end of each year. First, disposable income must be at least 1,000 Swedish kronor
($113) each year. Second, the value of all financial assets must be no smaller than 3,000
kronor ($339). Third, the highest earner in the household must be at least 25 years old.

3. What Drives the Risky Share?

In this section, we analyze the determinants of risk-taking in household portfolios. We
describe the main predicting variables, report cross-sectional evidence with time fixed
eﬀects, and then estimate regressions that also control for twin pair fixed eﬀects.
   6
    In order to protect privacy, Statistics Sweden provided us with a scrambled version of the household
identification number.




                                                   6
3.1. Definitions and Construction of Variables

We will use the following definitions throughout the paper. Cash consists of bank ac-
count balances and money market funds. Risky financial assets include directly held
stocks and risky mutual funds. For every household h, the risky portfolio is defined as the
portfolio of risky financial assets. We measure financial wealth Fh,t as the sum of hold-
ings in cash, risky financial assets, capital insurance products, and directly held bonds,
excluding from consideration illiquid assets such as real estate or consumer durables,
and defined contribution retirement accounts. Also, our measure of wealth Fh,t is gross
financial wealth and does not subtract mortgage or other household debt.
    The risky share wh,t at date t is the weight of risky assets in the household’s portfolio
of cash and risky financial assets. A participant is a household with a positive risky
share. In the rest of this section and in Sections 4 and 5, we examine the determinants
of the risky share in the portfolios held by participants. The participation decision is
investigated in Section 6.
    The financial wealth elasticity of the risky share is defined as:

                                               d ln(wh,t )
                                     η h,t =               ,                           (3.1)
                                                  dfh,t

where fh,t = ln(Fh,t ) denotes the household’s log financial wealth. Portfolio choice the-
ory suggests that the elasticity ηh,t is zero if the household has isoelastic utility and
there are no market frictions. The elasticity η h,t can be positive, however, if the house-
hold exhibits decreasing relative risk aversion or faces leverage constraints. Portfolio
characteristics, family composition, human capital, and habit formation can also im-
pact the risky share and its elasticity. We now summarize how we measure these eﬀects,
and refer the reader to the online appendix for more detailed descriptions.

Leverage. Risk-taking can be impacted by current borrowing, for instance through
a mortgage, and the likelihood of facing borrowing constraints in the future, as in the
portfolio choice models of Cvitanić and Karatzas (1992), Grossman and Vila (1992),
Paxson (1990), Teplá (2000), Cocco (2005), and Yao and Zhang (2005). We measure
these eﬀects by the leverage ratio, which is defined as a household’s total debt divided
by the sum of its financial and real estate wealth.

Portfolio Characteristics. A household’s risky share may be driven by the systematic
exposure of its risky portfolio to aggregate market risk. As in CCS (2007), we measure
systematic risk by computing the risky portfolio’s beta coeﬃcient relative to a global
equity index under an international version of the CAPM.
    A household with a diversified portfolio of risky securities may feel more confident
in stockmarket investing and therefore be more willing to invest a higher fraction of


                                                7
its financial wealth in risky assets. Diversification may also proxy for the household’s
sophistication (CCS 2009b) or self-assessment of its investment skills (CCS 2007), which
can in turn impact risk-taking. For this reason, we will include the ex-ante Sharpe ratio
of the risky portfolio in our set of explanatory variables.

Family Composition. Gender is known to aﬀect economic decision-making (e.g. Cro-
son and Gneezy 2008) and may impact the asset allocation of the risky portfolio. In
Sweden, each resident declares the fraction of the household’s assets that it owns, and
this information is available in the Swedish Wealth Registry. We define a gender index
of economic power within the household as the share of the household’s gross financial
and real estate wealth owned by adult men. The gender index ranges between zero and
one. It is close to unity if gross wealth is primarily controlled by men.

Human Capital. Future income can be viewed, at least partly, as a nontraded bond.
Households with substantial human capital may therefore tilt their financial portfo-
lios toward risky financial assets, as in the theoretical models of Bodie, Merton and
Samuelson (1992), Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005), and Wachter and Yogo (2009).
The risky share may also depend on the variance of labor income growth, and on the
correlation between the household’s income growth and its risky portfolio.
    We estimate the labor income specification used in Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout
(2005):
                           ln(Lh,t ) = ah + b0 xh,t + ν h,t + εh,t ,
where Lh,t denotes real income in year t, ah is a household fixed eﬀect, xh,t is a vector of
characteristics, ν h,t is an idiosyncratic permanent component, and εh,t is an idiosyncratic
temporary shock distributed as N (0, σ2ε,h ). The permanent component ν h,t follows the
random walk:
                                      ν h,t = ν h,t−1 + ξ h,t ,
where ξ h,t ∼ N (0, σ 2ξ,h ) is the shock to permanent income in period t. The Gaussian
innovations εh,t and ξ h,t are white noise and are uncorrelated with each other at all
leads and lags.
    We estimate the income process of each household by using its yearly series be-
tween 1993 and 2002. Let uh,t denote the diﬀerence between the income growth,
ln(Lh,t /Lh,t−1 ), and the fitted value, b0 (xh,t − xh,t−1 ). We also estimate the sample
correlation ρh between the income growth residual uh,t and the historical excess return
on the household’s risky portfolio in year t.
    Expected human capital is defined by:
                                  Th
                                  X                 Et (Lh,t+n )
                                        π h,t,t+n                ,
                                  n=0
                                                     (1 + r)n

                                                8
where Th denotes the diﬀerence between 100 and the age of household h at date t, and
π h,t,t+n denotes the probability that the household head h is alive at t + n conditional
on being alive at t. We make the simplifying assumption that no individual lives longer
than 100. The survival probability is estimated using the life table provided by Statistics
Sweden. The interest rate is set equal to r = 3% per year, and we have verified that
our results are strongly robust to alternative choices of r. We refer the reader to the
Appendix for a detailed discussion of the estimation of labor income and human capital.
     We use the following variables throughout the remainder of the paper: (a) expected
human capital expressed in year t prices; (b) the variance of the transitory component
of real income, σ2ε,h ; (c) the variance of the permanent component of real income, σ 2ξ,h ;
and (d) the correlation between income and the risky portfolio excess return, ρh .

Internal and External Habit. The risky share can be impacted by lagged values of
consumption, either by the household itself or by a peer group. For instance, a large
class of additive habit formation models imply that the optimal risky share is of the
form:                                   µ              ¶
                                     ∗       λh,t Xh,t
                             wh,t = wh,t 1 −             ,                      (3.2)
                                                Fh,t
         ∗ is the risky share of a CRRA investor, X
where wh,t                                            h,t is an internal or external habit,
and λh,t is the shadow value of the habit. In the internal habit model of Constantinides
(1990) and the external habit specification of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), λh,t Xh,t
represents the cost of supporting the habit over an infinite horizon.
    Equation (3.2) implies that households have a positive financial wealth elasticity
of the risky share. Let yh,t = λh,t Xh,t /Fh,t denote the present value of the cost of
maintaining the (internal or external) habit relative to financial wealth. The financial
wealth elasticity of the risky share,
                                       yh,t        λh,t Xh,t
                            ηh,t =            =                  ,                    (3.3)
                                     1 − yh,t   Fh,t − λh,t Xh,t

is arbitrarily large when financial wealth is close to the present value of the habit, and
declines to zero for large values of financial wealth.
    Since we do not observe individual consumption, we proxy the internal habit of
household h at date t by its average disposable income in years t − 2, t − 1 and t,
excluding private pension savings from consideration. Similarly, we proxy the external
habit by the three-year average household income in household h0 s municipality. The
twin sample has been excluded from the households sampled in each peer group.

   For the remainder of this paper, we investigate the determinants of the risky share
on the set of twin pairs in which both siblings participate in risky asset markets. In
Table 1, we report summary statistics for the set of participating twins, as well as

                                               9
for a random sample from the population of participating households. For the twin
sample, the education, entrepreneur and unemployment dummies refer to the twin in
the household, while all other characteristics are computed at the household level. To
facilitate international comparisons, we convert all financial quantities into U.S. dollars.
Specifically, the Swedish krona traded at $0.1127 at the end of 2002, and this fixed
conversion factor is used throughout the paper. A household in the twin sample selects on
average a slightly higher risky share, has slightly higher financial and real estate wealth,
is slightly more educated, has lower human capital, is more likely to be unemployed
and is less leveraged than the average Swedish household. Diﬀerences in the means
across the two samples are modest, except for the leverage ratio. The correlation of
characteristics within twin pairs is positive, and ranges from 0.001 for the Sharpe ratio
to 0.484 for human capital.
    In the Appendix, we report summary statistics for the risky share and the char-
acteristics of identical and fraternal twins. Pairwise correlations are generally higher
for identical twins than for fraternal twins, which suggests that these variables have a
genetic component. We also report the results of an ACE decomposition, an additive
model of genetic eﬀects that has been widely employed in medicine and is now starting
to be used in household finance (e.g. Barnea, Cronqvist and Siegel 2010; Cesarini et
al. 2009a, 2009b). ACE provides a decomposition of the cross-sectional variance of a
characteristic into a genetic component, a common component, and an idiosyncratic
component, which is conveniently estimated from the pairwise correlations of identical
and fraternal twins. We verify that the risky share, financial wealth and most charac-
teristics have a substantial genetic component according to ACE.

3.2. Cross-Sectional Evidence
In household finance, it is common to consider pooled cross-sections of the risky share:

                           ln(wh,t ) = δ t + ηfh,t + γ 0 xh,t + εh,t ,                (3.4)

where δ t is a time fixed eﬀect, fh,t is the log financial wealth, and xh,t is a vector of
characteristics. We now examine the evidence on a pooled cross-section of Swedish
households.

Financial and Portfolio Characteristics. In the first two columns of Table 2, we
regress the log risky share on log financial wealth and yearly fixed eﬀects. The financial
wealth coeﬃcient η is highly significantly positive and estimated at 0.212. The pooled
regression has an R2 coeﬃcient of 9.7%. In unreported work, we have found that R2
is only 1.6% when financial wealth is excluded from the pooled regression with yearly
dummies. Financial wealth therefore explains most of the predicted variation in the
risky share.

                                               10
    In the next two columns, we include additional financial variables and demographic
characteristics. The financial wealth coeﬃcient η increases slightly to 0.223. Real estate
wealth, which represents a large fraction of the overall wealth of most households, is neg-
atively related to the risky share in the cross-section. The real estate wealth coeﬃcient
is estimated at −0.005, which is much smaller than the financial wealth coeﬃcient, but
is strongly significant. These results are consistent with Cocco (2005), who documents
that homeowners tend to select lower levels of financial risk in the 1989 wave of the U.S.
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). This empirical regularity could be explained
by the risk of real estate investments, as in the portfolio choice models of Cocco (2005),
Flavin and Yamashita (2002), and Yao and Zhang (2005), or by a household fixed eﬀect.
    Households with high leverage ratios tend to select conservative portfolios, consistent
with previous empirical evidence (e.g. Guiso, Jappelli, and Terlizzese 1996). A high
level of debt in kronor, however, is associated with a higher risky share. Households
with high nominal debt might have more experience of financial markets or might be
more risk-tolerant, which would explain why they choose leveraged positions in risky
assets. Like debt, private pension investing is positively related to the risky share and
may be a proxy for financial experience and literacy.
    The risky portfolio’s Sharpe ratio has a positive coeﬃcient, while beta has a negative
coeﬃcient. Both estimates are strongly significant. In a cross-section, households holding
diversified portfolios with low systematic exposure also tend to select high risky shares.

Demographic Characteristics. The level of education has a positive cross-sectional
relation with the risky share. One possibility is that education has a direct impact
on risk-taking. Another is that education proxies for latent traits such as ability and
upbringing that are also associated with higher risk-taking.
    Larger households take less financial risk, consistent with the substantial background
risk caused by the random needs of the members of a large family. A complementary
interpretation is that larger households behave like poorer households of smaller size, as
in consumption models based on household equivalence scales (e.g. Calvet and Comon
2003; Deaton, 1974; Jorgenson and Slesnick 1987; Lewbel and Pendakur 2008; Prais
and Houthakker 1955).
    Households in which men control a large share of financial wealth have a slight ten-
dency to select a lower risky share. In unreported work, we obtain that male-dominated
households invest a higher share of their risky portfolios directly in stocks. These results
are in line with the evidence that gender diﬀerences in risk taking vary with the gamble
payoﬀ structure and the type of task (e.g. Croson and Gneezy 2008, Feng and Seasholes
2007, Haliassos and Bertaut 1995).

Human Capital, Income Risk and Habit. In the third set of columns, we add
human capital and measures of habit to the set of predictors. Expected human capital

                                            11
has a positive but insignificant coeﬃcient. Income risk, on the other hand, is negatively
related to financial risk-taking, as captured by the negative coeﬃcients on the variance
of the permanent and transitory components of income. Entrepreneurs tend to invest
less aggressively than the rest of the population. A high correlation between income
innovation and the household’s risky portfolio return is associated with a high risky
share. These results confirm the findings of Palia, Qi and Wu (2009) and Vissing-
Jørgensen (2002b) on income risk, Heaton and Lucas (2000) on entrepreneurship, and
Massa and Simonov (2006) on the correlation of labor income and portfolio return.
    The measures of internal and external habit are both negatively related to the risky
share, as theory predicts, but with diﬀerent significance levels. Internal habit is strongly
significant: households with higher average income (a proxy for own consumption habit)
are less prone to financial risk. Lupton (2002) obtained a similar result on US con-
sumption data. The external habit coeﬃcient is insignificant, suggesting that income
diﬀerences across Swedish municipalities provide only limited explanations of the risky
share. Our cross-sectional evidence is based on a short history and should be interpreted
with caution. External habit-formation models are primarily used to explain time series
variations in asset returns and risk premia, not the cross-section of the risky share. Fur-
thermore, given that we proxy habit with average income, the internal habit coeﬃcient
may be due to cash on hand eﬀects, as in Haliassos and Bertaut (1995) and Haliassos
and Michaelides (2002).

Municipality and Business Dummies. In the last set of columns of Table 2, we
include dummies for the household’s municipality and the household head’s industry.
These variables may matter because households in diﬀerent municipalities and business
sectors may have access to diﬀerent information or have diﬀerent expectations about
future economic conditions and stock market performance. The previously reported
coeﬃcients are almost unchanged when we control for these eﬀects.


    Overall, Table 2 confirms earlier empirical findings. As in Carroll (2002), the risky
share is substantially larger for households with higher financial wealth, which is by far
the most significant regressor. While earlier research is typically based on fragmentary
data, the Swedish dataset allows us to simultaneously measure the relation between
the risky share and a large number of household characteristics. To the best of our
knowledge, this paper is the first to combine human capital, leverage, and habit into a
single regression. In addition, we consider portfolio characteristics and document that in
a cross-section, the risky share is positively related to the risky portfolio’s Sharpe ratio
and negatively related to its systematic risk. The inclusion of portfolio characteristics,
however, does not impact the cross-sectional relation between the risky share and other
financial and demographic variables.

                                            12
    While compelling, these results are diﬃcult to interpret because financial wealth and
household characteristics play a dual role in the pooled cross sectional regressions (3.4).
On the one hand, the regressors may have a direct impact on risk-taking, as financial
theory would predict. On the other hand, household characteristics can be viewed as
proxies for a latent fixed eﬀect. One might consider resolving these issues by including
a household fixed eﬀect in (3.4). This is diﬃcult to do in practice, however, because
important variables such as gender and education are either constant or very persistent,
and therefore diﬃcult to distinguish from a fixed eﬀect. Even when there is suﬃcient
variation, one must control for endogeneity and inertia, as will be explained in Section
5.4. The Swedish twin dataset oﬀers the possibility of an alternative estimation strategy,
which we now explain.

3.3. Twin Regressions
We assume that for every twin pair i, the risky share of twin j 0 s household, j ∈ {1, 2},
can be expressed as:

                      ln(wi,1,t ) = αi,t + ηfi,1,t + γ 0 xi,1,t + εi,1,t ,            (3.5)
                                                              0
                      ln(wi,2,t ) = αi,t + ηfi,2,t + γ xi,2,t + εi,2,t .

The intercept αi,t is a fixed eﬀect specific to twin pair i in year t. It captures the
common impact of time, stock market performance, genes, shared background, common
upbringing, and expected inheritance, among others, on the twin’s risky shares. The
elasticity η is assumed to be the same for all households and can therefore be viewed as
the average elasticity in the population. In Section 4, we will consider a more flexible
specification in which the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share can vary across
pairs.
    Specification (3.5) can be estimated using standard panel techniques. Equivalently,
we can diﬀerence the two equations and estimate by least squares:

                      ∆j ln(wi,j,t ) = η∆j (fi,j,t ) + γ 0 ∆j (xi,j,t ) + εi,t ,      (3.6)

where ∆j (yi,j,t ) = yi,2,t − yi,1,t denotes the twin diﬀerence of a variable y, and εi,t =
εi,2,t − εi,1,t . The two methods provide nearly identical estimates and t−statistics of η
and γ, but diﬀerent R2 coeﬃcients. We will see that twin diﬀerence regressions (3.6)
have substantially lower R2 coeﬃcients than the regressions in levels (3.5), as one would
expect if pair fixed eﬀects are important.
     The contribution of the pair fixed eﬀect to the cross-sectional variance of the risky
share is given by:
                                               V ar(αi,t )
                                      ω 2α =                  .
                                             V ar(ln wi,j,t )

                                                 13
Since the residuals ui,j,t = ln(wi,j,t )−ηfi,j,t −γ 0 xi,j,t satisfy Cov(ui,1,t ; ui,2,t ) = V ar(αi,t ),
we estimate the cross-sectional variance of the fixed eﬀect, V ar(αi,t ), by the pairwise
covariance of the regression residuals.
   We are also interested in comparing the relative eﬀects of the fixed eﬀect and house-
hold characteristics, and in measuring their correlation. The coeﬃcient of determination
can be decomposed as:
                         V ar(αi,t + ηfi,j,t + γ 0 xi,j,t )
                  ρ2 =                                      = ω 2α + ω 2c + 2ρc,α ω α ωc ,         (3.7)
                               V ar(ln wi,j,t )
where ω 2c = V ar(ηfi,j,t + γ 0 xi,j,t )/V ar(ln wi,j,t ) denotes the contribution of observable
characteristics, and ρc,α = Corr(αi,t ; ηfi,j,t +γ 0 xi,j,t ). Because the number of parameters
increases linearly with the number of pairs, ρ2 is consistently estimated by the adjusted
R2 of the panel regression in levels. We estimate ω 2c by taking the ratio of the sample
variances of ηfi,j,t + γ 0 xi,j,t and ln wi,j,t , and infer from (3.7) an estimate of the corre-
lation ρc,α between the fixed eﬀect and the predictor of the risky share computed from
characteristics.
    In the first two columns of Table 3, we regress the risky share on financial wealth
and yearly twin pair fixed eﬀects. Financial wealth has a strong positive coeﬃcient, and
the estimated elasticity η is now 0.196, as compared to 0.212 in the pooled regression
reported in Table 2. The elasticity of the risky share with respect to financial wealth is
estimated at 0.212 when we include financial and demographic characteristics (second
set of columns), 0.220 when we add human capital, income risk and habit measures
(third set), and 0.217 when we also include municipality and industry dummies (last
set of columns). These estimates are remarkably stable and confirm the cross-sectional
findings that the average financial wealth elasticity of the risky share is strictly positive
and close to 0.22.
    The twin regressions confirm that households with real estate holdings, leverage,
large family size, a risky portfolio with high systematic exposure, or a high habit,
tend to invest conservatively. Diversification and proxies for financial experience and
sophistication are positively related to the risky share, while expected human capital is
insignificant. The positive Sharpe ratio coeﬃcient confirms the explanation proposed in
CCS (2007, 2009b) that households are more prone to purchase risky assets when they
are more competent about stockmarket investing.
    One interesting diﬀerence between the pooled and twin regressions is that the educa-
tion level and income risk are significantly related to the risky share in the cross-section,
but are insignificant in the twin regression. These results indicate that education and in-
come risk proxy for a fixed eﬀect in traditional cross-sectional regressions. For instance,
education could capture the impact of ability and upbringing, while income risk could
be correlated with risk tolerance. Able, risk-tolerant individuals may have a propen-
sity to choose both aggressive financial portfolios and risky and skilled professions, but

                                                    14
the panel regressions indicate that income risk and education have no direct bearing
on the risky share. One caveat is that we do not control for the field of study. In a
recent dynamic panel investigation, Christiansen, Joensen and Rangvid (2008) provide
evidence that conditional on risky asset market participation, no field of study at the
university level seems to have a causal impact on the risky share. Our results confirm
that the causal relation between education and the risky share is either weak or diﬃcult
to measure.
     Yearly twin pair fixed eﬀects and financial wealth explain most of the predicted
variation in the risky share. The adjusted R2 coeﬃcient of the panel regression (3.5),
which equals 9.7% in the pooled cross-section of the risky share on financial wealth,
increases to 18.0% in the presence of yearly twin pair fixed eﬀects, and to 23.0% when
all other characteristics are included as explanatory variables.
     These results can be readily interpreted by estimating the decomposition (3.7) of the
adjusted R2 . When financial wealth is the only explanatory variable (first set of column
of Table 3), yearly twin pair fixed eﬀects and financial wealth account, respectively, for
ω 2α = 9.6% and ω 2c = 6.9% of the variance of the risky share; the correlation between
financial wealth and the fixed eﬀect, ρc,α , is correspondingly equal to 8.5%. We obtain
almost identical estimates of ω2α , ω2c , and ρc,α in the presence of demographic character-
istics, human capital, income risk, and habit variables (second and third set of column
of Table 3). When municipality and business dummies are included as well, the share
of the fixed eﬀects ω 2α increases to 12.1%, and the share ω 2c to 15.7%, with an implied
correlation ρc,α = −17.4% (last set of columns of Table 3). In all specifications, twin
pair fixed eﬀects therefore explain a substantial fraction of the observed variation of the
risky share. We refer the reader to the Appendix for the comprehensive set of results.
     Our estimates of the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share can be readily
interpreted in the context of habit formation models. Since the average elasticity is
η ≈ 0.2, we infer from (3.3) that the present value of maintaining the (internal or
external) habit relative to financial wealth is approximately η/(1 + η) ≈ 1/6. If the
habit is internal, Table 1 indicates that that its proxy, the three-year average value
of disposable income, is about two thirds of financial wealth. The present value of
maintaining the internal habit over an infinite horizon therefore represents about one
sixth of financial wealth and one quarter of disposable income.
     We conduct a number of robustness checks in the Appendix, which we summarize
below.

Identical vs. Fraternal Twins. The measured variance of the risky share within pairs
is substantially smaller for identical twins than for fraternal twins. We reestimate the
yearly twin pair regressions separately on both groups and report that characteristics
capture a higher fraction of the observed variation of the risky share for identical twins.


                                            15
For instance, the adjusted R2 coeﬃcients are 31.6% and 21.8%, respectively, for identical
and fraternal twins, as compared to 23.0% in Table 3.7 The contribution of the fixed
eﬀect is also more than twice as high for identical twins (ω 2α = 16.0%) as for fraternal
twins (ω 2α = 7.2%). These findings confirm the intuition that the twin pair fixed eﬀect
has a genetic component.
    The financial wealth elasticity of the risky share is estimated at 0.18 for identical
twins and 0.20 for fraternal twins when financial wealth is the only observable charac-
teristic, and and at 0.17 and 0.23, respectively, in the presence of all characteristics.
Thus, the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share is close to 0.2 in both groups,
and remains strongly significant despite the smaller size of each subsample.

Random Matching. We verify that the measured pair fixed eﬀects are not spurious
by reestimating the regressions on a panel of randomly matched pairs. The coeﬃcients
of all characteristics in the diﬀerence regressions with random pairs are very similar to
the ones obtained from pooled cross-sections. In particular, income risk and education
remain significant. The adjusted R2 declines to 16.8%, compared to 23.0% with actual
twin pairs. The share of the cross-sectional variance explained by the pseudo twin pair
fixed eﬀect, ω2α , ranges between 2% and 4% across specifications. These estimates of ω 2α
are of the same order as the contribution of yearly fixed eﬀects and are substantially
smaller than the values obtained with properly matched twins. These findings confirm
the empirical importance of yearly twin pair fixed eﬀects in our actual dataset.

Age. It is sometimes suggested that genetic eﬀects matter less with age. In the Ap-
pendix, we classify twin pairs by age and reestimate the twin regressions in each group.
The financial wealth elasticity of the risky share remains significantly positive and close
to 0.22 for all groups, and we cannot reject that the null hypothesis that the elasticity
is constant with age. The eﬀect of other characteristics is generally robust, but tends to
be less significant due to the smaller size of the groups. Leverage, family size and habit
have a negative impact on the risky share. The correlation between the income growth
innovation and the risky portfolio return, ρh , is positively related to risk-taking in two
age groups (35 − 45 and above 55) and insignificant in the other two (less than 25 and
45 − 55). Furthermore, the correlation eﬀect is strongly significant only for the oldest
group.

Frequency of Communication Between Twins. The insignificant education coef-
ficients in Table 3 can be interpreted as evidence that education cannot explain risk-
taking, or alternatively that twins communicate frequently enough to overcome the
   7
    The pooled cross sectional regressions have adjusted R2 of 16.97% and 16.16% for monozygotic and
dizygotic twins, respectively.



                                                16
impact of education diﬀerences. In the Appendix, we separately reestimate our regres-
sions on the set of twins who communicate often with each other and the set of twins
who communicate rarely. The regression coeﬃcients reported for each group are very
similar to the ones reported in Table 3. The adjusted R2 is twice as high for twins with
infrequent contacts as for twins with frequent contacts, suggesting that communication
tends to reduce diﬀerences in risk-taking.

Social Interactions. We have so far focused on the impact of individual preferences
and characteristics on individual choices, and have devoted only limited attention to
the influence of social interactions. Because investors may imitate the asset allocation
of their neighbors, we have included municipality and business dummies in the last
column of Tables 2 and 3. These variables do not impact the regression coeﬃcients of
other characteristics.
    In the Appendix, we report that the standard deviation of the risky share (in logs
or in levels) within Swedish municipalities is at least five times larger than the standard
deviation of the average risky share between municipalities. Thus, local interactions do
not appear to be the main drivers of risk-taking.
    We reestimate the twin diﬀerence regressions by including as controls the average
log risky share and the average log financial wealth of households in the same mu-
nicipality, while keeping municipality fixed eﬀects as controls. The financial wealth
elasticity is again estimated at 0.22, and the other results of Table 3 remain unchanged.
The municipality log risky share has a positive and significant coeﬃcient of about 0.76,
which suggests that a household’s risky share is influenced by households in the same
geographical area. This result should be taken with caution, however, since the econo-
metric analysis of social interactions is fraught with diﬃculties (e.g. Manski, 2000). We
leave for further research the full investigation of this topic.
    Our findings on communication and social interactions complement earlier research
on the link between information and risk-taking (e.g. Guiso and Jappelli 2006; Peress
2004). We document that while social interactions and information asymmetries seem
to play a substantial role, they do not significantly aﬀect the positive relation between
financial wealth and the risky share.

    In the above analysis, we have not controlled for individual fixed eﬀects that are
specific to each twin and impact the risky share in addition to the pair fixed eﬀect. We
will provide a detailed treatment of this issue in Section 5.

4. What Drives the Financial Wealth Elasticity of the Risky Share?

Economic theory suggests that the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share can
vary with wealth and other household characteristics. For this reason, we consider the

                                            17
extended specification:

                            ∆j ln(wi,j,t ) = η i,t ∆j (fi,j,t ) + γ 0 ∆j (xi,j,t ) + εi,t ,                       (4.1)

where ηi,t is specific to the pair and may be a function of its characteristics.8
     In Table 4, we classify twin pairs into quartiles of the average log financial wealth
fi,t = (fi,1,t + fi,2,t )/2, and estimate the elasticity of the risky share in each bin. We
include no other characteristic in the first set of columns. The measured elasticity is
0.29 in the first financial wealth quartile, 0.22 in the second quartile, 0.15 in the third
quartile, and 0.10 in the fourth quartile. The elasticity η i,t is therefore a decreasing
function of financial wealth fi,t . In the second set of columns of Table 4, we also include
all the other characteristics as controls. The elasticity increases slightly in each quartile
compared to the previous specification, and remains a strongly decreasing function of
financial wealth.
     We next assume that the elasticity is a linear function of log financial wealth and
other characteristics:
                                    η i,t = η 0 + η 1 fi,t + ψ 0 xi,t ,
where xi,t denotes the average vector of characteristics in pair i. The variables fi,t and
xi,t are demeaned year by year. This specification implies:

                ∆j ln(wi,j,t ) = (η 0 + η 1 fi,t + ψ 0 xi,t )∆j (fi,j,t ) + γ 0 ∆j (xi,j,t ) + εi,t ,             (4.2)

which can be conveniently estimated.
    In a habit formation model, the elasticity increases with habit and decreases with
financial wealth, as can be seen from (3.3). In the first set of columns of Table 5, we
estimate a version of (4.2) in which the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share is
driven only by log financial wealth and log internal habit. We focus on the internal habit
because our measure of external habit is noisy and less significant in previous tables.
Consistent with theory, the elasticity is a decreasing function of financial wealth and
an increasing function of habit. The first result is consistent with the bin regressions in
Table 4, while the second result is new.
    We interpret the regression coeﬃcients by loglinearizing (3.3) around ln(yh,t ) :
                      ¡            ¢     h                     i    h                     i
      η h,t ≈ η̄ − η 1 fh,t − f¯h,t + η 1 ln(Xh,t ) − ln(Xh,t ) + η1 ln(λh,t ) − ln(λh,t ) ,

where η 1 = η̄ 2 /eln(yh,t ) . Since η̄ ≈ 0.2, we infer that η1 ≈ 0.24. In regression (1) of Table
5, we have estimated that the coeﬃcient of financial wealth and habit are −0.09 and 0.13,
   8
    Equation (4.1) is a direct implication of the specification ln(wi,j,t ) = αi,t + η i,t fi,j,t + γ 0 xi,j,t + εi,j,t .
Ashenfelter and Rouse (1998) consider a similar approach to modeling heterogeneity in the context of
labor economics.


                                                          18
respectively. These estimates are approximately the negative of each other, and their
magnitudes are about half of the predicted theoretical values. Our analysis represents of
course a rough assessment of habit formation, since our measures of habit and financial
wealth are contaminated by measurement error and we have ignored nonlinearities in
financial wealth and other characteristics.
    In the second set of columns of Table 5, we allow the elasticity to depend on the full
set of demographic and financial characteristics. The elasticity decreases with financial
wealth and human capital, and increases with real estate wealth and leverage. Consis-
tent with the household equivalence scales literature, family size has a direct negative
impact on the risky share and a positive impact on its elasticity. Thus, large households
behave like poorer households of smaller size. It is noteworthy that human capital,
whose direct impact on the risky share is insignificant, becomes significant when it is
interacted with financial wealth. Conversely, the risky portfolio’s beta and Sharpe ratio,
which have a significant direct impact on the risky share, do not significantly aﬀect the
elasticity.
    In the Appendix, we investigate the relation between the elasticity η i,t and the
propensity to take risk. We reestimate the twin diﬀerence regression when the set
of explanatory variables of ηi,t includes the twin pair fixed eﬀect αi,t obtained from
the regression reported in Table 5. The coeﬃcient of αi,t is negative and significant:
households with a high propensity to take risk tend to have a small financial wealth
elasticity of the risky share.
    This analysis shows that there is substantial heterogeneity in the financial wealth
elasticity of the risky share, which tends to strongly decrease with financial wealth
itself. We investigate in the next section the robustness of these results to alternative
specifications, and derive in Section 6 their implications for the aggregate demand for
risky assets.

5. Robustness Checks

5.1. Measurement Error

Financial wealth and the risky share are observed with measurement error, for instance
because of high-frequency variation in cash balances at the end of the year. For this
reason, we now consider the instrumental variable estimation of the twin specification
(3.5).
    We begin with some definitions. The passive risky return rh,t is the proportional
change in value of a household’s risky portfolio if the household does not trade risky
assets during the year. Log passive financial wealth is defined as:
                             p
                            fh,t = φ(Fh,t−1 , wh,t−1 , rh,t , rf,t ),


                                               19
where
                   φ(F, w, r, rf ) = ln {[w(1 + r) + (1 − w)(1 + rf )]F } .
In Table 6, we instrument log financial wealth with log passive financial wealth. In the
first set of columns, we estimate the average elasticity η at 0.29, which is slightly higher
than the values reported in earlier tables.
     In the second set of columns of Table 6, we estimate separate values of the elastic-
ity η in diﬀerent financial wealth quartiles. Consistent with Section 4, the measured
elasticity strongly decreases with financial wealth. The impact of other characteristics
is qualitatively unchanged, but internal habit now has a negative significant impact on
the risky share.
     In the Appendix, we consider the instrumental variable estimation of the linear
elasticity specifications (4.2). The internal habit coeﬃcient is measured to be larger and
more significant than in Table 5. Overall, we document the results of Sections 3 and 4
even more strongly when we control for measurement error in financial wealth.

5.2. Reverse Causality between the Risky Share and Financial Wealth
We have hitherto viewed the positive empirical cross-sectional correlation between fi-
nancial wealth and risk-taking as evidence that richer households tend to select a higher
risky share. An alternative interpretation is that at the end of the bull market of the
nineties, investors with high equity investments happened to have larger financial wealth
than other households. In an economy populated with CRRA investors, we would in-
deed observe a positive cross-sectional correlation between the risky share and financial
wealth after a prolonged period of positive excess stock returns.
    In order to distinguish between these two explanations, we define the passive risky
        p
share wh,t  as the risky share at the end of year t if the household does not trade during
the year. It is given by:

                      p                   wh,t−1 (1 + rh,t )
                     wh,t =                                               ,
                              wh,t−1 (1 + rh,t ) + (1 − wh,t−1 )(1 + rf )

where rh,t denotes the risky portfolio’s passive return defined in Section 5.1. The passive
                                                        p
change in the log risky share is the diﬀerence ln(wh,t    ) − ln(wh,t−1 ). These definitions
readily extend to periods of inactivity of n years.
    In Table 7, we report twin regressions of the log risky share in 2002 on the usual
characteristics and: (a) the log risky share in 1999; (b) the passive change in the log
risky share between 1999 and 2002; (c) log financial wealth in 1999; and (d) the passive
change in log financial wealth. The lagged risky share and the passive change both
have significantly positive coeﬃcients, which confirms that the propensity to take risk
is persistent and that there is inertia in portfolio rebalancing.


                                              20
    Lagged financial wealth has a positive and significant coeﬃcient: households with
larger financial wealth in 1999 have a higher risky share in 2002, even though we control
for the risky share at the end of 1999. This result is important because one would
not expect it to hold if investors have CRRA utilities, with or without inertia. In an
economy of heterogeneous CRRA investors, households with high risk tolerance would
both have high risky shares and high financial wealth at the end of the bull market of
the 1990’s, which would generate a positive cross-sectional correlation between financial
wealth and the risky share in 1999. Heterogeneity in risk tolerance cannot explain,
however, why the 2002 risky share is positively related to both 1999 financial wealth
and the 1999 risky share, as shown in Table 7.
    The measured positive relation between financial wealth and risk-taking is not me-
chanically implied by the bull market of the 1990’s. Instead, Table 7 strongly suggests
that individual investors exhibit both decreasing relative risk aversion and inertia.

5.3. Health and Lifestyle

Twin diﬀerence regressions may be contaminated by individual fixed eﬀects that are
specific to each twin in the pair, such as individual diﬀerences in risk aversion. Barsky
et al. (1997) show that risk aversion and asset allocation decisions are empirically related
to lifestyle variables such as smoking and drinking. In Table 8, we verify the robustness
of our results to individual fixed eﬀects by including data on the lifestyle and health
of each twin as controls. Because we have only obtained these variables for the SALT
survey, we reestimate the risky share regression on the subset of twins born between
1886 and 1958.
    The empirical regularities documented in Sections 3 and 4 are robust to the inclusion
of the health and lifestyle variables. The average financial wealth elasticity of the risky
share is again estimated at 0.21. The new control variables are mainly insignificant at the
5% level, which is partly due to the smaller number of observations. Alcohol drinking
is positively related to risk-taking at the 10% significance level. High blood pressure
and depression have a negative impact at higher significance levels. Coﬀee drinking,
tobacco, regular physical exercise, height, and weight have insignificant coeﬃcients.
Overall, these new regressions confirm the robustness of our elasticity estimates, and
show that risk-taking is positively related to alcohol consumption and negatively related
to depression and high blood pressure.

5.4. Dynamic Panel Estimation
We can also control for individual fixed eﬀects by relating time variations in a house-
hold’s risky share to time variations in its financial wealth (e.g. Brunnermeier and Nagel
2008; Chiappori and Paiella 2008; CCS 2009a). This method can naturally be applied


                                            21
to any sample of households, and not just to households with a twin.
    Given the specification ln(wh,t ) = δ 0,t + αh + ηfh,t + εh,t , we eliminate the household
fixed eﬀect by taking the first time-diﬀerence:

                            ∆t ln(wh,t ) = δ t + η∆t (fh,t ) + ∆t (εh,t ).                     (5.1)

As discussed in CCS (2009a), the estimation of (5.1) must control for two related prob-
lems. First, households display inertia in portfolio rebalancing. When a household saves
in the form of cash during the year and only partially rebalances its financial portfolio,
its risky share tends to fall mechanically. For this reason, we need to include variables
that capture passive variations in the risky share. Second, the regressor ∆t (fh,t ) and the
error term ∆t (εh,t ) are correlated in equation (5.1), since the innovation to the period
t − 1 risky share, εh,t−1 , has an impact on the following period’s financial wealth fh,t .
A natural solution is to instrument changes in financial wealth.
    In the first set of columns of Table 9, we estimate the specification:
                                                              p
                   ∆t ln(wh,t ) = δ t + η∆t (fh,t ) + ζ∆t ln(wh,t ) + ∆t (εh,t ).

We instrument changes in financial wealth, ∆t (fh,t ), and changes in the passive risky
               p
share, ∆t ln(wh,t ), with: (a) the change in financial wealth in the absence of period t − 1
                           p
rebalancing, φ(Fh,t−1 , wh,t−1  , rh,t , rf,t ) − fh,t−1 ;9 and (b) the period t − 1 log passive
                   p
risky share, ln(wh,t−1 ). In CCS (2009a), we followed a similar method to estimate an
adjustment model of portfolio rebalancing, in which the financial wealth elasticity of
the target risky share was assumed to be constant.
    The average elasticity of the risky share with respect to financial wealth is estimated
at 0.22 in the dynamic panel. This result is consistent with the twin diﬀerence regres-
sions of Section 3, and is also in line with the financial wealth elasticity of the target
risky share reported in CCS (2009a). The change in the log passive share has a signifi-
cant and positive coeﬃcient, which confirms that there is inertia in household portfolio
rebalancing.
    In the second set of columns, we let η vary across financial wealth quartiles. As in
the twin diﬀerence regressions, the wealth elasticity of the risky share strongly decreases
with financial wealth itself. In the third and fourth set of columns, we reestimate these
specifications in the presence of all controls. We use the level of these controls at the end
of year t − 1 in order to avoid endogeneity problems. The average elasticity of the risky
share slightly increases to 0.23, and the elasticity is once again a strongly decreasing
function of financial wealth.
    The dynamic panel and twin diﬀerence regressions are strongly complementary. The
dynamic method controls for household fixed eﬀects but requires valid instruments,
   9
    The instrument coincides with the passive log return on the portfolio of cash and risky financial
            p                         p
assets, ln[wh,t−1 (1 + rh,t ) + (1 − wh,t−1 )(1 + rf )].


                                                 22
which is a source of concern and can hamper applicability to a large class of explanatory
variables. Twin diﬀerence regressions, on the other hand, can be estimated by least
squares, and the results of this section suggest that they are not severely contaminated
by individual fixed eﬀects. Overall, the robustness checks reported in this section confirm
that the financial wealth elasticity of the risky share has a positive average and strongly
decreases with financial wealth among participants.

6. Participation and Aggregate Implications

In this section, we investigate the decision to participate in risky assets markets. We
then combine our micro findings to compute the response of the aggregate demand for
risky assets to changes in the wealth distribution.

6.1. Determinants of Risky Asset Market Participation

We begin by measuring the cross-sectional relation between risky asset market partic-
ipation, financial wealth, and other characteristics. In the first two sets of columns of
Table 10, we report the results of pooled logit regressions:

                            E(yh,t |xh,t ) = Λ(δ t + θfh,t + γ 0 xh,t ),               (6.1)

where yh,t equals unity if household h holds risky assets at the end of year t. In a cross-
section, richer households with high human capital and education are more likely to own
risky assets. Other experience of financial markets, as measured for instance by debt
or investments in the private pension system, is also positively related to participation.
Conversely, large households that have a high leverage ratio, a high external or internal
habit, or high income risk are less likely to own risky assets. These cross-sectional results
confirm earlier empirical findings (e.g. Bertaut and Starr-McCluer 2002; CCS 2007;
Guiso and Jappelli 2002; Vissing-Jørgensen 2002b). The reported negative correlation
between participation and internal and external habit measures are, to the best of our
knowledge, new to the literature.
    In the last two sets of columns of Table 10, we report the results of logit regressions
with yearly twin pair fixed eﬀects:

                         E(yi,j,t |xi,j,t ) = Λ(αi,t + θfi,j,t + γ 0 xi,j,t ).

Financial wealth, human capital, and proxies for financial experience all have strong
positive coeﬃcients, while leverage, income risk and external habit have negative co-
eﬃcients. Interestingly, some of these variables, such as external habit, have stronger
magnitudes than in the cross-sectional regression. Thus, some of the main theories of
financial market participation remain empirically valid when one controls for yearly twin

                                                 23
pair fixed eﬀects (e.g., Haliassos and Bertaut 1995; Heaton and Lucas 1999; Vissing-
Jørgensen 2002a; Calvet, Gonzalez-Eiras and Sodini, 2004).
    Education variables, internal habit, and household size, which are significant in the
pooled regression (6.1), become insignificant in the presence of yearly twin pair fixed
eﬀects. The general level of education seems to impact neither the risky share nor risky
asset market participation. One caveat is that in these regressions, we do not take into
account the field of training received by investors. Our results therefore complement
the work of Christiansen, Joensen and Rangvid (2008), who show on a dynamic panel
that getting an education in economics can have a causal impact on risky asset market
participation, while training in other fields does not.

6.2. Aggregate Implications

The micro findings on participation and the risky share reported in earlier sections
allow us to assess how exogenous changes in household financial wealth can impact the
aggregate demand for risky assets. We take security prices as fixed and neglect general
equilibrium eﬀects, local interactions, and habit changes. For simplicity, we remove time
indices in this section.
    At the end of a given year, each household h is characterized by its risky share
wh , log financial wealth fh = ln(Fh ), and other characteristics xh . We consider an
exogenous change in the cross-sectional distribution of financial wealth, which is specified
by the individual growth rates ∆fh . Each household h now has new financial wealth
Fh0 = Fh e∆fh and selects a new risky share wh0 , as we explain below.

Fixed Set of Participants. We focus for now on the set of households P that ini-
tially hold risky assets, and we do not consider participation changes. Let F denote the
                                                        P
aggregate financial wealth of participants, and FR = h∈P wh Fh the aggregate wealth
invested in risky assets. We define the elasticity of aggregate risky wealth as:

                                             ∆ ln(FR )
                                        ξ=             .
                                             ∆ ln(F )

Since asset prices are fixed, ξ is the elasticity of the aggregate demand for risky assets in
response to exogenous changes in household wealth. The elasticity ξ generally depends
on the households’ initial risky shares (wh )h∈P , initial levels of financial wealth (Fh )h∈P ,
growth rates (∆fh )h∈P , and elasticities (η h )h∈P .
    If the demand for risky assets is driven by a representative agent with constant
relative risk aversion (CRRA), the aggregate risky share FR /F remains constant and
the elasticity equals unity: ξ = 1. We view this case as an important benchmark.
    We also employ imputation methods based on the initial share wh of each household.



                                              24
After the wealth shock, the risky share is given by:

                               ln(wh0 ) = ln(wh ) + η h ∆fh .

We consider three possible choices for the elasticity:

   • ηh = 0 for all h, as is the case if households have CRRA utilities;

   • ηh = η > 0 for all h, that is, all households have the same positive elasticity (as
     in Section 3);

   • ηh = η(fh , xh ) is a function of the household’s financial wealth and characteristics
     (as in Section 4).

Under all three specifications, the aggregate risky wealth after the shock satisfies:
                                      X
                                FR0 =    wh Fh e(1+ηh )∆fh .                          (6.2)
                                      h∈P
            P
Since F 0 = h∈P Fh e∆fh , the aggregate elasticity ξ tends to be high when the wealth
increase is concentrated on households with high initial risky shares or high elasticities.
    The scenario η h = 0 implicitly assumes that households have heterogeneous risk
aversion coeﬃcients, which determine their initial risky share wh . By (6.2), the aggregate
elasticity ξ equals unity if all households have the same initial risky share, but can
otherwise be larger or smaller than unity. In the scenario η h = η > 0, the common
individual elasticity is obtained from the yearly twin diﬀerence regression of the risky
share on log financial wealth. In the last scenario, the elasticity η(fh , xh ) depends on
financial wealth and other characteristics. It is the most plausible specification given
the micro-level evidence reported in Section 4.
    In Figure 1, we consider twenty financial wealth quantiles, and report for each quan-
tile the aggregate elasticity corresponding to an exogenous wealth shock aﬀecting only
households in the quantile: ∆fh = g if h is in the quantile, and ∆fh = 0 otherwise. The
growth rate g is set equal to 10%, and all the results are reported for year 2001. In the
Appendix we verify that the results are qualitatively similar in other years. The yellow
line corresponds to the benchmark representative investor.
    When households have heterogeneous CRRA utilities (black line), the aggregate
elasticity increases monotonically with the quantile on which the wealth shock is con-
centrated. The mechanism is that richer households have higher risky shares. ξ is less
than 1 for low and medium quantiles and exceeds unity only for the very top quantiles.
    When households have an identical and strictly positive elasticity of the risky share
(blue line), the aggregate elasticity is again a monotonic function of the wealth quantile
on which the shock is concentrated. As one would expect, the aggregate elasticity ξ is

                                            25
uniformly higher than in the heterogeneous CRRA case. It reaches 1.4 when the wealth
shock impacts the richest households.
    The red line corresponds to our preferred micro specification. Poor investors have
a higher elasticity η(fh ; xh ) than average. As a result, ξ is higher and closer to unity
in low quantiles than under the CRRA and constant positive elasticity specifications.
Conversely, because the linear elasticity η(fh ; xh ) decreases with wealth, ξ is smaller and
closer to unity in higher wealth quantiles than under the constant elasticity method.
In top wealth quantiles, household elasticities are very close to zero, and the aggre-
gate elasticity ξ coincides almost exactly with the aggregate elasticity of heterogeneous
CRRA investors.
    We now consider the impact of a homogenous wealth shock: ∆(fh ) = g for all
h. When investors have CRRA utilities, ξ equals unity, as can be seen from (6.2).10
The aggregate elasticity is 1.22 when households have a constant η, and 1.07 when
households have a linear elasticity η(fh , xh ). The corresponding aggregate elasticity of
the risky share, ∆ ln(FR /F )/∆ ln(F ), is therefore 0 in the heterogeneous CRRA case,
22% in the identical η case, and 7% in the preferred case. Thus, the heterogeneous
elasticity specification is consistent with micro evidence, and generates an aggregate
demand for risky assets that can be approximately represented by, but does not exactly
coincide with, the demand of a CRRA representative investor.

Endogenous Participation. We next investigate participation eﬀects. The probability
that a household participates in risky asset markets is given by the yearly cross-sectional
logit model Λ(fh ; xh ). Let N denote the set of households that do not initially partic-
ipate. The probability that a household in N enters after the shock is 0 if ∆fh ≤ 0,
and
                                   Λ(fh + ∆fh ; xh ) − Λ(fh ; xh )
                             p0h =
                                          1 − Λ(fh ; xh )
otherwise. We impute the risky share wh0 = w(fh + ∆fh ; xh ) of an entering household
from the cross-sectional regression of the log risky share on characteristics reported in
Table 2. Conversely, a household in P remains a participant with probability:

                                p0h = min[1; Λ(fh + ∆fh ; xh )/Λ(fh ; xh )].
                                                 P                  P
Aggregate risky financial wealth is then FR0 = h∈N p0h wh0 Fh0 + h∈P p0h wh eηh gh Fh0 .
   In Figure 2, we illustrate the elasticity of aggregate risky wealth with respect to ag-
gregate financial wealth in the population of participating and nonparticipating house-
holds. By a slight abuse of notation, this new elasticity is also denoted by ξ. We consider
wealth shocks of 10% to each quantile of financial wealth in the population of households
with a twin. In bottom quantiles, participation is low and new entrants select small risky
 10                        S
      By (6.2), FR0 = eg   h   wh Fh = eg FR , and therefore ∆ ln(FR0 ) = ∆ ln(FR ).


                                                       26
shares, so ξ is close to zero for all imputation methods. With the linear elasticity method
(red line), the aggregate elasticity ξ remains close to unity on a range of intermediate
wealth quantiles. We verify that the contribution of new entrants is generally small
compared to changes in risky asset demand from preexisting participants.
    We now investigate the impact of a homogenous wealth shock: ∆(fh ) = g for all h.
When investors have CRRA utilities, the elasticity ξ is 1.02 in 2001, which is slightly
higher than the unit value in the fixed participation case. The aggregate elasticity es-
timates are 1.25 when households have a constant η, and 1.09 when households have a
linear elasticity. These values exceed only slightly the fixed participation estimates.
    Entry and exit generally imply that the aggregate elasticity ξ is not the same for
a positive or negative shock. The diﬀerence remains small in practice, however, as is
shown in the Appendix. The explanation is that participation turnover is limited and
has only a modest impact on the aggregate elasticity.

    Overall, this section illustrates the benefits of considering a risky share specification
in which the elasticity η(fh , xh ) decreases with financial wealth. First, this approach is
consistent with the micro evidence reported in Section 4. Second, the aggregate elasticity
is remarkably stable, whether one considers homogenous or concentrated shocks. The
aggregate demand for risky assets is close to, but does not exactly coincide with, the
demand of a representative agent with CRRA utility. It is an open question whether
the deviations from the CRRA representative agent benchmark are negligible or could
instead be used to provide support for alternative specifications, such as the aggregate
habit formation models of Constantinides (1990) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999).

7. Conclusion

The determinants of risk-taking have been the subject of an extensive literature in port-
folio choice theory and empirical household finance. In this paper, we have used a novel
empirical methodology, the comparison of the portfolios held by twins, to investigate
the risky share and its elasticity with respect to financial wealth. We have considered
an unprecedented set of control variables, including portfolio characteristics, real estate
wealth, debt, leverage, human capital, labor income risk, household size, age, and mea-
sures of internal and external habit. The average financial wealth elasticity of the risky
share is strongly significant and estimated at 22%.
    This paper confirms that the majority of the cross-sectional results obtained in
the earlier literature are robust to the inclusion of twin pair fixed eﬀects. The risky
share is positively related to diversification and financial experience, and negatively
related to leverage, entrepreneurship, the risky portfolio’s beta, household size and a
measure of habit. One interesting diﬀerence is that income risk and education, which


                                             27
are significantly related to the risky share in pooled cross sections, become insignificant
in the twin diﬀerence regressions.
     We document substantial heterogeneity in the financial wealth elasticity of the risky
share across households. The elasticity decreases with financial wealth and human
capital, is unaﬀected by education and diversification, and increases with leverage and
a measure of habit. The present value of maintaining the habit over an infinite horizon
represents 1/6 of financial wealth on average, and is higher for poorer households.
     Intuition suggests that twin pair fixed eﬀects control for factors such as genes, ability,
risk aversion, common upbringing, or expected inheritance. One might worry, however,
that twin diﬀerence regressions may be contaminated by fixed eﬀects that are specific
to each twin in the pair. We confirm our findings by regressing time variations of a
household’s log risky share on time variations of its log financial wealth. We verify
that our results are unchanged when we control for communication between twins and
lifestyle and physiological characteristics typically associated with risk-taking.
     Our results provide support for decreasing relative risk aversion, habit formation,
and a negative relation between financial wealth and the financial wealth elasticity of
the risky share at the micro level. We also consider exogenous shocks to the wealth
distribution, and show that the aggregate demand for risky assets behaves close to, but
does not coincide with, the aggregate demand of a representative investor with CRRA
utility. In further research, it would be interesting to examine if these deviations provide
support for alternative benchmarks, such as the aggregate habit formation models of
Constantinides (1990) and Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Our estimates also have
implications for consumption-based asset pricing. We leave these questions for further
research.




                                              28
References

 [1] Alessie, Rob, Stefan Hochguertel, and Arthur Van Soest, 2002, Household portfo-
     lios in the Netherlands, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds.
     Household Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

 [2] Ameriks, John, and Stephen Zeldes, 2004, How do household portfolio shares vary
     with age?, working paper, Columbia University.

 [3] Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan Krueger, 1994, Estimates of the economic return to
     schooling from a new sample of twins, American Economic Review 84(5), 1157—
     1173.

 [4] Ashenfelter, Orley, and Cecilia Rouse, 1998, Income, schooling, and ability: Evi-
     dence from a new sample of identical twins, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113,
     253-284.

 [5] Banks, James, and Sarah Tanner, 2002, Household portfolios in the United King-
     dom, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Portfo-
     lios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

 [6] Barnea, Amir, Henrik Cronqvist, and Stephan Siegel, 2010, Nature or nurture:
     What determines investor behavior?, working paper, Claremont McKenna College
     and University of Washington.

 [7] Barsky, Robert, Thomas Juster, Miles Kimball, and Matthew Shapiro, 1997, Pref-
     erence parameters and behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the
     Health and Retirement Study, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2), 537-579.

 [8] Behrman, Jere, and Mark Rosenzweig, 2002, Does increasing women’s schooling
     raise the schooling of the next generation?, American Economic Review 92(1),
     323-334.

 [9] Behrman, Jere, and Paul Taubman, 1989, Is schooling mostly in the genes? Nature-
     nurture decomposition using data on relatives, Journal of Political Economy, 97,
     1425-1446.

[10] Bertaut, Carol, and Martha Starr-McCluer, 2002, Household portfolios in the
     United States, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household
     Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[11] Björklund, Anders, Markus Jäntti, and Gary Solon, 2007, Nature and nurture in
     the intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status: Evidence from Swedish


                                          29
    children and their biological and rearing parents, B.E. Journal of Economic Analy-
    sis and Policy 7.

[12] Björklund, Anders, Mikael Lindahl, and Erik Plug, 2006, The origins of intergen-
     erational associations: Lessons from Swedish adoption data, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 121, 999-1028.

[13] Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William Samuelson, 1992, Labor supply flex-
     ibility and portfolio choice in a life cycle model, Journal of Economic Dynamics
     and Control 16, 427-49.

[14] Brennan, Michael, and Eduardo Schwartz, 1988, Time invariant portfolio insurance
     strategies, Journal of Finance 43, 283—299.

[15] Bronars, Stephen, and Jeﬀ Grogger, 1994, The economic consequences of unwed
     motherhood: Using twin births as a natural experiment, American Economic Re-
     view 84 (5), 1141-1156.

[16] Brunnermeier, Markus, and Stefan Nagel, 2008, Do wealth fluctuations generate
     time-varying risk aversion? Micro-evidence on individuals’ asset allocation, Amer-
     ican Economic Review 98 (3), 713-736.

[17] Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2007, Down or out:
     Assessing the welfare costs of household investment mistakes, Journal of Political
     Economy 115, 707-747.

[18] Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009a, Fight or flight?
     Portfolio rebalancing by individual investors, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,
     301-348.

[19] Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, 2009b, Measuring the
     financial sophistication of households, American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
     ceedings 99, 393—98.

[20] Calvet, Laurent E., and Etienne Comon, 2003, Behavioral heterogeneity and the
     income eﬀect, Review of Economics and Statistics 85(3), 653-669.

[21] Calvet, Laurent E., Martín Gonzalez-Eiras, and Paolo Sodini, 2004, Financial inno-
     vation, market participation and asset prices, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
     Analysis 39, 431—459.

[22] Calvet, Laurent E., Jean-Michel Grandmont, and Isabelle Lemaire, 2005, Aggre-
     gation of heterogeneous beliefs, asset pricing and risk-sharing in complete financial
     markets, working paper, HEC Paris and CREST.

                                           30
[23] Calvet, Laurent E., and Paolo Sodini, 2010, Appendix to Twin picks: Disentan-
     gling the determinants of risk-taking in household portfolios, available online at
     http://www.hec.fr/calvet.

[24] Campbell, John Y., 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553—1604.

[25] Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption
     based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy
     107, 205-251.

[26] Carroll, Christopher D., 2000, Why do the rich save so much?, in J.B. Slemrod
     ed. Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, Harvard
     University Press, Cambridge, MA.

[27] Carroll, Christopher D., 2002, Portfolios of the rich, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Halias-
     sos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[28] Carroll, Christopher D., and Andrew Samwick, 1997, The nature of precautionary
     wealth, Journal of Monetary Economics 40, 41-71.

[29] Cesarini, David, Christopher Dawes, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, and
     Björn Wallace, 2009a, Genetic variation in preferences for giving and risk-taking,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2), 809-842.

[30] Cesarini, David, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, Sandewall Örjan and
     Björn Wallace, 2009b, Genetic variation in financial decision making, forthcoming,
     Journal of Finance.

[31] Chiappori, Pierre-André, and Monica Paiella, 2008, Relative risk aversion is con-
     stant: evidence from panel data, working paper, Columbia University and Univer-
     sity of Naples.

[32] Christiansen, Charlotte, Juanna Schröter Joensen, and Jesper Rangvid, 2008, Are
     economists more likely to hold stocks?, Review of Finance 12 (3), 465-496.

[33] Cocco, Joao, 2005, Portfolio choice in the presence of housing, Review of Financial
     Studies 18 (2), 535-567.

[34] Cocco, Joao, Francisco Gomes, and Pascal Maenhout, 2005, Consumption and
     portfolio choice over the life cycle, Review of Financial Studies 18 (2), 491-533.

[35] Cohn, R. A., Wilbur G. Lewellen, Ronald C. Lease, and Gary G. Schlarbaum, 1975,
     Individual investor, risk aversion, and investment portfolio composition, Journal of
     Finance 39, 602-620.

                                            31
[36] Constantinides, George M., 1982, Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous
     consumers and without demand aggregation, Journal of Business 55(2), 253-267.

[37] Constantinides, George, 1990, Habit formation: A resolution of the equity pre-
     mium, Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.

[38] Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy, 2008, Gender diﬀerences in preferences, Journal
     of Economic Literature, 47 (2), 1-27.

[39] Cvitanić, Jakša, and Ioannis Karatzas, 1992, Convex duality in constrained port-
     folio optimization, Annals of Applied Probability 2(4), 767-818.

[40] Deaton, Angus, 1974, The analysis of consumer demand in the United Kingdom,
     1900-1970, Econometrica 42 (2), 341-367.

[41] Eymann, Angelika, and Axel Börsch-Supan, 2002, Household portfolios in Ger-
     many, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Port-
     folios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[42] Feng, Lei and Marc Seasholes, 2007, Individual investors and gender similarities in
     an emerging stock market, Pacific Basin Finance Journal 16, 44-60.

[43] Flavin, Marjorie, and Takashi Yamashita, 2002, Owner-occupied housing and the
     composition of the household portfolio, American Economic Review 92 (1), 345-
     362.

[44] Friend, Irwin, and Marshall Blume, 1975, The demand for risky assets, American
     Economic Review 65(5), 900-922.

[45] Gollier, Christian (2001), Wealth inequality and asset pricing, Review of Economic
     Studies 68, 181-203.

[46] Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa, 2009, IQ and stock
     market participation, Working paper, UCLA, Helsinki School of Economics, and
     University of Chicago.

[47] Grossman, Sanford, and Jean-Luc Vila, 1992, Optimal dynamic trading with lever-
     age constraints, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 27(2), 151-168.

[48] Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Jappelli, 2002, Household Portfolios,
     MIT Press.

[49] Guiso, Luigi, and Tullio Jappelli, 2002, Household portfolios in Italy, in Luigi
     Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Portfolios, MIT Press,
     Cambridge, MA.

                                          32
[50] Guiso, Luigi, and Tullio Jappelli, 2006, Information acquisition and portfolio per-
     formance, CEPR Working Paper 5901.

[51] Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, and Daniele Terlizzese, 1996, Income risk, borrowing
     constraints and portfolio choice, American Economic Review 86, 158-171.

[52] Guiso, Luigi, Paolo Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2009, Cultural biases in economic
     exchange?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3), 1095-1131.

[53] Haliassos, Michael, and Carol Bertaut, 1995, Why do so few hold stocks?, Economic
     Journal 105, 1110-1129.

[54] Haliassos, Michael, and Alexander Michaelides, 2002, Calibration and computation
     of household portfolio models, in Guiso, Haliassos and Jappelli (2002), 55-101.

[55] Hara, Chiaki, James Huang and Christoph Kuzmics, 2007, Representative con-
     sumer’s risk aversion and eﬃcient risk-sharing rules, Journal of Economic Theory
     137, 652-72.

[56] Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 1999, Stock prices and fundamentals, in NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual Vol. 14, 213-242.

[57] Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice and asset prices: The
     importance of entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance 55, 1163-1198.

[58] Jorgenson, Dale, and Daniel Slesnick, 1987, Aggregate consumer behavior and
     household equivalence scales, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 5, 219-
     232.

[59] Jouini, Elyès, and Clothilde Napp, 2007, Consensus consumer and intertemporal
     asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs, Review of Economic Studies 74, 1149-1174.

[60] Juster, Thomas, James Smith, and Frank Staﬀord, 1999, The measurement and
     structure of household wealth, Labor Economics 6, 253–275.

[61] King, Mervyn A., and Jonathan I. Leape, 1987, Asset accumulation, information
     and the life cycle, NBER Working Paper 2392.

[62] King, Mervyn A., and Jonathan I. Leape, 1998, Wealth and portfolio composition:
     Theory and evidence, Journal of Public Economics 69, 155—193.

[63] Lewbel, Arthur, and Krishna Pendakur, 2008, Equivalence scales, entry for The
     New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition.



                                          33
[64] Lichtenstein, Paul, Patrick F. Sullivan, Sven Cnattingius, Margaret Gatz, Sofie
     Johanson, Eva Carlström, Camilla Björk, Magnus Svartengren, Alicja Volk, Lars
     Klareskog, Ulf de Faire, Martin Schalling, Juni Palmgren, and Nancy L. Peder-
     sen, 2006, The Swedish Twin Registry in the third millenium: An update, Twin
     Research and Human Genetics 9, 875-882.

[65] Lupton, Joseph, 2002, Household portfolio choice and the habit liability: Evidence
     from panel data, working paper, University of Michigan.

[66] Manski, Charles, 2000, Economic analysis of social interactions, Journal of Eco-
     nomic Perspectives 14(3), 115-136.

[67] Massa, Massimo, and Andrei Simonov, 2006, Hedging, familiarity and portfolio
     choice, Review of Financial Studies 19, 633-685.

[68] Murray, Charles, 2002, IQ and income inequality in a sample of sibling pairs from
     advantaged family backgrounds, American Economic Review Papers and Proceed-
     ings 92(2), 339-343.

[69] Palia, Darius, Yaxuan Qi, and Yangru Wu, 2009, Heterogeneous background risks,
     portfolio choice, and asset returns: Evidence from micro-level data, Working Paper,
     Concordia University and Rutgers Business School.

[70] Paxson, Christina, 1990, Borrowing constraints and portfolio choice, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 105(2), 535-543.

[71] Pedersen, Nancy L., Paul Lichtenstein, and Pia Svedberg, 2002, The Swedish Twin
     Registry in the third millenium, Twin Research and Human Genetics 5, 427—432.

[72] Peress, Joël, 2004, Wealth, information acquisition, and portfolio choice, Review of
     Financial Studies 17, 879-914.

[73] Perraudin, William, and Bent Sørensen, 2000, The demand for risky assets: Sample
     selection and household portfolios, Journal of Econometrics 97, 117-144.

[74] Plug, Erik, and Wim Vijverberg, 2003, Schooling, family background, and adop-
     tion: Is it nature or is it nurture?, Journal of Political Economy 111, 611-641.

[75] Prais, S. J., and Hendrik Houthakker, 1955, The Analysis of Family Budgets, Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[76] Rubinstein, Mark, 1974, An aggregation theorem for securities markets, Journal of
     Financial Economics 1, 225-244.



                                           34
[77] Sacerdote, Bruce, 2002, The nature and nurture of economic outcomes, American
     Economic Review 92, 344-348.

[78] Sacerdote, Bruce, 2007, How large are the eﬀects from changes in family environ-
     ment? A study of Korean American adoptees, Quarterly Journal of Economics
     122, 119-157.

[79] Taubman, Paul, 1976, The determinants of earnings: Genetics, family, and other
     environments; A study of white male twins, American Economic Review 66(5),
     858-870.

[80] Teplá, Lucie, 2000, Optimal portfolio policies with borrowing and shortsale con-
     straints, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 1623—39.

[81] Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, 2002a, Limited asset market participation and the
     elasticity of intertemporal substitution, Journal of Political Economy 100, 825—
     853.

[82] Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, 2002b, Towards an explanation of household portfolio
     choice heterogeneity: Nonfinancial income and participation cost structures, NBER
     Working Paper 8884.

[83] Yao, Rui, and Harold Zhang, 2005, Optimal consumption and portfolio choices
     with risky housing and borrowing constraints, Review of Financial Studies 18(1),
     197-239.

[84] Wachter, Jessica, and Motohiro Yogo, 2009, Why do household portfolio shares rise
     in wealth?, working paper, The Wharton School.




                                         35
                                                        TABLE 1. SUMMARY STATISTICS



                                                                                             TWINS                                    RANDOM SAMPLE
                                                                               Mean           Standard            Pairwise              Mean    Standard
                                                                                              deviation         correlation                     deviation
Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
Risky share                                                                    0.543              0.291                0.185              0.513              0.296
Financial wealth ($)                                                          46,782             72,718                0.312             45,067             73,774
Real estate wealth ($)                                                       120,135            123,011                0.289            112,925            119,133
Leverage ratio                                                                 0.778              2.381                0.148              0.936              3.128
Total liability ($)                                                           50,800             55,935                0.248             49,658             56,126
Private pension premia/income                                                  0.043              0.094                0.058              0.042              0.211
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                                                0.289              0.056                0.001              0.285              0.061
Beta of risky portfolio                                                        0.930              0.321                0.104              0.932              0.340
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                                               0.843              0.364               0.365               0.807              0.395
Post-high school dummy                                                          0.371              0.483               0.470               0.358              0.479
Number of adults                                                                1.728              0.445               0.147               1.733              0.442
Number of children                                                              1.005              1.107               0.403               0.992              1.096
Wealth-weighted gender index                                                    0.542              0.325               0.135               0.547              0.324
Human Capital and Income Risk
Human capital ($)                                                            759,461            513,832                0.484            772,455            639,964
Permanent income risk                                                         -0.002              0.089                0.029             -0.001              0.113
Transitory income risk                                                         0.060              0.365                0.042              0.068              0.381
Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return                         -0.003              0.308                0.040             -0.003              0.308
Entrepreneur dummy                                                             0.036              0.186                0.128              0.037              0.190
Unemployment dummy                                                             0.084              0.277                0.109              0.072              0.258
Habit
Internal habit ($)                                                            36,052              16,901               0.291             35,338              16,664
External habit ($)                                                            26,135               3,319               0.449             26,215               3,328
Notes: The table reports summary statistics of the financial, portfolio, demographic, income, and habit characteristics of participating Swedish households. The first
set of columns is based on the set of twin pairs in which both siblings participate in risky asset markets, and the last set of columns on a random sample of
participating households. For each characteristic, we report the cross-sectional mean and standard deviation in each sample, as well as the correlation within twin
pairs. The education, entrepreneur and unemployment dummies are computed for the twin in the household. All other characteristics are computed at the household
level. Internal habit is proxied by the household’s three-year average of disposable income, excluding private pension savings from consideration. External habit is
proxied by the three-year average household income in the municipality. All nominal variables are winsorized at the 99th percentile.
                    TABLE 2. POOLED CROSS-SECTIONAL REGRESSIONS OF THE LOG RISKY SHARE
                                             Yearly fixed effects


                                                                   Estimate         t-stat Estimate            t-stat Estimate           t-stat Estimate           t-stat
Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
Log financial wealth                                                   0.212        43.20         0.223        39.80        0.234        36.50        0.233        36.60
Log real estate wealth                                                                           -0.005        -2.67       -0.004        -2.09       -0.003        -1.75
Leverage ratio                                                                                   -0.021        -6.69       -0.020        -6.34       -0.020        -6.26
Log total liability                                                                               0.018         9.96        0.019        10.30        0.019        10.30
Private pension premia/income                                                                     0.108         1.05        0.154         1.31        0.148         1.29
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                                                                   0.027        16.50        0.027        16.10        0.027        16.40
Beta of risky portfolio                                                                          -0.093        -3.90       -0.083        -3.42       -0.081        -3.39
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                                                                 0.109         5.01        0.105         4.84        0.110          5.14
Post-high school dummy                                                                            0.064         4.61        0.061         4.33        0.065          4.28
Number of adults                                                                                 -0.207       -11.30       -0.175        -8.35       -0.180         -8.49
Number of children                                                                               -0.056        -8.32       -0.055        -7.21       -0.051         -6.55
Wealth-weighted gender index                                                                     -0.030        -1.42       -0.023        -1.10       -0.022         -1.06
Human Capital and Income Risk
Log human capital                                                                                                           0.018         1.41        0.012          0.86
Permanent income risk                                                                                                      -0.116        -1.10       -0.079         -0.76
Transitory income risk                                                                                                     -0.061        -2.36       -0.052         -2.11
Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return                                                                       0.052         2.31        0.054          2.40
Entrepreneur dummy                                                                                                         -0.236        -5.82       -0.175         -4.23
Unemployment dummy                                                                                                         -0.078        -3.43       -0.071         -3.13
Habit
Log internal habit                                                                                                         -0.091        -3.99       -0.095         -4.17
Log external habit                                                                                                         -0.036        -0.63       -0.365         -1.19
Municipality and
Industry Dummies                                                                                                                                       Included
Number of observations                                                55,898                    55,898                    55,898                    55,898
Number of twin pairs                                                   8,394                     8,394                     8,394                     8,394
  2
R                                                                     9.70%                    13.70%                    14.01%                    15.81%
             2
Adjusted R                                                            9.70%                    13.68%                    13.97%                    15.31%
Notes: This table reports pooled cross-sectional regressions of the log risky share on financial wealth and other characteristics. The estimation is based on participating
households with an adult twin. Yearly fixed effects are included in the cross-sectional regressions. The education, entrepreneur and unemployment dummies are computed for
the twin in the household. All other characteristics are computed at the household level. Log human capital and the leverage ratio are winsorized at the 99th percentile.
                                       TABLE 3. TWIN REGRESSIONS OF THE LOG RISKY SHARE
                                                     Yearly twin pair fixed effects


                                                                   Estimate          t-stat Estimate            t-stat Estimate            t-stat Estimate            t-stat
Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
Log financial wealth                                                    0.196        24.60         0.212        24.00         0.220        23.60        0.217         23.10
Log real estate wealth                                                                            -0.006        -2.56        -0.006        -2.28       -0.005         -1.95
Leverage ratio                                                                                    -0.034        -4.85        -0.032        -4.58       -0.031         -4.45
Log total liability                                                                                0.017         6.52         0.018         6.95        0.017          6.64
Private pension premia/income                                                                      0.101         1.04         0.143         1.31        0.122          1.18
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                                                                    0.029        14.30         0.029        14.20        0.029         14.30
Beta of risky portfolio                                                                           -0.126        -3.90        -0.120        -3.70       -0.114         -3.55
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                                                                  0.046          1.36        0.037          1.08       0.038          1.11
Post-high school dummy                                                                             0.043          1.77        0.035          1.43       0.032          1.29
Number of adults                                                                                  -0.153         -6.01       -0.112         -3.74      -0.102         -3.34
Number of children                                                                                -0.069         -6.10       -0.058         -5.11      -0.057         -4.95
Wealth-weighted gender index                                                                      -0.074         -2.46       -0.061         -2.03      -0.054         -1.75
Human Capital and Income Risk
Log human capital                                                                                                            -0.036         -1.19      -0.045         -1.47
Permanent income risk                                                                                                        -0.128         -0.97      -0.121         -0.93
Transitory income risk                                                                                                       -0.027         -0.93      -0.012         -0.42
Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return                                                                         0.069          2.34       0.068          2.27
Entrepreneur dummy                                                                                                           -0.292         -5.70      -0.252         -4.72
Unemployment dummy                                                                                                           -0.066         -2.25      -0.057         -1.97
Habit
Log internal habit                                                                                                           -0.063         -1.81      -0.067         -1.89
Log external habit                                                                                                            0.035          0.39      -0.350         -0.65
Municipality and
Industry Dummies                                                                                                                                          Included
Number of observations                                                27,949                     27,949                     27,949                     27,949
Number of twin pairs                                                   8,394                      8,394                      8,394                      8,394
             2
Adjusted R of twin difference regression                              5.46%                      9.43%                      9.80%                     11.25%
  2
R with yearly twin pair fixed effects                                59.00%                     60.71%                     60.88%                     61.92%
             2
Adjusted R with yearly twin pair fixed effects                       17.99%                     21.38%                     21.69%                     22.96%
Notes: This table reports pooled twin difference regressions of the log risky share on financial wealth and other characteristics. The estimation is based on participating
households with an adult twin. We report the adjusted R2 of the twin difference regressions, and the R2 and adjusted R2 of the corresponding linear panel regressions with
yearly fixed effects specified by equation (3.5). The education, entrepreneur, and unemployment dummies are computed for the twin in the household. All other characteristics
are computed at the household level. Differences in log human capital and the leverage ratio are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile.
          TABLE 4. TWIN REGRESSIONS OF THE LOG RISKY SHARE
      Financial wealth elasticity computed for quartiles of financial wealth


                                                                       Estimate           t-stat Estimate             t-stat
Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
Log financial wealth
  First quartile                                                            0.289         18.10         0.308         17.30
  Second quartile                                                           0.224         15.80         0.232         15.90
  Third quartile                                                            0.150         10.90         0.173         12.30
  Fourth quartile                                                           0.101          7.68         0.147         10.40
Log real estate wealth                                                                                 -0.004         -1.62
Leverage ratio                                                                                         -0.019         -2.66
Log total liability                                                                                     0.015          5.84
Private pension premia/income                                                                           0.148          1.33
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                                                                         0.028         14.20
Beta of risky portfolio                                                                                -0.108         -3.37
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                                                                       0.033           0.97
Post-high school dummy                                                                                  0.029           1.16
Number of adults                                                                                       -0.134          -4.35
Number of children                                                                                     -0.065          -5.61
Wealth-weighted gender index                                                                           -0.047          -1.56
Human Capital and Income Risk
Log human capital                                                                                      -0.047          -1.54
Permanent income risk                                                                                  -0.109          -0.83
Transitory income risk                                                                                  0.002           0.06
Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return                                                   0.063           2.09
Entrepreneur dummy                                                                                     -0.249          -4.67
Unemployment dummy                                                                                     -0.050          -1.74
Habit
Log internal habit                                                                                    -0.029           -0.80
Log external habit                                                                                    -0.351           -0.66
             2
Adjusted R of twin difference regression                                   6.12%                     11.69%
Number of observations                                                     27,949                     27,949
Number of twin pairs                                                        8,394                      8,394
Notes: This table reports the pooled twin difference regressions of the log risky share on: (1) financial wealth interacted
with dummies for financial wealth quartiles (first set of columns), and (2) other characteristics (second set of columns). The
education, entrepreneur and unemployment dummies are computed for the twin in the household. All other characteristics
are computed at the household level. Differences in log human capital and the leverage ratio are winsorized at the 1st and
99th percentile.
                                   TABLE 5. FINANCIAL WEALTH ELASTICITY OF THE RISKY SHARE
                                                   Households with an adult twin


                                                                                  Regression (1)                            Regression (2)
                                                                        Direct Effect         Interacted          Direct Effect         Interacted
                                                                     Estimate      t-stat Estimate      t-stat Estimate      t-stat Estimate      t-stat
Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
Log financial wealth                                                      0.212         23.00        -0.090       -10.20         0.216         23.80        -0.083         -8.59
Log real estate wealth                                                   -0.003         -1.37                                   -0.003         -1.14         0.008          2.91
Leverage ratio                                                           -0.015         -2.11                                   -0.012         -1.30         0.011          1.91
Log total liability                                                       0.014          5.57                                    0.013          5.07         0.004          1.38
Private pension premia/income                                             0.156          1.37                                    0.299          2.79        -0.260         -2.36
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                                           0.028         14.20                                    0.028         14.00        -0.003         -1.62
Beta of risky portfolio                                                  -0.108         -3.39                                   -0.119         -3.75        -0.047         -1.44
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                                         0.035          1.03                                    0.033          0.96         0.020          0.74
Post-high school dummy                                                    0.026          1.06                                    0.021          0.85        -0.017         -0.80
Number of adults                                                         -0.126         -4.05                                   -0.127         -4.11         0.130          3.95
Number of children                                                       -0.065         -5.63                                   -0.077         -6.58         0.067          6.05
Wealth-weighted gender index                                             -0.043         -1.41                                   -0.031         -1.01         0.046          1.42
Human Capital and Income Risk
Log human capital                                                        -0.041         -1.33                                   -0.037         -1.23        -0.046         -2.95
Permanent income risk                                                    -0.114         -0.87                                   -0.038         -0.28        -0.152         -0.88
Transitory income risk                                                    0.003          0.10                                    0.018          0.58        -0.011         -0.25
Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return                     0.062          2.07                                    0.056          1.86         0.067          1.94
Entrepreneur dummy                                                       -0.256         -4.81                                   -0.239         -4.50        -0.045         -0.91
Unemployment dummy                                                       -0.053         -1.84                                   -0.042         -1.47         0.021          0.65
Habit
Log internal habit                                                       -0.037         -1.03         0.130          5.61        0.002          0.06         0.030          1.00
Log external habit                                                       -0.361         -0.68                                   -0.395         -0.75        -0.066         -0.81
             2
Adjusted R of twin difference regression                                12.03%                                                 12.89%
Number of observations                                                   27,949                                                 27,949
Number of twin pairs                                                      8,394                                                  8,394
Notes: This table reports the pooled twin difference regressions of the log risky share on financial wealth, other household characteristics, and financial wealth interacted with
characteristics. The education, entrepreneur and unemployment dummies are computed for the twin in the household. All other characteristics are computed at the household
level. Differences in log human capital and the leverage ratio are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
TABLE 6. IV ESTIMATION OF TWIN DIFFERENCE REGRESSIONS OF THE LOG RISKY SHARE
                            Yearly twin pair fixed effects


                                                                           Estimate          t-stat Estimate           t-stat
       Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
       Log financial wealth                                                    0.289         24.10
         First quartile                                                                                   0.469        15.40
         Second quartile                                                                                  0.284        10.90
         Third quartile                                                                                   0.235         9.64
         Fourth quartile                                                                                  0.180         9.22
       Log real estate wealth                                                 -0.003         -1.25       -0.002        -0.71
       Leverage ratio                                                         -0.008         -0.90        0.018         1.80
       Log total liability                                                     0.020          7.28        0.017         6.06
       Private pension premia/income                                          -0.006         -0.10        0.028         0.37
       Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                                         0.028         12.10        0.027        11.70
       Beta of risky portfolio                                                -0.187         -5.05       -0.182        -4.91
       Demographic Characteristics
       High school dummy                                                       0.031          0.83        0.024          0.64
       Post-high school dummy                                                  0.023          0.87        0.016          0.61
       Number of adults                                                       -0.088         -2.61       -0.139         -4.07
       Number of children                                                     -0.055         -4.35       -0.069         -5.45
       Wealth-weighted gender index                                           -0.083         -2.49       -0.071         -2.15
       Human Capital and Income Risk
       Log human capital                                                      -0.056         -1.68       -0.059         -1.79
       Permanent income risk                                                  -0.113         -0.79       -0.104         -0.71
       Transitory income risk                                                 -0.018         -0.56        0.003          0.08
       Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return                   0.072          2.21        0.060          1.84
       Entrepreneur dummy                                                     -0.242         -3.95       -0.238         -3.91
       Unemployment dummy                                                     -0.050         -1.56       -0.041         -1.27
       Habit
       Log internal habit                                                     -0.153         -3.85      -0.097          -2.43
       Log external habit                                                     -1.108         -1.08      -1.120          -1.08
                    2
       Adjusted R of twin difference regression                                8.8%                      8.9%
       Number of observations                                                 19,418                    19,418
       Number of twin pairs                                                    7,520                     7,520
      Notes: This table reports the IV estimation of twin difference regressions of the log risky share on financial wealth and
      other characteristics. Differences in log human capital and the leverage ratio are winsorized at the 99th percentile.
                              TABLE 7. LAGGED FINANCIAL AND PORTFOLIO CHARACTERISTICS
                                                  Twin pair fixed effects

                                                                  Estimate          t-stat Estimate            t-stat Estimate            t-stat Estimate            t-stat
Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
Log financial wealth in 99                                            0.132         15.50                                   0.132         15.50
  First quartile                                                                                 0.173         10.10                                   0.172        10.10
  Second quartile                                                                                0.113          8.16                                   0.112         8.11
  Third quartile                                                                                 0.149         10.60                                   0.150        10.70
  Fourth quartile                                                                                0.096          8.22                                   0.095         8.19
Log risky share in 99                                                 0.562         35.40        0.560         35.30        0.557         31.70        0.554        31.50
Log passive financial wealth change since 99                                                                                0.067          1.43        0.060         1.30
Log passive risky share change since 99                                                                                     0.144          2.51        0.145         2.54
Log real estate wealth                                               -0.001          -0.35       -0.001         -0.37      -0.001         -0.44       -0.001        -0.45
Leverage ratio                                                       -0.008          -0.90       -0.004         -0.40      -0.007         -0.86       -0.003        -0.38
Log total liability                                                   0.008           3.86        0.008          3.65       0.008          3.85        0.008         3.63
Private pension premia/income                                        -0.012          -0.29       -0.007         -0.16      -0.012         -0.29       -0.007        -0.16
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                                       0.014           7.88        0.014          7.81       0.014          7.85        0.014         7.78
Beta of risky portfolio                                              -0.141          -4.06       -0.139         -3.99      -0.108         -2.93       -0.106        -2.90
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                                    -0.010          -0.39       -0.010         -0.39      -0.010         -0.38       -0.010         -0.38
Post-high school dummy                                                0.045           2.22        0.043          2.08       0.045          2.22        0.043          2.09
Number of adults                                                     -0.013          -0.50       -0.023         -0.86      -0.014         -0.55       -0.024         -0.90
Number of children                                                   -0.016          -1.62       -0.018         -1.87      -0.015         -1.59       -0.018         -1.83
Wealth-weighted gender index                                         -0.049          -1.96       -0.047         -1.86      -0.050         -2.00       -0.048         -1.89
Human Capital and Income Risk
Log human capital                                                    -0.014          -0.53       -0.014         -0.54      -0.012         -0.44       -0.012         -0.44
Permanent income risk                                                -0.158          -1.07       -0.149         -1.00      -0.174         -1.18       -0.165         -1.12
Transitory income risk                                               -0.015          -0.56       -0.007         -0.28      -0.017         -0.64       -0.010         -0.36
Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return                 0.022           0.87        0.022          0.86       0.024          0.92        0.023          0.91
Entrepreneur dummy                                                   -0.078          -1.57       -0.080         -1.60      -0.079         -1.59       -0.080         -1.62
Unemployment dummy                                                   -0.046          -1.86       -0.045         -1.83      -0.045         -1.80       -0.044         -1.78
Habit
Log internal habit                                                   -0.113          -3.64      -0.102          -3.24      -0.113         -3.62       -0.102         -3.23
Log external habit                                                   -0.274          -0.31      -0.273          -0.31      -0.319         -0.36       -0.316         -0.35
             2
Adjusted R of twin difference regression                            45.09%                     45.21%                     45.18%                     45.30%
Number of observations                                               17,355                     17,355                     17,355                     17,355
Number of twin pairs                                                  6,312                      6,312                      6,312                      6,312
Notes: This table reports the IV regression of changes in the log risky share on lagged financial and portfolio characteristics. The estimation is based on households that
participate in risky asset markets at the end of two consecutive years. Yearly fixed effects are included in all the regressions.
                  TABLE 8. HEALTH AND LIFESTYLE VARIABLES
                           Yearly twin pair fixed effects


                                                        Estimate   t-stat Estimate   t-stat
Financial and Portfolio Characteristics
Log financial wealth                                       0.210   18.60
  First quartile                                                             0.290   13.70
  Second quartile                                                            0.203   12.50
  Third quartile                                                             0.178    9.57
  Fourth quartile                                                            0.146    8.56
Log real estate wealth                                    -0.005   -1.69    -0.005   -1.53
Leverage ratio                                            -0.064   -4.32    -0.046   -3.02
Log total liability                                        0.022    7.52     0.020    6.92
Private pension premia/income                              0.238    1.75     0.272    1.99
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio                            0.031   12.30     0.031   12.20
Beta of risky portfolio                                   -0.214   -5.42    -0.208   -5.25
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                          0.036    0.93     0.031    0.79
Post-high school dummy                                     0.015    0.49     0.012    0.38
Number of adults                                          -0.098   -2.58    -0.127   -3.34
Number of children                                        -0.049   -3.48    -0.055   -3.90
Wealth-weighted gender index                              -0.082   -2.13    -0.074   -1.92
Human Capital and Income Risk
Log human capital                                         -0.059   -1.49    -0.058   -1.47
Permanent income risk                                     -0.063   -0.34    -0.057   -0.30
Transitory income risk                                     0.011    0.28     0.024    0.61
Correlation of income innovation and portfolio return      0.069    1.84     0.063    1.70
Entrepreneur dummy                                        -0.259   -4.05    -0.257   -4.00
Unemployment dummy                                        -0.101   -2.55    -0.098   -2.48
Habit
Log internal habit                                        -0.096   -2.12    -0.063   -1.38
Log external habit                                        -1.011   -1.98    -1.007   -1.98
                TABLE 8 (cont.) HEALTH AND LIFESTYLE VARIABLES
                            Yearly twin pair fixed effects


Lifestyle
Regular smoker                                                              -0.02         -0.70         -0.02        -0.88
Alcohol drinker                                                              0.06          1.79          0.05         1.64
Coffee drinker                                                               0.02          0.32          0.02         0.39
Exercise level                                                               0.00         -0.25          0.00        -0.26
Body Structure
Height                                                                       0.00         -0.93          0.00        -1.04
Overweight                                                                  -0.03         -1.15         -0.04        -1.31
Obese                                                                       -0.04         -0.83         -0.04        -0.76
Mental Health
Eating Disorder (EDNOS)                                                      0.00         -0.17          0.00        -0.02
Anxiety (GAD)                                                                0.07          0.77          0.06         0.69
Depression Symptoms                                                         -0.07         -1.89         -0.07        -1.85
Major Depression                                                             0.01          0.38          0.01         0.38
Health Conditions
Indifferent or bad self-assessed health                                    -0.04          -1.16       -0.04          -1.04
Self-assessed health deterioration (last 5 years)                           0.00          -0.01        0.00           0.03
Recurrent headaches, migrane                                                0.00           0.11        0.00           0.02
High Blood Pressure                                                        -0.08          -2.29       -0.08          -2.37
             2
Adjusted R of twin difference regression                                  13.8%                      14.2%
Number of observations                                                    18,129                     18,129
Number of twin pairs                                                       5,354                      5,354
Notes: This table reports the pooled twin difference regressions of the log risky share on health, lifestyle, and other
characteristics, and: (1) financial wealth (first set of columns), and (2) financial wealth interacted with financial wealth
dummies (second set of columns). The education, entrepreneur and unemployment dummies are computed for the twin
in the household. All other characteristics are computed at the household level. Differences in log human capital and the
leverage ratio are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile.
             TABLE 9. IV ESTIMATION OF YEARLY CHANGES IN THE LOG RISKY SHARE
                                 Random sample of households


                                                             No Controls                                          With Controls
                                           Estimate          t-stat Estimate            t-stat Estimate            t-stat Estimate             t-stat
Log financial wealth                          0.218            4.77                               0.229             4.75
  First quartile                                                       0.441              2.75                               0.467              2.76
  Second quartile                                                      0.413              3.09                               0.372              2.80
  Third quartile                                                       0.333              3.35                               0.346              3.45
  Fourth quartile                                                      0.029              0.57                               0.031              0.55
Change in log passive share                    0.093           3.07    0.084              2.69    0.101              3.47    0.091              3.01
Number of observations                        38,496                  38,496                     38,496                     38,496
Notes: This table reports the IV regression of changes in the log risky share on changes in financial wealth, changes in the log passive share, and
household characteristics. The estimation is based on households that participate in risky asset markets at the end of two consecutive years. Yearly
fixed effects are included in all the regressions. Log human capital and the leverage ratio are winsorized at the 99th percentile. Characteristics are
taken at the beginning of the period and are the same as in the last set of columns of Table 3.
                                              TABLE 10. PARTICIPATION IN RISKY ASSET MARKETS
                                                              Logit regressions


                                                                                POOLED CROSS-SECTION                     TWIN REGRESSION
                                                                                    Yearly Fixed Effects            Yearly Twin Pair Fixed Effects
                                                                           Estimate     t-stat Estimate  t-stat Estimate     t-stat Estimate       t-stat
Financial Characteristics
Log financial wealth                                                            1.180         73.90         1.163        57.80         1.086         34.40         1.038          28.80
Log real estate wealth                                                                                      0.006         1.45                                     0.006           0.80
Leverage ratio                                                                                             -0.018        -5.14                                    -0.016          -2.21
Log total liability                                                                                         0.059        10.50                                     0.047           4.81
Private pension premia/income                                                                               1.924         2.98                                     1.216           0.99
Demographic Characteristics
High school dummy                                                                                           0.243          5.17                                    0.115           1.14
Post-high school dummy                                                                                      0.131          2.78                                    0.098           0.98
Number of adults                                                                                           -0.195         -3.44                                   -0.096          -0.93
Number of children                                                                                         -0.079         -3.42                                   -0.017          -0.41
Wealth-weighted gender index                                                                               -0.163         -3.10                                   -0.176          -1.82
Human Capital and Income Risk
Log human capital                                                                                           0.358          9.91                                    0.235           2.03
Permanent income risk                                                                                      -1.002         -4.08                                   -1.226          -2.85
Transitory income risk                                                                                     -0.207         -3.24                                   -0.171          -1.58
Entrepreneur dummy                                                                                         -0.185         -1.60                                   -0.114          -0.52
Unemployment dummy                                                                                         -0.038         -0.74                                    0.039           0.43
Habit
Log internal habit                                                                                        -0.221          -3.36                                    0.099           0.73
Log external habit                                                                                        -0.705          -4.21                                   -0.895          -2.45
Number of observations                                                        85,532                      85,532                      23,132                      23,132
Number of twin pairs                                                          11,721                      11,721                      11,721                      11,721
Number of pairs with different participation decisions                    .                           .                                4,477                       4,477
Notes: This table reports the pooled logit regression of a household’s decision to participate in risky asset markets. The cross-sectional regressions are based on all Swedish
households with an adult twin, and are run without and with characteristics (first two sets of columns). In the last sets of columns, we report a logit regression with a twin pair fixed
effect. Yearly fixed effects are included in all regressions. The education, entrepreneur and unemployment dummies are computed for the twin in the household. All other
characteristics are computed at the household level. Log human capital and the leverage ratio are winsorized at the 99th percentile.
                                            FIGURE 1. ELASTICITY OF AGGREGATE RISKY FINANCIAL WEALTH
                                                             Fixed set of participants (2001)


                1.6
                                    CRRA representative investor
                1.4                 Heterogeneous CRRA
                                    Constant wealth elasticity of the risky share
                1.2                 Linear wealth elasticity of the risky share


                   1


                0.8




Elasticity
                0.6


                0.4


                0.2


                   0
                          5       10      15      20      25      30       35      40      45      50      55       60      65      70      75      80      85       90      95 100

                                                                             Quantiles of Financial Wealth

             Notes: This figure illustrates the elasticity of aggregate risky financial wealth with respect to the aggregate financial wealth of participating households. We consider twenty
             financial wealth quantiles, and report for each quantile the aggregate elasticity corresponding to an exogenous wealth shock affecting only households in the quantile:
             Δln(Fh) = g if h is in the quantile and Δln(Fh) = 0 otherwise. The set of participants is fixed and all results are reported for year 2001.
                                            FIGURE 2. ELASTICITY OF AGGREGATE RISKY FINANCIAL WEALTH
                                                                   With entry (2001)


                1.6
                                    CRRA representative investor
                1.4                 Heterogeneous CRRA
                                    Constant wealth elasticity of the risky share
                1.2                 Linear wealth elasticity of the risky share


                   1


                0.8




Elasticity
                0.6


                0.4


                0.2


                   0
                           5      10      15      20       25      30      35       40      45      50      55       60      65      70       75      80      85      90       95 100

                                                                              Quantiles of Financial Wealth

             Notes: This figure illustrates the elasticity of aggregate risky financial wealth with respect to the aggregate financial wealth of participating and nonparticipating households.
             We consider twenty financial wealth quantiles, and report for each quantile the aggregate elasticity corresponding to an exogenous positive wealth shock affecting only
             households in the quantile: Δln(Fh) = g if h is in the quantile and Δln(Fh) = 0 otherwise. The set of participants is endogenous and all results are reported for year 2001.
