NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MENTAL HEALTH TREATMENT AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE OUTCOMES
Richard Frank
Thomas G. McGuire
Working Paper 15858
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15858

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

This paper is prepared for presentation at the NBER conference on the Costs and Benefits of Crime
Control and Prevention, January 15 and 16, Berkeley, California. The authors are grateful to the MacArthur
Foundation for research support and to Pasha Hamed, Tisa Sherry and Zach Yoneda for excellent analysis
research assistance. We are grateful to Harold Pollack and participants at an earlier NBER workshop
for comments on an earlier draft, and to Phil Cook for encouragement and ideas. Ellen Meara, Jens
Ludwig, John Monahan, Jennifer Skeem and Hank Steadman commented on an earlier draft. We are
particularly grateful to Jeff Swanson for helpful guidance. Colleagues from the MacArthur Foundation
Mandated Community Treatment Network, chaired by John Monahan, did much of the research on
the relation between mental health and crime. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Richard Frank and Thomas G. McGuire. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Mental Health Treatment and Criminal Justice Outcomes
Richard Frank and Thomas G. McGuire
NBER Working Paper No. 15858
April 2010
JEL No. I18
ABSTRACT
Are many prisoners in jail or prison because of their mental illness? And if so, is mental health treatment
a cost-effective way to reduce crime and lower criminal justice costs? This paper reviews and evaluates
the evidence assessing the potential of expansion of mental health services for reducing crime. Mental
illness and symptoms of mental illness are highly prevalent among adult and child criminal justice
populations. The association between serious mental illness and violence and arrest is particularly
strong among individuals who are psychotic and do not adhere to medication. Two empirical studies
augment the empirical research base relating mental illness to crime. In a recent community sample
of adults, we find higher rates of arrest for those with serious mental illness and with substance abuse.
Among youth, even with family fixed effects, antisocial personality scores predict future school problems
and arrests. A large body of research tracks mental health and criminal justice outcomes associated
with treatments and social policies. Reviews of the cost-effectiveness of treatments for children with
behavioral problems, mental health courts, and mandatory outpatient treatment are inconclusive.

Richard Frank
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
frank@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Thomas G. McGuire
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Tragic data relate mental illness and crime. The Los Angeles County Jail, Cook County
Jail, and Riker’s Island in New York each house more persons with mental illness (about 1,400
in LA, alone) than any psychiatric institution in the country (Treatment Advocacy Center, 2009).
Two-thirds of the nation’s juvenile inmates have at least one mental illness (Moore, 2009). By
Skeem et al.’s (2009) calculations, on a typical day, over one million people with mental
illnesses are in jail, in prison, on probation, or on parole. These figures raise natural questions:
Are many prisoners in jail or prison because of their mental illness? And if so, is mental health
treatment a cost-effective way to reduce crime and lower criminal justice costs? The main goal
of this paper is to review and evaluate the evidence assessing the potential of expansion of
mental health services for reducing crime. We also undertake two empirical studies to augment
the empirical research base relating mental illness to crime.
A simple logic offers a starting point for analysis. If: a) mental illness causes crime, and
b) mental health treatment reduces mental illness, then: c) increasing mental health treatment can
reduce mental illness and crime. National efforts based on this reasoning, some led by the
Council of State Governments (2009), have been underway for some time, targeting expansion
of access to community-based mental health care to the criminally involved.
A good deal of research evaluates premises a) and b). The social science literature
bearing on the link of mental illness to crime (a), is the main focus of this paper, whereas the
clinical literature regarding the effectiveness of mental health treatment (b), is also relevant. As
we will see later on, the connection between mental illness and crime is predominantly among
persons with severe mental illness such as psychosis and major depression. These illnesses are

1

serious and persistent in about 2 percent of the adult population. Development of and evaluation
of the effects and costs of treatments for people with these conditions has long been a focus of
public and private research. In the cases of both illnesses, effective treatments, largely drug
treatments with appropriate monitoring and supportive psychosocial services, have been known
for some time.1 Major advances in the treatment of schizophrenia with psychoactive drugs, date
from the early 1950s and the marketing of chlorpromazine. Many other antipsychotics are now
available, most with very comparable effectiveness and side effect profiles (clozapine,
introduced in 1989 in the US, may be particularly helpful for patients who fail on other drugs).
A large number of these drugs are now available as generics. The unresolved problems with
treatment for schizophrenia is that while many drug treatments have some effectiveness, it is rare
for full function to be restored, adjunctive treatments such as vocational rehabilitation and family
counseling are expensive and themselves of modest effectiveness, and, unpleasant side effects of
drugs lead many patients to discontinue therapy. Less than half of patients with schizophrenia
are on a treatment likely to be effective.
Depression is an episodic illness for which there are also many effective drug treatments
(which have a major effect on symptoms). Tricyclic antidepressants have been available since
the early 1960s, and the selective serotonin uptake inhibitors (the first and most famous of which
is Prozac) since 1988. Many effective drugs for depression are available as low-cost generics
and are frequently prescribed by non-psychiatrists. While overtreatment or inappropriate
treatment is a concern for people with mild symptoms, a positive trend in the past several
decades has been the large increases in share of people with serious depression who are taking

1

This discussion is based on material in Frank and Glied (2006). For a series of articles on the cost-effectiveness
and policy implications of treatment for schizophrenia, see the May, 2008 issue of Psychiatric Services.

2

medications likely to help them, with recent estimates of over 80% (Frank and Glied, 2006,
p116).
Two difficulties encountered by researchers in assessing the causal link between mental
illness and crime are worth calling attention to at the outset. First, mental illness is correlated
with many factors (e.g., criminal attitudes) that cause crime and may be difficult to measure. In
community and survey data, indicators of mental illness might be picking up effects of other
criminogenic factors correlated with mental illness (being raised in a family where there is
violence). Related to this common problem of “unobservables” in social science research is a
second issue. Mental illness may affect crime directly and indirectly, mediated by other factors,
and this process may occur over an extended period of time. Mental illness may have a
contemporaneous effect on crime, and in addition, mental illness in the past may have an indirect
effect on current crime working through the role of mental illness in elevating other risk factors
contributing to current crime (e.g. growing up in bad neighborhoods, substance abuse). These
complications are depicted in Figure 1. Past problems with mental illness, going back to
childhood, are tied up with personal and social factors, and are a potential cause of current
mental illness and other personal and social factors (some of which are unobserved) causing
crime. The link to childhood raises similar issues and possibilities discussed by Heckman and
Masterov (2004) related to workplace outcomes. The direct effect of current mental illness on
crime (arrow a) is the limited sense in which it is usually meant by the question “does mental
illness cause crime?” but the full effect of mental illness on crime goes beyond a
contemporaneous causal relation.
To preview one conclusion from the literature: a small fraction (Skeem et al. (2009)
judge it to be one in ten) of criminals with mental illness commit crimes because of their current

3

illness, but the elevated risk is small. Current treatment can ameliorate current illness and
symptoms, but cannot reverse the past effects of illness on the accumulation of other risk factors
over a person’s lifetime. In light of this, we pay attention in our review to the role of past on
current illness and on other social factors leading to crime. Although the research base is less
developed, the effects of childhood mental illness and treatments for children are an important
consideration for the intersection of mental health and criminal justice policy.
We also note that our syllogism is a sufficient, but not a necessary, condition for
improved mental health treatment to reduce crime and criminal justice costs. Policies that link
people at risk for committing crimes to community mental health treatment comprise more than
simple mental health care interventions and their route of cause might be by some mechanism
other than by improving mental health. Some treatments, like hospitalization or outpatient case
management, may keep potential offenders out of trouble simply by keeping them off the streets
and providing supervision. A “mental health court,” to take another example discussed in more
detail below, is a package of interventions which includes an active judge, frequent court
monitoring, as well as mandated mental health care. In evaluating the role of “mental health”
interventions in reducing crime, we will comment on whether the mechanism seems to be
through improved mental health.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review research on the association
and causal relationship between mental illness and crime. If mental health treatment is to be
cost-effective in terms of criminal justice outcomes, it should be targeted to “high-risk”
populations. The next two sections study mental health treatment in two high-risk groups who
are candidates for mental health interventions targeted to reduce crime: children with serious
behavioral problems, and adult criminals. Section 3 is concerned with the effect of past illness

4

and treatment on subsequent criminal justice contact in the case of children with conduct
disorder. Section 4 is concerned with current mental health interventions targeted to criminals
who are also mentally ill. A large range of programs are designed for this second population –
mental health courts, specialty probation programs, forensic-oriented community treatments,
among others. We focus on mental health courts. We also consider mandatory outpatient
treatment, a widely applied policy with implications for criminal justice. We return, in Section
5, to the question of the cost-effectiveness of expanding various forms of mental health treatment
based on favorable effects on crime and criminal justice costs.

2. Mental Illness and Crime
The association between mental illness and crime, with a special focus on whether
“mental illness causes crime,” has attracted a great deal of interest among social scientists. The
literature features some excellent analytic reviews.2 We begin with a review of the association
between mental illness and crime.
Mental Illness and Crime in Community Samples
The “dangerousness” of people with mental illnesses emerged as a social concern as state
mental hospitals closed beds during the 1960s and 1970s and patients with serious mental illness
found themselves in the community, often struggling to maintain stable living arrangements,
social support, and basic services. Former mental patients, or those who formally would have
been hospitalized for long periods of time, were largely without jobs and visible on city streets.
Advocates for the mentally ill claimed that people with mental illness “pose no more of a crime
threat than do other members of the general population” (National Mental Health Association,
2

Skeem, Manchak and Petersen (2009) review a wider literature than is covered here in Section 4, and their views
will be highlighted below. Marcotte and Markowitz (2009) contain a nice review from an economic perspective.
See also Monahan and Steadman (1983, 2010), Fisher, Silver and Wolff (2006).

5

1987), but this conclusion was premature because data to that point were not well-suited to test
the relationship (Monahan and Steadman, 1983). For example, with data from a psychiatric
epidemiologic survey, Swanson et al. (1990) found that violence (self-reported hitting, fighting
or weapon use) was five times higher among persons meeting diagnostic criteria for mental
illness than community residents without illness, even after adjusting for demographic and
socioeconomic factors, and the presence of a substance abuse diagnosis.3 This partial association
is not necessarily casual.4
The conclusions of a community-based study around this time by Link, Andrews and
Cullen (1992), based on comparison of former patients and community residents in one
neighborhood in New York City, remain a good summary of the literature. Mental patients had
elevated rates of self-reported violence. Substance abuse, correlated with mental illness, also
elevates violence but does not account for the full effect of mental illness. Notably, the presence
of psychotic symptoms mediates the effect of mental illness. 5 In other words, the elevated
violence is found among the patients with more severe and current illness. Other studies come to
similar conclusions about the role of substance abuse and mental illness. One review (Friedman,
2006) concluded that substance abuse alone dramatically increases the lifetime prevalence of

3

See also Harry and Steadman (1988). Data on the association of mental illness and crime has been found in other
countries. In Australia patients with schizophrenia more likely to have been convicted of a violent offense than
matched controls without schizophrenia (8.2% versus 1.8%) (Wallace, Mullen & Burgess, 2004). In Sweden men
with major mental disorders are four times more likely than men without a mental disorder to be registered for a
violent offense; women with major mental disorders 27 times more likely to be registered for a violent offense than
women with no disorder (Hodgins 1992). In Switzerland men with schizophrenia were five times more likely to
commit violent crimes than matched controls without schizophrenia (Modestin and Ammann, 1996). Stueve and
Link (1997) found elevated rates of violence and weapon use among persons diagnosed with psychosis or bipolar
disorder in Israel. The evidence for the association of mental illness and crime is not uniform, however. A metaanalysis of 58 studies found clinical variables (eg diagnosis, treatment history) did not predict criminal recidivism
(Bonta, Law and Hanson, 1998).
4
Causality is irrelevant for many purposes. Community residents do not care why someone might be more
dangerous.
5
One notable study, Applebaum et al (2000), however, did not this relationship.

6

violent behavior, and among people with serious mental disorders, the effects were almost
additive.
We add to this literature and characterize the association between crime and mental
illness with recent data from the Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiological Surveys (CPES),
designed to capture the prevalence of psychiatric illness and service use with a national sample
including an oversampling of minority groups. The CPES combines three surveys conducted
with a unified approach during 2002-4, allowing for integration of design-based weights to
combine the data as if they were a single, nationally representative study (NIMH, 2007).6 These
data accurately identify recent (12-month) and lifetime presence of psychiatric disorder. We
focus on the effects of serious mental illness, defined to include bipolar disorder or
schizophrenia, and substance abuse, defined as abuse of alcohol or illicit drugs.7 Respondents
answered a single question about their arrest history (“have you ever been arrested”) which we
use as a dependent variable in our models. After excluding some cases because of missing data,
we analyzed a sample of 10,686 individuals.
Figure 2 shows both the unadjusted and adjusted association between serious mental
illness (SMI) and arrest. The left-hand section of the figure shows the unadjusted rates of arrest
at any time during a respondent’s lifetime according to whether the respondent reported having

6

The University of Michigan Survey Research Center (SRC) collected data for the CPES, combining data from the
National Latino and Asian American Study (NLAAS; Alegria et al., 2004), the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication (NCS-R; Kessler & Merikangas, 2004) and the National Survey of African American Life (NSAL;
Jackson et al., 2004). Design and methodological information can be found at the CPES website
(https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/CPES/index.html).
7
Bipolar disorder was present in the past 12 months if the respondent met DSMIV criteria for either Bipolar I or
Bipolar II Disorder in the past 12 months. A designation of substance abuse was present if the respondent met DSM
IV criteria for Alcohol or Drug Abuse or Dependence. Psychosis was designated differently on the basis of
symptom report and is therefore less reliable. The respondent was regarded as having psychosis if they reported
experiencing at least one of a set of symptoms associated with psychosis in the past 12 months, such as (when not
dreaming/sleeping/using substances): Ever saw visions others couldn’t see; even felt their mind was being
controlled; ever experienced communication attempts from strange forces; and three others.

7

an SMI in the past twelve months.8 Not surprisingly, those with an SMI are at an elevated risk of
having been arrested, though in these data the arrest could have predated illness. The adjusted
bars on the right-hand side of the figure report results from a linear model of arrest rates on age
categories, gender, race, and having an SMI and abusing substances in the past 12 months. For
presentation, rates are compared against a “base case” rate of 42.2% for white males aged 25-34
with neither SMI nor substance abuse. Presence of an SMI alone elevates the rate of lifetime risk
of arrest to 57.9%, and substance abuse alone is much higher. As shown by a negative and
significant interaction term for substance abuse and serious mental illness, a person reporting
both SMI and substance abuse has adjusted arrest rates more like someone with SMI alone than
with substance abuse alone. We added an indicator of “other mental illness” into the model, and
the estimated coefficient for this variable was not significant at conventional levels, implying
that elevated rates of arrest are concentrated among those with serious mental illness or
substance abuse.9 (Regression results from the basic model are included in Appendix A.) From
these data, we would conclude that both serious mental illness and substance abuse have an
independent effect on arrest rates.
Overlap in Criminal Justice and Patient Samples
Community samples exclude individuals that are institutionalized, those in hospitals, jails
and prisons, and may undercount people that are homeless and others without established
community ties. A powerful impression of the association of mental illness and criminal
involvement emerges from studies of jail and patient samples.

8

The CPES also collected information about lifetime rates of SMI. The unadjusted rate of arrest is about 40 percent
for this group.
9
We have estimated models separately for males and females, and adjusting also for income and education. The
results are similar. SMI raises risk of arrest, but not as much as substance abuse. The interaction effect between the
two conditions is negative. The CPES contains an alternative arrest variable but it is only reported for about half the
sample used here.

8

Mental illness and symptoms of mental illness are highly prevalent among adult and child
criminal justice populations. In 2002, 25% of inmates in local jails had at least one previous
diagnosis of a mental illness; in 2004, 25.5% of inmates in state prisons and 14.8% of inmates in
federal prisons had at least one previous diagnosis of a mental illness (Wilper et al. 2009). The
prevalence of mental disorders among inmates of the Cook County Department of Corrections
was significantly higher than that of the general population, including major depression (3.9%
versus 1.1%), bipolar disorder (1.4% versus 0.1%), and schizophrenia (2.7% versus 0.9%);
overall, the rate of any severe mental disorder among inmates was elevated more than three-fold
(6.4% vs. 1.8%) in comparison to the general population (Teplin 1990). Inmates with major
psychiatric disorders, particularly bipolar disorder, are more likely to return to jail (Baillargeon
et al. 2009). Among inmates, prisoners with any psychiatric disorder were more likely to have
committed violent crimes that prisoners with no psychiatric disorder – this rate was further
elevated among prisoners with schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder (Baillargeon et al.
2009). The association between serious mental illness and violence and arrest is particularly
strong among individuals who are psychotic and do not adhere to medication (Ascher-Svanum et
al. 2006).
Criminal Opportunities and Victimization
Before considering the causal connection between mental illness and committing a crime,
it is worth mentioning another link between crime and mental illness, through the elevated rates
of victimization experienced by persons with severe mental illness. Issues of reverse causality
may confound associations in this literature as in connections already discussed. Teplin et al.
(2005) matched a sample of 936 patients with severe mental illness to a much larger comparison
group from the National Crime Victimization Survey and found dramatically elevated rates for

9

the mentally ill. Persons with mental illness were eight times more likely to be robbed, 15 times
more likely to be assaulted and 23 times more likely to be raped than the general population.
Vulnerability of community-based mentally ill makes them easy marks and creates criminal
opportunities contributing to overall criminal activity.10 Vulnerability of persons with mental
illness is exacerbated in prisons. Wolff et al. (2007) found male prisoners in New Jersey who
were mentally ill were three times more likely to be raped that those without mental illness.
Does Mental Illness Cause Crime?
Are people more likely to commit crimes due to having a mental illness? There are many
routes by which mental illness may make it more likely for an individual to engage in criminal
activity.11 Mental illness disrupts lives and may put people at higher risk for committing crimes
or being victimized. Mental illness interferes with human capital accumulation and wealth
building generally. Some psychotic symptoms, such as feeling threatened, may lead directly to
criminal conduct. Cognitive distortions associated with mental illness may erode interpersonal
relationships and lead individuals to approach situations in maladaptive fashion. Finally, mental
illness can make it more likely that individuals abuse drugs and alcohol, both of which also
contribute to crime.
Monahan and Steadman (1983) observe that some mental illnesses (such as bipolar
disorder) may predispose individuals to crime whereas others (such as catatonia) may inhibit
many activities including crime. Swanson, Swartz, Van Dorn et al (2008), find a complex mix of
effects of correlates and symptoms of schizophrenia on violence. In particular, negative
psychiatric symptoms (such as social withdrawal) predicted less violence.12 Most of the

10

See Cook’s chapter, this volume, on “criminal opportunities.”
We are grateful to Harold Pollack for discussion of some of these points.
12
See also Swanson, Swartz, Van Dorn et al. (2006).
11

10

empirical research investigating the causal effect of mental illness on crime has concentrated on
serious mental illnesses that blend conditions that may have a positive and negative effect.
As Link et al. (1992), Skeem et al. (2009) and others have emphasized, interpreting
correlations in community-based studies of illness and self-reported violence and crime is
problematic because mental illness and crime are both associated in complicated causal webs
with disadvantaged social backgrounds: poverty, bad housing, unsafe neighborhoods, among
other factors (Swanson et al., 2002). The poor and disadvantaged are both more likely to commit
crimes and more likely to be in the hands of the state mental health system. Without being able
to control for all of these factors it is difficult to attribute causality to mental illness using data
from a community sample.
To what degree is the observed correlation between mental illness and crime due to
unmeasured third factors? Skeem et al. (2008) studied 112 parolees with mental illness matched
to an otherwise similar group of parolees without mental illness. The parolees with mental
illness had more antisocial personality patterns, earlier and more diverse criminal histories, more
criminal attitudes and a pattern of generalized trouble in comparison to the non-ill parolees.
These variables, linked to crime, are often unmeasured in empirical investigations and could
account for the observed association between mental illness and criminal behavior.
It is useful to place our discussion in the context of more general theories of criminal
behavior. Bonta et al. (1998) regard crime as partly a learned behavior (“crime pays”) reinforced
by environments that tolerate crime and criminals, and personality traits, such as impulsivity or
antisocial attitudes. Mental illness has a role within this framework as it may have a direct affect
on personality traits, and an indirect effect on the environments a person spends time. Such a
more general theory also however points up the possibility that causes of crime, like

11

neighborhood characteristics or even personality are simply correlates of mental illness.
Perspectives from criminology develop broad-based theories of criminal behavior that can
accommodate mental illness, but emphasize other more general factors, such as a life-course
developmental perspective, or a local life circumstances perspective (Fisher, Silver and Wolff,
2006). The life-course perspective, for example, stresses early parenting styles. These theories
are an alternative to conceptualizing crime by persons with mental illness within theories of
mental illness and tend to deemphasize the salience of the illness as a cause of crime.
Interpretation of a correlation as causation is subject to other hazards. Teplin (1983,
1984) and others refer to the “criminalization of mental illness.” Fisher, Silver and Wolff (2006)
in their review of the conceptual connections between mental illness and crime see
criminalization as in reaction to the stricter requirements for involuntary inpatient psychiatric
treatment imposed in the 1970s. The burden of “social control” of persons with serious mental
illness shifted form the mental health to the criminal justice system. On a day-to-day basis,
criminalization implies that a person with mental illness committing offenses is more likely to be
arrested even with the offending behavior is similar. Higher arrest rates under this explanation
can be accounted for by police reaction to disturbed behavior, not a causal effect of mental
illness. Presumably this explanation is more relevant to less serious and nonviolent crimes, and
the data supporting this contention are equivocal (Fisher, Silver and Wolff, 2006). Conversely,
crime and mental illness could be correlated due to the “psychiatrization of criminal behavior”
noted by Monahan (1973). Aggression, violence, abuse of substances, among other behaviors,
has increasingly fallen within the domain of psychiatry. Those who at one time had been simply
called “bad,” are now instead or in addition labeled “ill.” If we, by definition label criminal
behavior to be mental illness, the positive link is not so much causal as definitional. Some

12

mental illnesses, like conduct disorder in adolescents, include criminal behavior as symptoms of
the illness itself. This explanation is likely to be more relevant to more serious offenses.
Studies of the clinical situation and the actual criminal behavior of persons with serious
mental illness have assessed the degree to which offenses are related to the immediate effects of
the symptoms of mental illness. Junginger et al. (2006) and Petersen et al. (2009) both find some
but a small part of the criminal behavior of offenders with mental illness is due to their
immediate symptoms; in Junginger et al. (2006), for example, it is only 8%. (The percentage
was higher, 26%, for substance abuse effects on arrests). The “immediate effect” of symptoms
means that a person may have reacted violently if, by disordered reasoning, he thought he being
threatened. Serious mental illness can put persons in positions of being likely to commit crimes
(e.g. by causing them to be homeless) which would not be accounted for in the methods in these
papers.
If current illness causes crime, effective treatment for the illness ought to reduce rates of
criminal activity. Another way to test for a causal relationship between serious mental illness
and crime is to see, in a treatment study, if randomization to treatment reduces crime. In effect,
treatment assignment becomes a kind of instrument for illness, avoiding endogeneity of illness
and other social factors. A “no treatment” group for schizophrenia may make such studies hard
to find, however. Reporting results from a prominent trial of treatment for schizophrenia, for
example, Swanson, Swartz, Van Dorn et al (2008) report that violence declined by around 15%
after treatment with antipsychotic medication. The violence reports in this study are pre-post.
Randomization was among alternative drug treatments for schizophrenia, and there, no
differences were found in violence reduction by drug assignment.

13

Marcotte and Markowitz (2009) call attention to the contemporaneous drop in violent
crime during the 1990s, and the rapid growth in treatment for mental disorders, particularly drug
treatment that occurred during the same period. Large national surveys estimate that between the
early 1990s and early 2000’s the percent of those with a mental disorder being treated rose from
20.3 percent to 32.9 percent (Kessler, Demler, et al., 2005). In an analysis of a panel of US
states from 1997-2004, they find that violent crime is negatively correlated with rates of
prescriptions for some antidepressants, antipsychotics, and stimulants for ADHD (in separate
models) after adjusting for some other variables likely to affect crime. If those results were
interpreted as causal, the observed growth of medication treatment over their time period would
account for 12 percent of the crime reduction.
Another perspective on the relationship of mental illness and crime derives from
longitudinal data, permitting the study of childhood mental health problems on adult criminal
behavior. Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and conduct disorder are both
prevalent illnesses whose consequences for many adult outcomes have been subject to study.
ADHD has been linked to risky behaviors, lower academic performance, and poor adult human
capital outcomes (see, e.g., Currie and Stabile, 2006). A recent paper by Fletcher and Wolfe
(2009) uses the large sample from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add
Health) to examine the association between ADHD symptoms and crime in young adulthood.
ADHD is positively associated with a range of criminal outcomes. For example, ADHD
increases the likelihood of being arrested (by a mean age of 22) by four percentage points (on a
sample average of about 12 percent) in a regression with extensive controls for individual,
family, and neighborhood characteristics. A significant positive estimated effect of ADHD is
maintained in a smaller sample identifying the effect off of sibling differences within families.

14

This strong research design, extensive controls including family fixed effects in a large
longitudinal data set, is applied in the next section, to study of conduct disorder.

3. Prevention and Treatment of Mental Disorders to Reduce Crime: The Case of Conduct
Disorder
Conduct disorder is characterized by aggression towards people or animals, property
destruction, deceit or theft, and serious rule violation, and is one of the most prevalent of
childhood mental disorders, with estimated lifetime prevalence rates of about 10% for males and
7% for females (Kessler, Berglund, et al. 2005 and Nock et al. 2006). The median age of onset is
11 years. Childhood onset of conduct disorder, defined as occurring prior to age 10, is regarded
as distinct from adolescent onset at ages 10 and above (Kazdin 2002). Childhood onset is more
likely to be severe and persistent (Nock et al. 2006). Untreated childhood onset is associated
with poor long-term development and poor social and economic outcomes in adulthood (Moffit,
1993). Many behaviors associated with the disorder are indeed criminal, and moderation of the
symptoms of conduct disorder, by definition, reduces criminal activity. No definitional
relationship connects childhood conduct disorder to adult crime. We focus on conduct disorder
in children, and its links to adult criminal activity.
Children with conduct disorder are at elevated risk to develop adult mental disorders,
drop out of school, abuse substances, and become pregnant as teenagers (Nock et al. 2006,
DHHS, 1999). Conduct disorder has also been associated with adult crime whereas the
association between crime and other childhood mental disorders is generally weaker. We discuss
this evidence in below. Prevention and treatment programs aimed at conduct disorder have been
found to be effective in controlled evaluations (Kazdin, 2002; Farmer et al. 2002). Investment in

15

treatment and prevention of conduct disorder is a candidate policy for an efficient way to reduce
criminal activity, the issue we investigate in this section.
3.1 General Framework
Cunha and Heckman (2007) regard the social and economic capabilities of adults as
being produced by a developmental process that starts in early childhood. Inputs into a child’s
development include parental capabilities, the household and community environment in which
the child grows up, and the investments made in the child and young adult by parents and others
(including the child him or herself). Research in psychiatric epidemiology and developmental
neuroscience calls attention to what might be called “toxic inputs” (our term) into the production
of mental health. Adversity early in life can literally damage the structure of a child’s brain in a
way that increases the likelihood of subsequent mental health problems (National Scientific
Council on the Developing Child, 2008). Toxic inputs include persistent poverty, abuse, neglect,
witnessing domestic violence, and maternal depression (Nock et al. 2006; Rubin et al. 2003;
IOM, 2009). Social programs may be able to counteract some of these negative effects.
Investment in prevention and early treatment of conduct disorders include teaching parenting
skills, treatment of parental substance abuse and depression, early recognition and treatment of
disruptive behavior and training of teachers in management of disruptive behavior (Kazdin 2002,
IOM, 2009).
3.2. Childhood Conduct Disorder and Adult Crime
We next consider the connection between childhood conduct disorder and adult crime,
with a focus on the question of whether conduct disorder in childhood can be considered a cause
of adult crime. The causal path could be from early to late mental illness, or from early illness to
a personally and socially disadvantaged young adulthood. We know children with conduct

16

disorder are less likely to do well in school and otherwise have a troubled adolescence. How
much of this carries over into young adulthood showing up in higher rates of criminal activity?
Swanson, Van Dorn, Swartz et al. (2008) used data from a large clinical trial on
treatment for schizophrenia to compare rates of violence in adults in patients who did and did not
have conduct disorders as children. Rates of violence were significantly higher among patients
who had had conduct disorder problems, and the rate of elevation varied uniformly with the
number of conduct problems, even in the presence of extensive controls, including substance use.
The investigators also found that medication adherence was associated with lower violence only
among adults with schizophrenia who did not have a history of antisocial conduct as children.
Large longitudinal data sets enable the study of the relationship between childhood
conduct disorders and consequences in later life. The U.K. collects data on birth cohorts
enabling longitudinal analyses of birth cohorts from 1946, 1958, and 1970 (Sainsbury Center for
Mental Health, 2009). The 1946 cohort of 5,362 people was followed until age 53. The 1958
cohort included 17,416 people followed up first at age 7 and until age 45. The 1970 cohort
consisted of 16, 571 subjects with the first follow-up at age 5, continuing until age 34. In each
cohort questions were asked of each child’s parents and teachers that enable conduct and other
emotional problems to be identified. The 1958 and 1970 cohorts used the Rutter A scale and the
1946 cohort used a prequel to the scale (Rutter et al. 1970).
Recent analyses of the 1958 and 1970 cohorts examine the relationship between
childhood and adolescent conduct problems and adult criminal activity (Sainsbury Center for
Mental Health, 2009). Analysis of the 1958 cohort estimated the relation between the presence
of either a severe or mild conduct problem during the teenage years on adult offending between
ages 32 and 42. Analysis of the 1970 cohort estimated the relation between severe and mild

17

conduct problems and lifetime offending up to age 34. Logit models stratified by gender and
controlling for IQ and father’s occupation revealed elevated rates of adult offending (arrested,
convicted of a crime) for people with severe conduct problems as teenagers in the 1958 cohort.
The estimated relative odds for men were between 1.1 and 1.9 compared to otherwise similar
people without conduct disorder. Analysis of the 1970 cohort linked severe conduct problems at
age 5 and offending between the ages of 16 and 34. The estimated logit models showed the
relative odds of being arrested for men were 3.4 fold and 2 fold for women, and the relative odds
of being convicted of a crime for men was 1.4 times that for men without childhood conduct
problems of any kind. The corresponding estimate for women was 1.5. Analyses of severe
conduct problems during early adolescence and lifetime offending between 16 and 34 years of
age showed relative odds of being arrested for men was about 4 times that for people with no
history of conduct problems. Women with severe conduct problems in adolescents had relative
odds that were 5 times those for women with no history of conduct problems. These estimates
are consistent with but do not establish causality because there are a variety of unobserved
factors that might affect both the development of conduct problems and criminal behavior later
in life.
Nagin and Tremblay (1999) followed a cohort of 1037 boys in Montreal, Canada to
investigate the effects of externalizing disorders, including indicators of conduct disorder, to
juvenile delinquency. Aggression and oppositional behavior persisted from childhood into
adolescence. Fergusson et al. (2005) studied a 25-year cohort of 973 children beginning at age 7
to 9 in New Zealand. Conduct problems were identified through teacher and parent interviews.
A variety of educations, economic and social outcomes were measured at age 25, including
criminal and anti-social behavior. The authors controlled for a variety of individual and family

18

covariates including child and family adversity, family socioeconomic status, parent educational
background, family stability (divorce, single motherhood, domestic violence), demographics
(ethnicity, age of parents) and child cognitive ability. The analysis compared children with rates
of conduct problems in the top 5% at ages 7-9 with those below the median. Multivariate
analysis showed that those in the top 5% of the distribution of conduct problems had rates of
property offenses that were 3 times those below the median (15.3% v 4.8%), rates of violent
offenses that were roughly four time those below the median (15.9% v. 3.9%) and rates of
arrest/conviction nearly 5 times higher (19.5% v 4.2%).
Currie and Stabile (2007) use the U.S. National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY)
and the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth (NLSCY) to study the
effect of mental and emotional problems in children on educational and behavioral outcomes.
They measure behavior for the Canadian children age 4 to 11 years in 1994 and observe
outcomes for the same children in 2002. For the NLSY they examine children aged 4 to 11 in
1994 and outcomes measured in 1998-2004. To address the problem of unobserved factors in an
analysis seeking a causal relationship, they examine households with multiple children and
including a household fixed effect. Thus, estimates of the impact of early life behavior problems
on subsequent delinquency in young adults are identified based on differences between siblings
growing up in the same household. Children with higher levels of antisocial and aggressive
behavior at ages 4-11 are more likely to display delinquency as young adults. The results were
similar for both the U.S. and Canadian cohorts.
We pursue a similar analysis of the NLSY as that conducted by Currie and Stabile (2007)
but focus on behavior problems at the most serious end of the spectrum for children ages 6 to 9
years. Specifically, we create an indicator for a child with behavioral problems that are in the

19

top decile of the age specific population. We also construct an indicator of whether the symptom
scale is between the 50th and 89th percentile of the age specific population. Like Currie and
Stabile (2007), we estimate the impact of conduct problems on expulsion/suspension from school
and the likelihood of having been arrested/convicted by age 16 using household (mother) fixed
effects, thereby basing identification on sibling differences.
We identified 6329 children living in multiple-child households where at least two
children had reached age 15 in 2008. Item non-response reduced the sample size for the
suspended/expelled and arrested/convicted regressions.13 Descriptive statistics from the
estimation samples are included in Table 1. Note that the percentage of children in our sample
who exceed the 90th percentile on the BPI antisocial scale is about 24 percent for each outcome,
indicating that the children in this sample are considerably more disturbed than a nationally
representative sample. The NLSY data guide acknowledges that the BPI distribution was above
national values in the early rounds of the NLSY, possibly due to oversampling children born to
younger and less-educated women.
Table 2 contains the results from three models, one with no controls, one with controls
listed in the Table, and one adding family fixed effects to the analysis. The dependent variable is
the 0-1 suspension/explusion by age 17. All models are estimated with a linear probability
models by a GLM. Key regressors are indicators of externalizing disorder symptoms (measured
at the 50-89th percentile and the 90+ percentile) and the household fixed effects.
The estimated coefficient for the 90th percentile for the externalizing disorder score is
positive and significant for being suspended/expelled in all specifications, though the estimated
magnitude drops as controls and then fixed effects are added. Having a high level of symptoms
of externalizing disorder increases the likelihood of being suspended or expelled by age 17 by
13

A delinquency scale was asked only in 1994, 1996 and 1998, and led to a smaller sample size.

20

14.3 percentage points in the model with fixed effects. The sample mean for suspended/expelled
is about 21% so this estimate implies a large elevation in the risk.
Table 3 contains the results bearing directly on criminal activity, with specifications and
analysis identical to those described for Table 2. The estimated impact of high levels of
externalizing disorder symptoms on probability of being arrested/convicted prior to age 16 and
on the delinquency score are positive and significant in all models, including with family fixed
effects where the point estimate indicates a 5 percentage point elevation on a base of about
4.6%, another large increase. To argue that the estimated effects in Tables 2 and 3 are causal,
we need to rely on the longitudinal research design with family fixed effects to control for
pervasive unobserved factors that might lead to both conduct disorder problems and later
behavioral problems. Overall, our findings are consistent with early conduct disorder causing
later criminal involvement. Of course if delinquency in teen years is seen simply as a
continuation of externalizing disorder in younger children identifying this “cause” does not help
much in understanding the developmental process behind the later criminal behavior.
3.2. Cost Effectiveness of Prevention of Conduct Disorder
Another way to approach the question of whether extension of mental health treatment to
a high-risk group reduces criminal behavior is to examine the results of social programs
changing access to, in this case, children with conduct disorder. A variety of prevention and
treatment programs aim to reduce the individual and social impacts of conduct disorder.
Effective prevention of conduct disorders requires identification of at-risk populations and
interventions in place early in a child’s life (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group,

21

1992; IOM, 2009). While a number of prevention interventions have been shown to be effective
we focus on prevention interventions where cost-effectiveness has also been assessed.14
A pair of meta analyses identifies prevention programs for which measured benefits,
including in terms of crime reduction, exceed costs (Aos et al. 2001, 2004). These are NurseHome visitation programs targeted at low income single mothers; Parent Child Interaction
Therapy; Home Visiting Programs for At-Risk Mothers, and the Good Behavior Game
(delivered in school). Overall the early childhood home visitation programs reviewed by Aos and
colleagues (2004) yielded net social benefits of about $6000 per child in 2003 dollars. The Good
Behavior Game which uses behavioral techniques in the classroom to prevent conduct problems
from developing yielded small positive benefits of less than $200 per child.
More recently Foster and colleagues (2005) conducted a cost-effectiveness study of the
Fast Track program which focuses specifically on prevention of conduct disorder and violence.
The program was likely to be cost effective (70%) when targeted at high risk children but had a
less than 1% chance of being cost effective when applied to the general population in “high risk”
communities.
3.3. Cost Effectiveness of Treatment for Conduct Disorder
Kazdin (2002) identifies 550 psychosocial treatments for conduct disorder in children and
youth, noting paradoxically that treatments with the strongest evidence base are those less
frequently applied in practice.15 The treatments most frequently used to treat conduct disorder
are psychodynamic psychotherapy, eclectic psychotherapies and family therapy. Few of these are

14

Only a small portion of all the interventions that have been shown to be effective have been subjected to
economic evaluations (IOM, 2009 Chapter 9 p.254). Furthermore, where economic evaluations have been done, the
report notes that the findings are subject to considerable uncertainty from low statistical power, short follow-up
periods, and generalizability outside of research contexts.
15
Psychosocial treatments are emphasized because existing research suggests that pharmacotherapies are not
effective in treatment of conduct disorder.

22

supported by evidence of effectiveness.16 Kazdin (2002) identified five main classes of evidence
based treatments for conduct disorder. They are Parent Management Training (PMT),
Multisystemic Therapy (MST), Problem Solving Skills Training (PSST), Functional Family
Therapy (FFT) and Brief Strategic Family Therapy (BSFT). Recently, the National Institute for
Clinical Excellence (NICE) in the United Kingdom issued a technology appraisal guideline
indicating that parent training programs were cost-effective in treating conduct disorder (NICE,
2006).
PMT, MST, FFT and a program that combines several of these elements known as the
Incredible Years program have been subject to economic evaluations. Parent Management
Training (PMT) trains parents to modify their child’s behavior at home and in the context of their
family. PMT is based on the theory that poor parenting is a source of conduct disorder. Parents
are trained to identify problem behaviors and to intervene in ways that do not reinforce bad
behavior. NICE (2006) concluded that PMT was cost-effective in relation to usual care of
conduct disorder due to savings from the health and education sectors. Some evidence of
reduced crime related activity has been reported in outcome studies but the net economic
consequences for criminal activity have not been established (Brestan and Eyberg, 1998).
Multi Systemic Therapy extends PMT by adding other types of skills and treatment
including family communication skills, marital therapy, and problem solving therapy among
others. Aos and Barnoski (1998) estimated significant net cost savings for MST, on the order of
$13,000 in 1997. Aos et al. (2004) conducted a later review of MST on the application of the
technology to violent offending youth aged 12 to17 years. The assessment was based on three
evaluations of MST targeted at offending youth. MST incurred direct costs of $4,473 on average
in year 2000 dollars, whereas the savings to the criminal justice system were estimated at
16

An exception is Brief Strategic Family Therapy (BSFT), discussed below.

23

$31,661. The large benefits in this study appear to stem from the highly targeted nature of the
populations treated with MST.
Functional Family Therapy (FFT) was evaluated in Washington State (Washington State
Institute for Public Policy, 2004) by randomly assigning youth offenders to FFT, MST,
Aggression Replacement Training (ART) or a waiting list (with usual care).17 FFT focuses on
teaching families to change problematic family behaviors through the development of problem
solving skills. Families participate in 12 therapy visits over a 90-day period. ART is a group
therapy method administered to youth offenders for 30 hours over a 10 week period. It focuses
on teaching youth to control impulses and anger. Therapists running the groups received
intensive training and their adherence to the ART model was measured. ART has been widely
adopted by juvenile courts in Washington State. The meta analysis by Aos et al. (2004) estimated
savings, based on four controlled evaluations, of $10 to $30 in criminal justice spending for each
dollar of direct program spending.
The Washington State evaluation found no significant differences between rates of
overall recidivism or felony recidivism between FFT, ART and the controls. However, for
therapists that adhere to the treatment the two experimental programs yielded savings of between
$10 and $12 for each dollar of program spending. This analysis however, sacrifices the virtues of
randomization since adherence rates may be associated with a variety of unmeasured
characteristics of the youths assigned to different therapists. Furthermore, fidelity to program
design is higher in experimental than real-world settings, implying that the overall results might
be more of what we could expect in non-experimental settings rather than results for the
therapists with the greatest fidelity.
3.4. Summary Comment
17

Implementation problems for MST limited the ability to evaluate the MST intervention.

24

Evidence from longitudinal surveys in the New Zealand, the U.K., Canada and the U.S.
imply that the association between early life conduct problems and later criminal activity is
partly causal. Prevention and treatment programs have potential to reduce the economic and
social costs of crime stemming from conduct disorder to a degree that may more than pay for
treatment. Some studies yield very favorable payoffs in terms of lowering criminal justice costs
from investment in treatment and prevention. However, this potential has not been clearly
established in the real world of the constrained, poorly coordinated, unevenly staffed social
service, education, and criminal justice sectors.

4. Mental Health Treatment for Offenders
An obvious high-risk candidate group for enhanced investment in mental health treatment
is those how have already offended and are at some stage in the criminal justice system. The
left-hand side of Figure 3 depicts a typical sequence of events for an offender. After a policy
encounter, arrest and arraignment, the accused proceeds to trial, and if found guilty, is sentenced
to prison or jail. Eventually the offender would be released to the community and may be put on
probation, remaining for some period under the supervision of the criminal justice system.
Movement down the left hand side is slow, expensive and may not be effective in
forestalling future problems, especially for people with serious mental illnesses. At virtually
every step in the process interventions addressing role of mental illness have been devised to
divert the offender from the criminal justice system; some of these are indicated in Figure 3.
Some police officers have special training in mental health issues and are trained to handle
mentally ill offenders with recognition of the role of symptoms and illness in behavior. Mental
health courts, reviewed in detail below, are an alternative to regular court trials. Judges in these

25

courts work with mental health system professionals, more actively supervise progress, and
employ jail-prison as a backup for lapses in progress. Mental health courts are one but not the
only way that offenders, upon release, can be referred and in many cases forced to receive
community treatment (such as medication and counseling). During the probation period, some
jurisdictions use probation officers with special training and who specialize in persons with
mental illness.
Criminal justice system involvement identifies good targets for intervention, and,
furthermore, enforces a link between offenders and mental health treatment. One would expect
that closely targeted mental health treatment, with sanctions of the criminal justice system
backing up adherence, would have a good chance of being cost-effective. We review here the
evidence for mental health interventions associated with mental health courts and mandated
community treatment, two prominent policies diverting offenders from the left-hand side of
Figure 3.18
4.1 Mental Health Courts
Mental Health Courts (MHCs) are alternatives to regular courts for offenders whose
mental illness may have contributed to their criminality, and employ resources of both the
criminal justice and the mental health system within a framework of therapeutic jurisprudence
(Wexler and Winick 1991). Therapeutic jurisprudence is based on the principle that punishment
should not be the sole concern of the courts, but rather the well-being of the accused as well as
the potential mitigating circumstances regarding mental health are required for a more complete
sense of justice (Rottman and Casey, 1999). MHCs were modeled on drug courts established
earlier (Steadman et al. 2001), with the important distinction that while drug possession and use
are crimes, having a mental illness is not. The monitoring-sanctioning function of MHCs thus
18

See Skeem, Manchak and Peterson (2009) and Monahan and Steadman (2010) for related reviews.

26

works differently than drug courts, and the enforced treatment handed down by MHCs is also
more controversial than treatment mandates set for drug offenders (Slate and Johnson, 2008).
Broward County, Florida, established the first MHC in 1997, one county north from the
nation’s first drug court in Dade (Poythress et al. 2002). Broward’s MHC was established with
the goals of making sure mentally ill patients were released from jail in a timely fashion, got
connected with both legal representation and mental health resources, and were oriented well in a
return to the community (Cristy et al. 2005). MHCs have proliferated, mainly in southern and
western states (Slate and Johnson, 2008). By December, 2005, the National Alliance for the
Mentally Ill (2005) counted 113 courts; Steadman recently estimated that there are about 150
courts in operation (Slate and Johnson, 2008).19 The Mentally Ill Offender Treatment and Crime
Reduction Act of 2003 awards grants to counties for mental health courts or other court-based
programs fueling growth of MHCs. Research on MHCs must contend with local idiosyncrasies
(Steadman et al. 2001), and the malleable nature of court administration (Bernstein and Seltzer,
2003).
MHCs are usually defined as courts with a separate docket for mentally ill
patients with specialized personnel to handle the cases. Courts set criminal and mental
health criteria for selecting candidates (Redlich et al. 2005).20 To establish leverage,
some MHCs require that the defendant enter a guilty plea (Bernstein and Seltzer, 2003).
19

There is no consensus on the definition of a MHC (Christy et al., 2005).
Some courts test potential clients after the initial arrest, and some require confirmed diagnosis before considering
the candidate eligible for treatment. Referrals to MHCs come from law enforcement personnel, court personnel,
district attorneys, public defenders or patient families. In an early study of 20 MHCs, Bernstein and Seltzer (2003)
report that four courts excluded offenders with any history of violent behavior. Ten courts accepted offenders with
felony charges, and ten were restricted to those with misdemeanor only charges. In Broward County, referrals to the
MHC must come post-arrest and may only come from other judges, district attorneys or lawyers for the defense
(Christy et al. 2005). Redlich et al. (2005) distinguish between what they refer to as first and second-generation
MHCs. Those following the Broward County model, accepting only misdemeanor patients, are termed first
generation courts. Second generation courts modify the Broward County model on four dimension: “(a) type of
charges the court accepts (felony vs. misdemeanor), (b) type of adjudicative model the courts follow (pre- vs.
postadjudication), (c) sanctions used in the court (specifically the expressed willingness to use jail as a sanction),
and (d) supervision of MHC participants (mental health vs. criminal justice professionals).” (Redlich et al. 2005)
20

27

Discharge from an MHC may take months or years, and may extend well beyond the time
a defendant would have spent in jail had he followed the normal route of criminal justice.
Although mental health courts may help mentally ill offenders avoid jail time, they are
designed to incur additional costs in terms of MHC supervision and contacts, and in the
mental health treatment system.
MHCs have been studied from several perspectives. Legal scholars question the concept
of therapeutic jurisprudence and whether offenders with mental illness are competent to abdicate
their rights to regular judicial processing including jury trial (Slobogin 1995, Allen and Smith,
2001). Others question whether clients in MHCs should be coerced or “leveraged” into
treatment (Griffin et al. 2002).21 MHCs mandate the mental health system to treat courtsupervised clients at a high priority, and in a setting with limited community-based resources,
some other clients, possibly with greater need from a clinical perspective, will be crowded out
(Clark 2004; Goldkamp and Iron-Guynn 2000; Steadman et al. 2001; Watson et al. 2001).22
Discretion in application of who is “appropriate” for MHCs, access to mental health courts may
not be fair, in the sense of leading to systematic discriminating on the basis of gender or race.23

21

See Monahan et al. (2005) for an empirical review of the application of “leverage” in mental health courts.
In principle, any impact of “queue-jumping” on the mental health system should be taken into account in
evaluating the impact of MHCs, this is very difficult to do in practice (Wolff 2002, Petrila 2003). In resource
constrained mental health systems, persons with mental illness have incentives to offend in order to access
treatment, an “unintended consequence” referred to by a number of observers (Sinaiko and McGuire 2006, Wolff
2002).
23
MHC clientele differ systematically from traditional criminal caseloads. Referring agents may select for ‘good’
risks based upon personal characteristics. Steadman et al. (2005) studied selection in seven MHCs concluding that
older, white females tend to be preferentially referred to MHCs. Naples et al. (2007) confirmed the Steadman
finding in that older, white women without felony or violent charges (even among courts that accept felony cases)
appear to be preferentially selected for entry into mental health court. The other way to state these results is that
young Black males are less likely to be referred to MHCs. Whether this represents unfair discrimination or
decisions based on application of reasonable criteria for likely success in MHCs has not been established. Fairness is
an issue in other application of mental health treatments for criminal justice populations, though the treatment is not
always regarded as a positive as in the case of MHCs. Blacks are more, not less likely to be referred to mandated
outpatient treatment, though in the case of New York State at least, this is due to Blacks’ overrepresentation in the
denominator population of those at risk for crime with extensive contact with the public mental health system rather
than any race-based discrimination by referring agents. See Swanson et al (2009).
22

28

Our main interest is evaluation of MHCs from the standpoint of their impact on criminal
justice and mental health system outcomes and costs. Table 3 summarizes the findings of eight
case studies of particular courts. The reports are generally positive, but study designs are not
uniformly strong.24
Cosden (2003) investigated the Santa Barbara MHC/ACT system for clients that received
MHC treatment compared to TAU using a randomized design. Clients in the MHC system
reported marginally better quality of life increases, but similar criminal outcomes in terms of
number of times arrested and time in jail. Cosden notes however, that MHC patients had less
intensive jail stays and were more frequently released with no charge.
Ridgely et al. (2007) studied the Allegheny County (Pittsburgh, PA) MHC, oriented to
non-violent offenders (though some aggravated assault cases are admitted). The court accepts
only those individuals with a documented diagnosis of mental illness and requires a guilty plea
be entered before beginning the MHC intervention. Like most MHCs, the intervention is a form
of monitored probation with integrated community treatment and ‘reinforcement hearings’ in the
MHC. Participants are discharged as having completed the program, potentially earlier than a
normal sentence, after the MHC team rules treatment to have been effective. The pre-post
component of the study yielded savings after one year and even larger savings, over $9,000 over

24

Hendrickx et al. (2005) studied the MHC in Clark County Nevada using a 12-month pre-post time comparison.
Crime dropped after MHC participation, and dropped most for those completing court participation. Boothroyd et
al. (2005) and Christy et al. (2005) studied mental health and criminal justice outcomes, respectively, for the
Broward court, comparing trends for MHC participants from a matched group of misdemeanants from Hillsborough
County. Although the MHC participants were more likely to be linked to treatment, this did not improve mental
health outcomes. Christy reported mainly favorable criminal justice outcomes.
Compared to offenders handled in regular court, Moore (2006) finds reduced recidivism in a MHC in the
southeastern U.S., particularly for those completing MHC. Trupin (2003) investigated the effect of MHCs in Seattle
on recidivism, clinical outcome measures and severity. In a pre-post comparison, recidivism dropped. Notably,
offenders were in jail longer pre-booking with MHCs, offsetting any savings in reduced recidivism. McNiel (2007)
examined the San Francisco county MHC which included violent offenders. Compared to a matched sample,
recidivism fell 55%, but McNiel cautioned that the propensity matching may not be picking up unobservable
characteristics related to being “most likely to violently reoffend,” biasing findings in favor of the MHC, a problem
plaguing the nonexperimental studies.

29

two years. The savings were largely in the form of reduced jail days, set against estimated MHC
and mental health system costs. Investigators attempted to compensate for weaknesses of the
pre-post design by construction of a hypothetical counterfactual group. With the assumptions
behind this hypothetical group, Ridgely et al. (2007) believed there would be a net savings from
MHCs if subjects were followed at least for two years.
The evidence is highly uneven on the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of MHCs.
Some but not all of the evaluations of MHCs point to a reduction in criminal activity associated
with participation in the court. Little evidence connects the mental treatment component of the
mental health court to these positive outcomes. In some studies mental health outcomes were not
evaluated. In others there was a weak or no effect, even when the criminal justice outcomes
were affected (as in the Broward evaluations). Good cost data to evaluate the cost-effectiveness
of this set of interventions is essentially absent.
4.2 Voluntary and Involuntary Community Treatment
By voluntary treatment we have in mind the typical client-provider relationship in which
treatment is sought freely by the client, who may terminate treatment at any time, and
symmetrically, the provider is under no obligation, other than due to normal professional
responsibility, to treat the client. Access to public and private mental health care is restricted by
non-price rationing, such as capacity constraints. Relaxation of these constraints will lead to
more use, and possibly reduction in criminal justice costs. Expansion of access to voluntary
treatment for mental health care is generally not done for the purpose of affecting the criminal
justice system. Any such offset would be a kind of bonus over and above the main purpose of
providing good mental health care to those who need it.

30

Two studies of the introduction of managed mental health care in King County (Seattle),
Washington, investigate how an exogenous shift in the availability of community-based mental
health services affects jail use.25 For Medicaid enrollees in 1995, a prospective payment system
replaced a fee-for-service payment system to community-based mental health care providers in
Seattle, giving them new incentives to “manage care.” Managed care introduces an incentive to
providers to reduce costs and even to “cost shift” care of persons with mental illness to other
sectors, such as jails. The authors posit this incentive may affect jail use: “If managed care
worsens access to adequate mental health treatment and resulting worsened mental health status
leads to more criminal offenses, then jail detentions should increase.” (Norton et al. 2006, p720)
Outpatient mental health costs fell after the introduction of managed care, and according
to the analysis in Domino et al. (2004) of about 40,000 Medicaid enrollees, in which nonMedicaid enrollees were used as a control group, managed mental health care resulted in a 5
percent increase in the likelihood of jail for a typical Medicaid enrollee (on a base rate of about 3
percentage points). In a subsequent analysis of a subset of 6800 persons who were likely to be
severely mentally ill, however, the authors found no effect of managed care on the likelihood of
jail (Norton et al. 2006).26
Involuntary outpatient commitment, sometimes euphemistically referred to as “assisted
outpatient commitment” is a form of civil commitment for persons with mental illness modeled
on earlier civil commitment to inpatient care. Under involuntary outpatient commitment laws, a
court determines that a person is remanded to care of the mental health system. The subject is

25

Domino et al (2004) and Norton et al (2006) are essentially the same research team.
The statistical methods of the two studies are quite different (two-part model vs Markov model), leaving it unclear
how to understand the different findings of the two studies.

26

31

obliged to get care and the system is obliged to give it to him.27 Patient non-compliance can
result in transport to an inpatient facility to be evaluated for an involuntary inpatient admission.
The impression patients have that they are required to comply with treatment is probably more
powerful than any actual legal sanction (Borum et al., 1999). Maximum available sanctions are
not always employed. More than forty states have some provision for outpatient commitment,
and although the primary legislative intention behind assisted commitment is to convince
noncompliant but needy patients to get treatment, outpatient commitment is probably the most
prevalent policy with the potential for using the mental health system to avoid crime and
criminal justice costs. Outpatient commitment can be evaluated from numerous perspectives, its
ethical principles, the experience of coercion, improvements in mental health, as well as its
impact on criminal justice (Monahan, 2008; Swartz et al. 2002).
The Duke Mental Health Study (Swartz et al. 2001) recruited 331 persons committed by
a court in North Carolina to community treatment, and randomly assigned about half of these to
be released from the orders. Both groups had access to enhanced mental health care, so the
randomization is associated with mandating, not the availability of services. A reduction in
arrests was associated with extended outpatient commitment for a subset of seriously ill patients
(Swanson et al., 2001). The comparison in this paper is no or short versus extended commitment
without randomization. The experimental vs. control group found no significant differences in
arrests.
New York State (NYS) established an outpatient commitment law (Chapter 408 of the
Laws of 1999) known as Kendra’s Law, named after a young woman pushed in front of a
subway train in New York City by a man with serious mental illness. NYS evaluated the law

27

“Mandated” or involuntary treatment can commit the client to go to care, the provider to supply care, or both. See
Sinaiko and McGuire (2006) for discussion and classification.

32

itself (NYS OMH, 2005), and commissioned an independent evaluation (Swartz et al., 2009). In
addition, researchers have studied the law’s impact (Link, 2010).
NYS created strict criteria for a person to be eligible for assisted outpatient treatment
(AOT) including illness, dangerousness, noncompliance history, and likelihood of benefiting
from AOT (Swanson et al 2009). By December 2004, 3,493 had received court-ordered
treatment through AOT. New York State’s evaluation used a pre-post design and showed very
large favorable changes comparing the six-month period prior to AOT assignment to the months
afterwards. Rates of incarceration fell from 23% pre to 3% during AOT (NYS OMH, 2005,
p.18). Arrests fell from 30% to 5%; psychiatric hospitalization from 97-22%; homelessness
from 19% to 5%. In the NY evaluation, AOT assignment is catching individuals at a time of
crisis, and they are likely to have improved in any case without AOT.
Link (2010) compared 76 individuals assigned to AOT with 108 patients recently
discharged from a psychiatric hospital. Matching via propensity scores he found the AOT group
had significantly lower rates of suicide risk, serious violent behavior, and better illness-related
social functioning. Interestingly the AOT group reported less subjective coercion associated
with treatment compared to the non AOT group. This matched, cross-sectional, post design
relies heavily on the ability to find comparable patients to those assigned to AOT.
Involuntary outpatient commitment shows some promise in improving both mental health
and reducing crime. Costs, however, have not yet been systematically studied, and they key
question of how the costs of enhanced outpatient treatment stack up against any savings in
criminal justice has not yet been answered.28

28

Ongoing research on Kendra’s Law will address this issue. The costs of enhanced services for criminal offenders
through involuntary treatment generally fall on the public mental health system. If this system is capacityconstrained, the cost will be manifest as other patients not getting treatment. See Sinaiko and McGuire (2006) for

33

5. Conclusions
As others have argued, persons who are severely mentally ill should be offered treatment,
independently of any social externalities that might flow to others (Monahan and Appelbaum,
2000). This paper bears on whether extra priority ought to be put on services for persons with
mental illness who also commit crimes, in terms of providing these individuals better access,
more extensive treatment, or even in terms of imposing sanctions against not adhering to
treatment. The potential spillover benefits – less crime, lower criminal justice costs – are
experienced by others, not the patient, implying the patient would put little weight on them in
deciding about treatment, and creating the classic externality rationale for special subsidy or
quantity targets.
The correlation between serious mental illness and crime, especially based on criminal
justice-involved samples, lends curb-appeal to the case for special priority. Time-series data are
also highly suggestive of a close connection between mental illness and the way we manage it,
and crime. Frank and Glied (2006) tracked the living arrangements of persons with serious and
persistent mental illness (SPMI) over the 50-years between 1950 and 2000.
“Deinstitutionalization” reduced the percent of persons with SPMI in psychiatric hospitals from
23 percent to seven percent over this period; during the same period, the percent of persons with
SPMI residing in jails and prisons went from one percent to five percent.29 These associations
do not of course amount to a sound case for elevated priority.

discussion, and Swanson, Van Dorn, Swartz et al. (unpublished) for evidence that in the early phase of the
implementation of Kendra’s Law, there was some “crowd-out” effect.
29
As Frank and Glied point out, the increasing incarceration rates in the 80s and 90s swept up larger portions of
criminals in the net, including those with mental illness.

34

Researchers do find some convincing causal connection between mental illness and
crime, but it is not large, and it is specific to certain groups of patients at certain stages of their
illness. The case for broad-based expansion of mental health prevention or treatment would need
to rest on grounds other than crime reduction. We identified some potential areas for effective
care targeted to high-risk groups, youth offenders with conduct disorders and adults with serious
mental illness. Some criminal justice offsets seem to follow enhanced mental health services for
these groups.
The strength of the evidence for positive spillover is not overwhelming. Two recent
reviews came to similar conclusions about the limited role of crime-related arguments for putting
more resources into mental health care. Skeem et al., (2009) conclude that while “theoretically,
effective psychiatric treatment would reduce recidivism for the subgroup of offenders for whom
mental illness has a direct effect on criminal behavior,” there is no evidence to date “that
insufficient psychiatric treatment causes criminal justice involvement for this population.” (p.
16). Fisher, Silver and Wolff (2006), referring to the high prevalence of persons with mental
illness in the criminal justice system: “…Targeting mental health treatment services as “the”
problem and “the” solution is … likely ineffective as a means of addressing this issue.” (p.548)
The evidence on criminal justice impacts needs to be understood within the context of the
package of social needs and deficits bearing on this group. Among disadvantaged populations
with elevated rates of crime, homelessness, welfare, and poverty, effective mental health care
produces joint products, better mental health, and better social functioning, including less crime
and its associated costs. To judge the value in relation to cost of mental health care, it is
insufficient to track just one of the potential joint products and compare value in this one sphere
to the costs. Although the interventions reviewed here have in common that they seek to

35

improve mental health and functioning as well as impact criminal justice, the scope of each type
of program, and the need to take into account a range of factors, differs across intervention types.
The most focused intervention we covered is the mental health court. These courts are
adjuncts to the criminal justice system, and their costs and benefits are directed primarily to
criminal justice considerations. Rigorous evaluation of mental health courts are lacking, in spite
of the years of experience in many jurisdictions with the courts. Cost data are particularly
needed. Comparison of the full social cost, of crime, criminal justice, court operation, and the
mental health system will lead to an accounting of a sufficient set of effects to make a
determination of the net value of this policy. Based on the evidence available to date, it seems
unlikely that any effect of mental health courts is not mediated through improvement in the
mental health of the offenders under supervision. If this turns out to be correct, it may suggest
ways to economize on mental health treatment per se, and make an effort to identify the active
ingredient in the “mental health” court.
Involuntary outpatient treatment is more complex for purposes of evaluation than mental
health courts. Involuntary treatment can be targeted to the set of patients/offenders who are most
likely to benefit from treatment both from a clinical as well as a criminal justice standpoint. The
criminal justice/mental health cost-effectiveness of this policy is an important but one piece of
the set of information needed to conduct a social evaluation. Cost-effectiveness is ill-suited to
valuing the subjective and ethical social costs of coercion associated with involuntary treatment.
In practice, those committed to involuntary treatment seem only mildly bothered by the coercion,
but this finding does not fully answer the ethical question about whether society should be
forcing mental health care.

36

References
Alegría, M., Takeuchi, D., Canino, G., Duan, N., Shrout, P., Meng, X.L., Vega, W., Zane,
N., Vila, D., Woo, M., Vera, M., Guarnaccia, P., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Sue, S., Escobar,
J., Lin, K.M., Gong, F. (2004), “Considering Context, Place and Culture: the National
Latino and Asian American Study,” International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric
Research 13(4): 208-220.
Allen, M., Smith, V.F. (2001), “Opening Pandora’s Box: the Practical and Legal Dangers of
Involuntary Outpatient Commitment,” Psychiatric Services 52(3): 342-346.
Aos, S., Lieb, R., Mayfield, J., Miller, M., and Pennucci, A. (2004), Benefits and Costs of
Prevention and early Intervention Programs for Youth, Washington State Institute for
Public Policy (July). Available at: http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/rptfiles/04-07-3901.pdf.
Accessed: September 2, 2009.
Aos, S., Phipps, P., Barnoski R., and Lieb, R. (2001), The Comparative Costs and Benefits of
Programs to Reduce Crime, Washington State Institute for Public Policy (May).
Available at: http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/rptfiles/costbenefit.pdf. Accessed: September 2,
2009.
Aos, S., and Barnoski R. (1998), Watching the bottom line: Cost effective interventions for
reducing crime in Washington, Washington State Institute for Public Policy (January).
Available at: http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/rptfiles/98-01-1201.pdf. Accessed: September 2,
2009.
Applebaum, P.S., Robbins, P.C, Monahan, J. (2000), “Violence and Delusions: Data from the
MacArthur Violence Risk Assessment Study,” American Journal of Psychiatry
(157):566-572.
Ascher-Svanum, H., Faries, D.E., Zhu, B., Ernst, F.R., Swartz, M.S., Swanson, J.W. (2006),
“Medication Adherence and Long-Term Functional Outcomes in the Treatment of
Schizophrenia in Usual Care,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 67(3): 453-460.
Baillargeon, J., Binswanger, I.A., Penn, J.V., Williams, B.A., Murray, O.J. (2009), “Psychiatric
Disorders and Repeat Incarcerations: The Revolving Prison Door,” American Journal of
Psychiatry 166 (1): 103-109.
Bernstein, R., Seltzer, T. (2003) “Criminalization of People With Mental Illness: the Role of
Mental Health Courts in System Reform.” University of the District of Columbia Law
Review 2003. Accessed through Bazelon.org, June 2008.
Bonta, J., Law, M., and Hanson, C., (1998), “The Prediction of Criminal and Violent Recidivism
Among Mentally Disordered Offenders: A Meta Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin,
123(2), 123-142.

37

Boothroyd, R.A., Mercado, C.C., Poythress, N.G., Christy, A., Petrila, J. (2005), “Clinical
Outcomes of Defendants in Mental Health Court,” Psychiatric Services 56(7): 829-834.
Borum WR, Swartz MS, Riley SR, Swanson JW (1999). Consumer Perceptions of Involuntary
Outpatient Commitment,” Psychiatric Services, 50(11), 1489-1491.
Brestan, E.V. and Eyberg, S.M. (1998), “Effective Psychosocial Treatment of Conduct
Disordered Children and Adolescents: 29 years 82 studies and 5,272 kids” Journal of
Clinical Child Psychology 27(2):180-189.
Harry, B., and Steadman, H.J. (1988) Arrest rates of patients treated at a community mental
health center. Hospital Community Psychiatry 40(12): 1303.
Clark, J. (2004) “Non-Specialty First Appearance Court Models for Diverting Persons with
Mental Illness: Alternatives to Mental Health Courts.” Delmar, NY: Technical
Assistance and Policy Analysis Center for Jail Diversion.
Council of State Governments. (2009), Criminal Justice/Mental Health Consensus Project.
Available at: http://consensusproject.org/. Accessed August 25, 2009.
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group (1992), “A developmental and clinical model for
the prevention of conduct disorders: The Fast Track Program” Development and
Psychopathology 4:509-527.
Cosden, M., Ellens, J.K., Schnell, J.L., Yamini-Diouf, Y., Wolfe, M.M. (2003), “Evaluation of a
Mental Health Treatment Court with Assertive Community Treatment,” Behavioral
Sciences and the Law 21(4): 415-427.
Christy, A., Poythress, N.G., Boothroyd, R.A., Petrila, J., Mehra, S. (2005), “Evaluating the
Efficiency and Community Safety Goals of the Broward County Mental Health Court,”
Behavioral Sciences and the Law 23(2): 227-243.
Cunha, F. and Heckman, J.J. (2007), “Technology and Skill Formation” American Economic
Review 97(2): 31-47.
Currie, J and Stabile, M. (2006) “ Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation: The
Case of ADHD” Journal of Health Economics 25(6): 1094-1118.
Currie, J. and Stabile, M. (2007), “Mental Health and Human Capital” NBER Working paper
#13217, July 2007.
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) (1999), Mental Health: A Report of the
Surgeon General, Washington: USGPO (Chapter 3). Available at:
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/mentalhealth/toc.html#chapter3 .

38

Domino, M.E., Norton, E.C., Morrissey, J.P., Thakur, N. (2004), “Cost Shifting to Jails After a
Change to Managed Mental Health Care,” Health Services Research 39(5): 1379-1401.
Farmer, E.M., Compton, S.N., Burns, B.J. and Robertson, E. (2002), “Review of Evidence Base
for Treatment of Childhood Psychopathology: Externalizing Disorders” Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 70(6): 1267-1302.
Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., and Ridder, E.M. (2005), “Show me the child at seven: The
consequences of conduct problems in childhood for psychosocial functioning in
adulthood,” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 46(8):837-849.
Fisher, W., Silver, E. and Wolff, N., (2006) “Beyond Criminalization: Toward a
Criminologically Informed Framework for Mental Health Policy and Services Research,”
Administration and Policy in Mental Health, 33(5), 544-557.
Fletcher, J. and Wolfe, B. (2009) “Long-Term Consequences of Childhood ADHD on Criminal
Activities” The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics (12): 119-138.
Foster, E.M., Jones, D.E., and the Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (2005), “The
Economic Analysis of Prevention: An Illustration Involving the Fast Track Project,”
Working Paper: Pennsylvania State University.
Frank, R.G. and Glied, S. (2006), Better But Not Well: Mental Health Policy in the United
States Since 1950, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Friedman, R.A. (2006) “Violence and Mental Illness—how strong is the link?” New England
Journal of Medicine 355(20):2064-6.
Goldkamp, J.S., Irons-Guynn, C. (2000), “Emerging Judicial Strategies for the Mentally Ill in the
Criminal Caseload: Mental Health Courts in Ft. Lauderdale, Seattle, San Bernardino, and
Anchorage,” Bureau of Justice Assistance Monograph NCJ 182504.
Griffin, P.A., Steadman, H.J., Petrila, J. (2002), “The Use of Criminal Charges and Sanctions in
Mental Health Courts,” Psychiatric Services 53: 1285-1289.
Heckman, J.J. and Masterov, D.V. (2004) The Productivity Argument for Investing in Young
Children. Technical Report Working Paper No. 5. Committee on Economic
Development, Washington, DC.
Hendrickx, H.A., Swart, S.C., Ama, S.M., Dolezal, C.D., King, S., (2005) “Rearrest and Linkage
to Mental Health Services Among Clients of the Clark County Mental Health Court
Program,” Psychiatric Services 56(7): 853-858.
Hodgins, S. (1992), “Mental Disorder, Intellectual Deficiency and Crime,” Archives of General
Psychiatry 49(6): 476-483.

39

Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2009), Preventing Mental, Emotional and Behavioral Disorders
Among Young People, Washington: National Academies Press.
Jackson, J., Torres, M., Caldwell, C., Neighbors, H.W., Nesse, R.M., Taylor, R.J., Trierweiler,
S.J., Williams, D.R. (2004), “The National Survey of American Life: a study of racial,
ethnic and cultural influences on mental disorders and mental health,” International
Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 13(4):196-207.
Junginger, J. Claypoole, K., Larygo, R., & Cristiani, A. (2006), “Effects of Serious Mental
Illness and Substance Abuse on Criminal Offenses,” Psychiatric Services, 57, 879-882.
Kazdin, A.E. (2002), “Psychosocial Treatments for Conduct Disorder in Children and
Adolescents” in P.E. Nathan, and J.M. Gorman (eds). A guide to treatments that work
(2nd edition), New York: Oxford University Press.
Kessler, R.C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K.R., Walters, E.E. (2005),
“Lifetime prevalence and age of onset distributions of DSM IV disorders in the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication”, Archives of General Psychiatry 62:593-602.
Kessler, R.C., Demler, O., Frank, R.G., Olfson, M., Pincus, A., Walters, E., Wang, P., Wells,
K.B. and Zaslavsky, A. (2005), “Prevalence and Treatment of Mental Disorders: 1990 to
2003,” New England Journal of Medicine (352): 2515-23.
Kessler, R., Merikangas, K. (2004), “The National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R),”
International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 13(2): 60-68.
Link, B.G., Andrews, H., and Cullen, F.T. (1992), “The Violent and Illegal Behavior of Mental
Patients Reconsidered,” American Sociological Review 57(3): 275-292.
Link, B. (2010) “Effectiveness and Outcomes of Assisted Outpatient Treatment in New York
State,” Psychiatric Services, forthcoming.
Marcotte, D.E. and Markowitz, S. (2009) “A Cure for Crime? Psycho-Pharmaceuticals and
Crime Trends,” NBER Working Paper 15354.
McNiel, D.E., Binder, R.L. (2007), “Effectiveness of a Mental Health Court in Reducing
Criminal Recidivism and Violence,” American Journal of Psychiatry 164(9): 1395-1403.
Modestin, J., Ammann, R. (1996), “Mental Disorder and Criminality: Male Schizophrenia,”
Schizophrenia Bulletin 22(1):69-82.
Moffit, T.E. (1993) “Adolescent limited life course persistent anti-social behavior: a
developmental taxonomy,” Psychological Review 100(4):674-701.
Monahan, J., and Appelbaum, P. (2000) “Reducing Violence Risk: Diagnostically-Based Clues
from the MacArthur Violence Risk Assessment Study,” in S. Hodgins (ed) Effective

40

Prevention of Crime and Violence Among the Mentally Ill. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp 19-34.
Monahan, J. (2008) Mandated community treatment: Applying leverage to achieve adherence.
Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law 36: 282-5.
Monahan, J., Redlich, A.D., Swanson, J., Robbins, P.C., Appelbaum, P.S., Petrila, J., Steadman,
H.J., Swartz, M., Angell, B., McNiel, D.E. (2005), “Use of Leverage to Improve
Adherence to Psychiatric Treatment in the Community,” Psychiatric Services 56(1): 3744.
Monahan, J. (1973), “The Psychiatrization of Criminal Behavior: A Reply,” Hospital and
Community Psychiatry 24(2):105-107.
Monahan, J., and Steadman, H. (1983), “Crime and Mental Disorder: An Epidemiological
Approach,” in Tonry, M. and Morris, N. (eds). Crime and Justice: An Annual Review of
Research. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Monahan, J and Steadman HJ (2010) “Extending Violence Reduction Principles to JusticeInvolved Persons with Mental Illness,” in Dvoskin, J., Skeem, J. Novaco, R and Douglas,
K (eds) Applying Social Science to Reduce Violent Offending. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Moore, M.E., Aldigé, V. (2006), “Mental Health Court Outcomes: A Comparison of Re-Arrest
and Re-Arrest Severity Between Mental Health Court and Traditional Court
Participants,” Law and Human Behavior 30(6): 659-674.
Moore, S., “Mentally Ill Offenders Strain Juvenile System,” The New York Times, August 10,
2009.
Naples, M., Morris, L.S., Steadman, H.J. (2007), “Factors in Disproportionate Representation
Among Persons Recommended by Programs and Accepted by Courts for Jail Diversion,”
Psychiatric Services 58(8): 1095-1101.
Nagin, D. and Tremblay, R.E. (1999), “Trajectories of Boys’ Physical Aggression, Opposition
and Hyperactivity on the Path to Physically Violent and Non-Violent Juvenile
Delinquency,” Child Development 70(5):1181-1196
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (2005). “Survey of Mental Health Courts.” Available at
http://www.mentalhealthcourtsurvey.com/pdfs/Mental_Health_Courts.pdf. Accessed:
June 1, 2009.
National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE), (2006), Parent training/education
programmes in the management of children with conduct disorder, TA102 Guidance.

41

National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH) Data Set: Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology
Survey Program (CPES): Integrated Weights and Sampling Error Codes for Design-based
Analysis, 2007.
National Mental Health Association (1987), Stigma: A Lack of Awareness and Understanding,
Alexandria, VA: National Mental Health Association.
National Scientific Council on the Developing Child (2008). Mental Health Problems in Early
Childhood Can Impair Learning and Behavior for Life: Working Paper #6. Harvard
University. Available at: http://www.developingchild.net . Accessed: September 2, 2009.
New York State, Office of Mental Health (NYS, OMH) (2005) “Kendra’s Law: Final Report on
the Status of Assisted Outpatient Treatment,” Albany NY, March.
Nock, M.K., Kazdin, A.E., Hiripi E., Kessler, R.C. (2006), “Prevalence, sub-types and correlates
of DSM IV conduct disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication,”
Psychological Medicine 36(5):699-710.
Norton, E.C., Yoon, J., Domino, M.E. and Morrissey, J.P. (2006) “Transitions Between the
Public Mental Health System and Jail for Persons with Severe Mental Illness: A Markov
Analysis,” Health Economics 15(7):719-733.
Petersen, J., Skeem, J, Hart, E., Vidal, S., and Keith, F. (2009) “Typology of Offenders with
Mental Disorder: Exploring the Criminalization Hypothesis,” University of California,
Irvine, Available at https://webfiles.uci.edu:443/skeem/Downloads.html.
Petrila, J., Ridgely, M.S., Borum, R. (2003), “Debating Outpatient Commitment: Controversy,
Trends and Empirical Data,” Crime and Delinquency 49:157-172.
Poythress, N.G., Petrila, J., McGaha, A., Boothroyd, R. (2002), “Perceived Coercion and
Procedural Justice in the Broward Mental Health Court,” International Journal of Law
and Psychiatry 25(2): 517-533.
Redlich, A.D., Steadman, H.J., Monahan, J. Petrila, J. and Griffin, P.A. (2005) “The Second
Generation of Mental Health Courts,” Psychology, Public Policy and Law 11(4):527538.
Ridgely, M.S., Engberg, J., Greenberg, M.D., Turner, S., DeMartini, C., and Dembosky, JW.
(2007), “Justice, Treatment and Cost: An Evaluation of the Fiscal Impact of the
Allegheny County Mental Health Court,” Rand Technical Reports TR-439: 64 pages.
Rottman, D., and Casey P. (1999), “Therapeutic jurisprudence and the emergence of problemsolving courts,” National Institute of Justice Journal, July: 12-19.

42

Rubin, K., Burgess, K., Dwyer, K., and Hastings, P. (2003), “Predicting Preschoolers
externalizing behaviors from toddler temperament, conflict and maternal negativity,”
Developmental Psychology 39:164-176
Rutter, M., Tizard, J., and Whitmore, K. (1970), Education, Health and Behavior, London:
Longmans.
Sainsbury Center for Mental Health (2009), Childhood mental health and life chances in postwar Britain, London: The Sainsbury Center for Mental Health.
Sinaiko, A.D., McGuire, T.G. (2006), “Patient Inducement, Provider Priorities, and Resource
Allocation in Public Mental Health Systems,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law
31(6): 1075-1105.
Skeem, J., Manchak, S., Johnsont. & Gillig, B., (2008) Comparing Specialty and Traditional
Supervision for Probationers with Mental Illness, University of California, Irvine,
Available at https://webfiles.uci.edu:443/skeem/Downloads.html.
Skeem, J.L. Manchak, S. and Peterson, J.K., (2009), “Correctional Policy for Offenders with
Mental Illness: Moving Beyond the One-Dimensional focus to Reduce Recidivism,”
unpublished.
Slate, R.N., and Johnson, W.W. (2008), The Criminalization of Mental Illness: Crisis and
Opportunity for the Justice System, Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press.
Slobogin, C. (1995), “Therapeutic Jurisprudence: Five Dilemmas to Ponder,” Psychology, Public
Policy, and Law 1(1): 193-219.
Steadman, H.J., Davidson, S., and Brown, C. (2001), “Mental Health Courts: Their Promise and
Unanswered Questions,” Psychiatric Services 52(4): 457-458.
Steadman, H.J., Redlich, A.D., Griffin, P., Petrila, J., Monahan, J. (2005), “From Referral to
Disposition: Case Processing in Seven Mental Health Courts,” Behavioral Sciences and
the Law 23(2): 215-226.
Stueve, A. and Link, B. (1997), “Violence and Psychiatric Disorders: Results from an
Epidemiological Study in Israel,” Psychiatric Quarterly 68:327-342.
Swanson, J.W., Borum, W.R., Wsartz, M.S., Hiday, V.A., Wagner, H.R., Burns, B.J. (2001),
“Can Involuntary Outpatient Commitment Reduce Crime Among Persons with Severe
Mental Illness?” Criminal Justice and Behavior, 28(2): 156-189.
Swanson, J.W., Swartz, M.S., Van Dorn, R.A., Monahan, J., McGuire, T.G., Steadman, H.J.,
Robbins, P.C. (2009), “Racial disparities in involuntary outpatient commitment: Are they
real?” Health Affairs, 28(3): 816-826.

43

Swanson, J.W., Swartz, M.S., Van Dorn, R.A., Elbogen, E.B., Wagner, H.R., Rosenheck, R.A.,
Stroup, T.S., McEvoy, J.P., Lieberman, J.A. (2006) A National study of the violent
behavior in persons with schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(5):490-9.
Swanson, J.W., Holzer C.E. III, Ganju, V.K., and Jono, R.T. (1990), “Violence and Psychiatric
Disorder in the Community: Evidence from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area
Surveys,” Hospital and Community Psychiatry 41: 761-770.
Swanson JW, Swartz MS, Essock SM, Osher FC, Wagner HR, Goodman LA, Rosenberg SD,
Meador KG (2002). The social-environmental context of violent behavior in persons
treated for severe mental illness. American Journal of Public Health, 92(9): 1523-1531.
Swanson, JW, Van Dorn, RA, Swartz, MA, Smith, A, Elbogen, EB and Monahan, J. (2008)
“Alternative Pathways to Violence in Persons with Schizophrenia: The Role of
Childhood Antisocial Behavior Problems,” Law and Human Behavior (32): 228-240.
Swanson, J.W., Swartz, M.S., Van Dorn, R.A., et al. (2008), “Comparison of Antipsychotic
Medication Effects on Reducing Violence in People with Schizophrenia,” The British
Journal of Psychiatry, (193): 37-43.
Swanson, J.W., Van Dorn, R.A. and Swartz, M.S. et al (unpublished) Robbing Peter to pay Paul:
Did New York State’s involuntary outpatient commitment program crowd out voluntary
service recipients?
Swartz MS, Wagner HR, Swanson JW, et al (2002) The perceived coerciveness of involuntary
outpatient commitment: Findings from an experimental study. Journal of the American
Academy of Psychiatry and the Law 30: 207-217.
Swartz MS, Swanson JW, Hiday VA, et al. (2001) A randomized controlled trial of outpatient
commitment in North Carolina. Psychiatric Services 52: 325-29.
Swartz, MS, Swanson, JW, Steadman, HJ, Robbins, PC and Monahan J. (2009) New York State
Assisted Outpatient Treatment Program Evaluation. Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC, June, 2009.
Teplin, L.A. (1983), “The Criminalization of the Mentally Ill: Speculation in Search of Data,”
Psychological Bulletin 94:54-67.
Teplin L.A. (1984), “Criminalizing Mental Disorder: The Comparative Arrest Rate of the
Merntally Ill,” American Psychologist 39(7):794-803.
Teplin L.A. (1990), “The Prevalence of Severe Mental Disorder Among Male Urban Jail
Detainees: Comparison with the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Program,” American
Journal of Public Health 80(6): 663-669.

44

Teplin, L.A., McClelland, G.M., Abram, K.M., Weiner, D.A. (2005), “Crime Victimization in
Adults with Severe Mental Illness,” Archives of General Psychiatry 62(8): 911-921.
Treatment Advocacy Center (2009), Jails and Prisons, Briefing Paper updated April, 2009.
Available at: http://www.treatmentadvocacycenter.org/. Accessed August 25, 2009.
Trupin, E. and Richards, H. (2003), “Seattle’s Mental Health Courts: Early Indicators of
Effectiveness,” International Journal of Law and Psychiatry 26(1): 33-53.
Wallace, C., Mullen, P.E, and Burgess, P. (2004), “Criminal Offending in Schizophrenia Over a
25-Year Period Marked by Deinstitutionalization and Increasing Prevalence of Comorbid
Substance Use Disorders,” American Journal of Psychiatry 161: 716-727.
Washington State Institute for Public Policy (2004), Outcome Evaluation of Washington State’s
Research Based Programs for Juvenile Offenders (January).
Watson, A., Hanrahan, P., Luchins, D., Lurigio, A. (2001), “Mental Health Courts and the
Complex Issue of Mentally Ill Offenders,” Psychiatric Services 52(4): 477-481.
Wexler, D.B. and Winick, B.J. (1991), “Therapeutic Jurisprudence as a New Approach to Mental
Health Law Policy Analysis and Research,” University of Miami Law Review 45(5): 97987.
Wilper, A.P, Woolhandler, S., Boyd, J.W, Lasser, K.E, McCormick, D., Bor, D.H., Himmelstein,
D.U. (2009), “The Health and Health Care of US Prisoners: Results of a Nationwide
Survey,” American Journal of Public Health 99(4): 666-672.
Wolff, N. (2002), “Courts as Therapeutic Agents: Thinking Past the Novelty of Mental Health
Courts,” Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law 30:431-437.
Wolff, N., Blitz, C.L., Shi, J. (2007), Rates of sexual victimization in prison for inmates with and
without mental disorders. Psychiatric Services 58:1087–1094.

45

Figure 1
Past (Indirect) and Current (Direct)
Effects of Mental Illness on Crime
PAST

Personal
Family
Social Factors

CURRENT

Personal Social
Factors

CRIME

Mental Illness

Mental Illness

a)

“Mental illness
causes crime”
(Direct Effect)

Many Indirect Casual Arrows!

46

47

Figure 2
Serious Mental Illness, Substance Abuse and Arrest Rates

Unadjusted

Adjusted*
78.5%

Ever Arrested

64.9%
57.9%
45.9%
42.2%

28.0%

No SMI

SMI

White Male,
25-34, No SMI,
No Substance
Abuse

SMI, No
Substance
Abuse

No SMI,
Substance
Abuse

SMI,
Substance
Abuse

Source: Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology Surveys. Rates of arrest are lifetime
rates. Illness and substance abuse are rates for past 12 months.
*Linear model adjusted for gender, age categories and race/ethnicity

48

Figure 3
Mental Health Treatment in the Flow of Criminal Justice
Mental Health
Specialty Police

Police
Encounter
Arraignment
Hearing

Mental Health
Court

Trial

Prison

Involuntary
Inpatient
Treatment
•Community-Based Treatment Voluntary
| Involuntary
•Specialty Probation

Community
Criminal Justice
Outcomes

Mental Health
Outcomes

49

Table 1: Estimation Samples from NLSY

Model N
Dependent variable
No
Yes
BPI Antisocial score (percentile) at age 8 group
Below 50th percentile
50th to 89th percentile
90th percentile and above
Sex
Male
Female
Race
Hispanic
Black
White
First born
No
Yes
Teen mom
No
Yes
Mom divorced in last year
No
Yes
Mom widowed in last year
No
Yes

Suspended/Expelled
6,329

Convicted/Probation
5,421

4,978
1,351

78.65%
21.35%

4,828
593

89.06%
10.94%

2,155
2,696
1,478

34.05%
42.60%
23.35%

1,787
2,353
1,281

32.96%
43.41%
23.63%

3,253
3,076

51.40%
48.60%

2,777
2,644

51.23%
48.77%

1,420
2,020
2,889

22.44%
31.92%
45.65%

1,258
1,833
2,330

23.21%
33.81%
42.98%

4,190
2,139

66.20%
33.80%

3,493
1,928

64.43%
35.57%

5,191
1,138

82.02%
17.98%

4,426
995

81.65%
18.35%

5,928
401

93.66%
6.34%

5,088
333

93.86%
6.14%

6,318
11

99.83%
0.17%

5,412
9

99.83%
0.17%

Note: Children are from multiple-child households where at least two children reach age 15 by
2008. Dependent variables are "ever" up to age 17.

50

Table 2 Suspension/expulsion by age 17
NSLY Regression Results
No controls
BPI 90th
BPI 50-89

0.269**
(0.013)
0.090**
(0.010)

Male
Latino
Black
First Born
Teen Mom
Divorce Last Yr
Widow Last Yr
Intercept
R2
N
Fixed Effects

0.081**
(0.007)
0.068
6329
No

With controls
0.206**
(0.012)
0.058**
(0.010)
0.102**
(0.009)
0.053**
(0.015)
0.240**
(0.011)
-0.012
(0.010)
0.066**
(0.014)
0.019
(0.018)
0.018
(0.095)
-0.003*
(0.009)
0.151
6329
No

Controls & fixed
effects
0.143**
(0.017)
0.027*
(0.012)
0.116**
(0.010)
0.620
(1.095)
0.383
(1.176)
0.015
(0.010)
0.006
(0.018)
0.004
(0.022)
0.137
(0.114)
-0.269
(0.332)
0.559
6329
Yes

** p<0.01 *p<0.05

51

Table 3 Convicted or Probation by age 17
NSLY Regression Results
No controls
BPI 90th
BPI 50-89

0.122**
(0.011)
0.039**
(0.009)

0.108**
(0.011)
0.036**
(0.009)
0.054**
(0.008)
0.017
(0.014)
0.007
(0.010)
-0.031**
(0.009)
0.007
(0.013)
0.047**
(0.017)
0.133
(0.097)

0.061**
(0.007)
0.022
5421
No

0.041**
(0.009)
0.033
5421
No

Male
Latino
Black
First Born
Teen Mom
Divorce Last Yr
Widow Last Yr
Intercept
R2
N
Fixed Effects

With controls

Controls & fixed
effects
0.050**
(0.016)
0.013
(0.012)
0.068**
(0.010)
0.023
(0.953)
0.037
(1.029)
-0.011
(0.010)
-0.036*
(0.017)
0.004
(0.022)
0.165
(0.123)
-0.078
(0.173)
0.470
5421
Yes

** p<0.01 *p<0.05

52

Table 3:Summary of Mental Health Court Evaluations
Setting

Court and Study
Comparison Population
Population
Pre-post
Herinckx et Clark County, Court: Diagnosis near
NV: 2000 al. (2005)
time of arrest. In 2001,
2003
Psychiatric
switched from pre-plea to
post-plea.
Services vol.
56
Study: Misdemeanor
only; Axis I disorder.
Majority of court cases, but
not all.
Nonequivalent comparison group. Used
chief district court judge to identify
traditional court participants from the prior
year who would have been eligible for the
MHC had it been in existance; that is, court
defendants with a history of mental illness
that did not pose a public safety risk.
Comparison group is nonequivalent as it is
both time mismatched, and diagnostic
criterion mismatched, as diagnosis is not
confirmed as it is for MHC patients.
Statistical controls for age, race, gender,
prior criminal history, prior jail time and
severity of current charge.

Notable Outcomes

Notes

Favorable effects were concentrated among those
Criminal Justice: 400% overall crime reduction
completing MHC; noncompleters showed little
rate one year after enrollment. 62% reduction in
benefit.
probation violations. MH treatment had no effect
on CJ outcomes, court completion associated with
less crime
Mental Health: used as covariate, not outcome.

Criminal Justice: MHC reports an order as a six Similar to Herinckx result.
month treatment window. Negative binomial
regressions report that after using prior offense
severity, the incident rate ratio for MHC prescence
at recidivism was -.62, significant at p <.01. On
average MHC completers were rearrested .58
times, a significant at p < .001 chi-squared
difference between non-completers average of
2.03.
Mental Health: None

Moore
(2006)
Law and
Human
Behavior vol.
30

Southeastern
MHC
(Unspecified):
2001 - 2002

Court: Subjective 'not a
threat to the community.'
Integrated with drug court.
Mental illness evaluated
and confirmed after MHC
screening for
'inappropriate behavior' or
prior diagnosis. Subjective
evaluation made by MHC.
Study: White or African
American.

Trupin
(2003)
International
Journal of
Law and
Psychiatry
vol. 26

King County,
WA / Seattle,
WA: (1999 2001)

Court: Misdemeanor only. Pre-post analysis of MHC sample, along
Psych evaluation at entry with comparison of MHC sample and those
that opted-out.
into court. Plea-bargain
integrated court process.
Study: No exclusions,
followed sample for ninemonth follow up following
MHC enrollment.

Criminal Justice: Post enrollment booking
decreased to a p < .05 significant level. Cohen d's
were reported .587 and .617 for Seattle and King
County respectively. Annualized jail LOS
decreased for Seattle p < .01, d = .779. Opt outs
in Seattle also appeared to decrease annualized
LOS, but not as much, p < .05, d = .442.
Mental Health: 95.4% linkage to services in
Seattle reported, 84% reported in King County.
King County report and increase in global
assessment of functioning, p < .05, but the effect is
weak, d = .257.

Qualitative evaluation of the courts gives a more
complete picture than quantitative data.
Quantitative results are of weak and mixed effect.
Though results are generally strong for treatment
access, the selective nature of the opt-in/opt-out
process makes the effects on criminal justice
uncertain.

Pre-post analaysis and counterfactual
Court: Nonviolent
hypothetical population.
instigating arrests with
documented diagnosis of
mental illness, felonies
and misdemeanors
included.
Study: All participants
from inception 2001
through end of Sept. 2004.

Cost: One year follow up pre-post overall $1,804
savings per person in MHC, two year $9,584.
Against hypothetical, increase in cost of $2,656. In
both cases, reduction in jail costs offset by
increase in mental health costs.

A cost study of MHC effectiveness. While results
are compelling in favor of MHC use, especially
from pre-post analysis, the sensitivity of the
returns to investment from the counterfactual
make positive/negative value largely dependant
upon sensitivity assumptions.

Allegheny
Ridgely
County, PA:
(2007)
2001 - 2006
RAND
Technical
Reports TR439

Santa
Cosden
Barbara, CA
(2005)
Behavioral
Sciences
and the Law
vol. 23

Random sample. It should be noted that
Court: Voluntary
participation of nonviolent demographics of the randomization are not
(no longer posed a danger perfect, suggesting incomplete
to others), could be either randomization, at least on some grounds,
pre or post plea. Court is though reported chi square values are
integrated with ACT team. insignificant.
Study: Stratified random
sample from those that
were deemed to have met
the criterion above. Due
to desire to add more to
MHC population,
randomization occured twoto-one in favor of the MHC
at the onset of the study.

Broward
Boothroyd
County, FL:
(2005)
1999 - 2003
Psychiatric
Services 56
-andChristy
(2005)
Behavioral
Sciences
and the Law
vol. 23

Court: Nonviolent
misdemeanors, no formal
diagnostic criteria, referred
by magistrates. Mental
health screening
conducted by students
after referral.
Study: English speaking
MHC patients, whose
initial court date came
between Dec. 1999 and
April 2001.

Court: Diagnosed Axis I
mental disorder or
developmental disabilities
and amenable to
community treatment.
Does not preclude
felonies.
Study: All participants in
the court from inception
through November 2004
for whom complete six
month follow-up was
available.

McNiel
(2007)
American
Journal of
Psychiatry
vol. 164

San
Francisco,
CA: 2003 2004

Criminal Justice: Re-arrests, convictions,
incarceration days all report no significant effect of
the MHC. If the top percent of offenders from both
categories are removed, a moderate effect of the
MHC appears. The success seems to be
determined by 'serious of substance abuse
problems at intake.'
Mental Health: MHC patients received many more
treatment hours and moderately better on GAF,
Lehman QOL, BASIS and ASI scores compared to
TAU. Partial support for MHC positive treatment
on mental health functioning.

True experiment gives a more compelling design,
though demographic differences within the normal
jail population and those selected for the study call
into question the generalizability of the model.
Both samples exhibit significant reversion to the
mean (both TAU and MHC patients fare better
over time). Cosden concludes that MHC is not
useful for all offenders, but may be helpful for the
majority of moderate cases. Reversion to mean is
contrary to behavior exhibited in the Trupin study.

Matched sample of misdemeanor
defendants from Hillsoborugh county due to
similar demographics and census variables.
Matching was done on a one to one basis,
two month lagged, looking for defendants in
other counties exhibiting signs of mental
illness.

Criminal Justice (Christy): Recidivism and time
to rearrest were measured in both groups.
Recidivism was lower for the MHC population, but
not significantly so. Time to rearrest was longer for
MHC patients. Felony vs. non-felony rearrest rates
were not significantly different. Index jail time was
significantly reduced.
Mental Health Measures (Boothroyd): BPRS
reports no better outcome from MHC patients
compared to matched TAU patients in other
counties. While MHC patients may be matched
more successfully to treatment, 'receipt of
treatment alone is not sufficient to effect positive
changes in clinical status.'

MHC does not show significant improvement over
base treatment condition; however it does no
worse. As the Broward county mission was to
reduce jail time without harming public safety,
authors conclude the MHC has succeeded. Study
only found a difference in rate patients were
matched with services not in outcomes. Study
interprets this as MHC working properly, mental
health systems in county as deficient. Contrary to
Cosden study, all defendants showed worsening
severity over time.

Used propensity weighting scores to
construct a TAU group out of diagnosed
mentally ill patients in the SF county jail
system. Controlled for non-random
assignment using observables

Criminal Justice Measures: Reported the effect
of the MHC on probability of new charge and
probabilty of new violent charge. MHC appeared
to reduce recidivism by 26% total and violent
recidivism by 55% at 18 month mark. Graduate
effect was more striking.
Mental Health Measures: None.

Study notes that while propensity weighting scores
can construct an approximately equal sample in
both cases, it can only do so on observables.
Unobservables (willingness to accept treatment)
may still cause selection bias. Study reinforces
idea that MHC benefit is more easily recongized
after both completion of the MHC and longer time
frames.

Appendix A: Basic Model Estimates from CPES Analysis

EverArrested

Coef.

Number of obs
F (12, 85)
Prob > F
R-squared
t

=
=
=
=

10686
115.68
0.0000
0.1387
│p│

Male

.265

18.10

0.000

Age < 25

.043

1.87

0.064

Age 25-24

.095

3.79

0.000

Age 35-44

.089

4.61

0.000

Age 45-54

.045

2.15

0.034

ASIAN

-.093

-1.52

0.133

AFR

.139

10.45

0.000

HISP

.104

4.49

0.000

RACEOTHER

.083

2.03

0.045

Severe MI

.155

4.74

0.000

SA

.362

8.96

0.000

SevereMI*SA

-.291

-2.48

0.015

Constant

.063

4.22

0.000

Omitted categories: female, age 55+, white race.

51

