NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECRUITING FOR IDEAS:
HOW FIRMS EXPLOIT THE PRIOR INVENTIONS OF NEW HIRES
Jasjit Singh
Ajay K. Agrawal
Working Paper 15869
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15869

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

The authors contributed equally. We thank INSEAD, the Martin Prosperity Institute, and the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for funding this research. We are grateful to
James Costantini, Pushan Dutt, Lee Fleming, Martin Gargiulo, Javier Gimeno, Henrich Greve, Kwanghui
Lim, Matt Marx, Illian Mihov, Amine Ouazad, Johannes Pennings, Kamalini Ramdas, Andrew Shipilov,
Brain Silverman, Olav Sorenson, Man Zhang, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at
INSEAD and the National University of Singapore for comments. We acknowledge use of the NBER
and NUS-MBS patent datasets. Errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jasjit Singh and Ajay K. Agrawal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Recruiting for Ideas: How Firms Exploit the Prior Inventions of New Hires
Jasjit Singh and Ajay K. Agrawal
NBER Working Paper No. 15869
April 2010
JEL No. O31,O32,O33,O34
ABSTRACT
When firms recruit inventors, they acquire not only the use of their skills but also enhanced access
to their stock of ideas. But do hiring firms actually increase their use of the new recruits’ prior inventions?
Our estimates suggest they do, quite significantly in fact, by approximately 202% on average. However,
this does not necessarily reflect widespread “learning-by-hiring.” In fact, we estimate that a recruit’s
exploitation of her own prior ideas accounts for almost half of the above effect. Furthermore, although
one might expect the recruit’s role to diminish rapidly as her tacit knowledge diffuses across her new
firm, our estimates indicate that her importance is surprisingly persistent over time. We base these
findings on an empirical strategy that exploits the variation over time in hiring firms’ citations to the
recruits’ pre-move patents. Specifically, we employ a difference-in-differences approach to compare
pre-move versus post-move citation rates for the recruits’ prior patents and the corresponding matched-pair
control patents. Our methodology has three benefits compared to previous studies that also examine
the link between labor mobility and knowledge flow: 1) it does not suffer from the upward bias inherent
in the conventional cross-sectional comparison, 2) it generates results that are robust to a more stringently
matched control sample, and 3) it enables a temporal examination of knowledge flow patterns.

Jasjit Singh
INSEAD
$\HU5DMDK$YHQXH
6LQJDSRUH
jasjit.singh@insead.edu
Ajay K. Agrawal
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
ajay.agrawal@rotman.utoronto.ca

1. INTRODUCTION
The link between recruiting inventors and using their ideas is important, yet we know surprisingly
little about it. There is a broad consensus that innovation is central to many firms’ strategies and the basis
for their competitive advantage. Yet a firm’s past experience and extant stock of knowledge constrains
innovation, making the innovation trajectory highly path dependent (Nelson and Winter 1982, Dosi
1988). Firms need to balance this natural tendency towards exploitation of familiar knowledge with
deliberate mechanisms that facilitate exploration of distant knowledge (March 1991), especially since
combining ideas drawn from different sources is important for innovation success (Weitzman 1998,
Fleming 2001, Chesbrough 2003). Thus, recruiting an individual from outside the organization may
enhance a firm’s access to external ideas and thus better enable it to complement exploitation of native
ideas with exploration of foreign ideas. But how much do firms really increase their use of a new recruit’s
stock of prior ideas? Furthermore, to the extent they do, how do they do it? To what extent do firms really
exhibit “learning-by-hiring”? Moreover, given the temporal nature of diffusion, how does this process
evolve over time after the new recruit settles in? We set out to address these questions.
Scholars from a variety of schools of thought have suggested that inter-firm mobility could be a
key mechanism driving diffusion of ideas across firms. Noting that knowledge spillovers through
mobility often take place even despite the source firm’s use of legal measures to prevent them, economist
Kenneth Arrow (1962: 615) remarks: “Mobility of personnel among firms provides a way of spreading
information. Legally imposed property rights can provide only a partial barrier, since there are obviously
enormous difficulties in defining in any sharp way an item of information and differentiating it from other
similar sounding items.” Proponents of institutional theory, such as DiMaggio and Powell (1983), suggest
that inter-firm movement of personnel is a particularly important mechanism through which innovations
diffuse among competitors in an industry. Analogously, the resource-based view of the firm

1

acknowledges that recruitment from outside can enable firms to bypass constraints on growth imposed by
relying solely on internally grown resources and capabilities (Penrose 1959, Barney 1991).1
At an aggregate level, scholars have also linked regional economic growth to enhanced access to
ideas afforded by inter-firm mobility. In her monograph on regional advantage, Saxenian (1994: 34-37)
characterizes the relationship between recruiting and access to ideas as central to explaining the
exceptional economic growth of Northern California: “Silicon Valley was quickly distinguished by
unusually high levels of job hopping. During the 1970s, average annual employee turnover exceeded 35
percent in local electronics firms and was as high as 59 percent in small firms.... Early efforts to take legal
action against departed employees proved inconclusive or protracted, and most firms came to accept high
turnover as a cost of business in the region.... This decentralized and fluid environment accelerated the
diffusion of technological capabilities and know-how within the region.” Several studies that examine the
effects of restrictions on inter-firm mobility due to non-compete covenants find support for this view
(Franco and Mitchell 2008, Marx et al. 2009, Samila and Sorenson 2009). Furthermore, some formal
models of economic growth explicitly cite the possibility of knowledge spillovers through inter-firm
mobility as one way of justifying a key assumption regarding technological knowledge being at least in
part a “non-excludable” good (Grossman and Helpman 1991).
While the above research assumes a link between mobility and knowledge flow, several studies
explicitly estimate aspects of this relationship, particularly in the context of mobile inventors. In one of
the first such studies, Almeida and Kogut (1999) show that locations with greater intra-regional labor
mobility between firms tend to have more localized knowledge flows. In another pioneering study, Song
et al. (2003) illustrate that mobile inventors build upon ideas from their previous firms more often than
inventors at the hiring firm who have not previously worked at that other firm. In yet another influential
article, Rosenkopf and Almeida (2003) examine firm pairs and show that dyads that experience more

1

Our explicit focus is on an individual moving from one firm to another existing firm. It is important to note that an
extensive literature also emphasizes knowledge transfer through mobility in the context of new firm formation
(Agarwal et al. 2004, Gompers et al. 2005, Klepper and Sleeper 2005).

2

labor mobility between them also demonstrate greater subsequent knowledge flow. Taken together, these
empirical studies have inspired further research employing similar data and methods to sharpen our
understanding of various aspects of the mobility-knowledge flow relationship (e.g., Agrawal et al. 2006,
Oettl and Agrawal 2008, Agarwal et al. 2009, Corredoira and Rosenkopf 2010).2
The above studies have advanced the field significantly by establishing an empirical link between
mobility and knowledge flow and providing insights into particular nuances of this relationship. However,
they are subject to two related limitations associated with drawing causal inferences from cross-sectional
data on inventor mobility and knowledge use across patents. The first limitation concerns unobserved
heterogeneity. The destination firm may be more likely to use an idea that is of inherently higher quality
or has greater firm-specific relevance, irrespective of whether the destination firm hires the inventor.
However, since the inventor is also likely to be a more attractive target for recruitment, this presents a
selection problem wherein the observed cross-sectional correlation between mobility and knowledge use
overestimates the true effect of mobility. The second concerns the endogeneity of a firm’s decision to
hire. A firm may be more inclined to recruit an individual who works in a domain that the firm intends to
focus on in the future. This could coincide with the firm also employing other mechanisms to improve its
access to external knowledge in that domain (including the recruit’s prior stock of ideas). This would
again produce a mobility-knowledge flow correlation without the former being a (fully) causal precursor
of the latter. Not accounting for such endogeneity will once more lead to an upward bias if we interpret
the estimates as boosts in the use of ideas caused by an instance of mobility.3
Recognizing these inherent limitations of a cross-sectional research design for making causal
inferences, Rosenkopf and Almeida (2003: 764) offer this challenge: “Future research should attempt to
2

While we focus on the direct effect of inter-firm mobility on knowledge transfer, it is worth noting that mobility
also influences the structure of interpersonal networks within and across firms, which in turn play an important role
in further shaping knowledge diffusion patterns (Singh 2005, Fleming et al. 2007, Breschi and Lissoni 2009).
3
To be clear, prior literature does attempt to deal with the aforementioned issues by using technologically matched
control patents as a benchmark for cross-sectional comparison. However, given necessarily imperfect matching,
such challenges are unavoidable in any cross-sectional research design. The concerns become particularly salient in
the typical mobility-related study that employs the relatively aggregate three-digit technology match, as that is
surely too coarse to sufficiently capture all relevant characteristics of the underlying knowledge.

3

utilize fully developed longitudinal databases to explore all possible temporal and causal links.” We take
up that challenge here and make significant progress on the first problem (unobserved heterogeneity) and
at least some progress on the second (endogeneity).
So, in addition to offering an empirical contribution in terms of estimating the boost in use of a
recruit’s prior ideas as well as the fraction of that boost that is due to the recruit herself, our methodology
advances existing research on mobility and knowledge flows in three significant ways. First, we base our
analysis not on aggregate firm-level citation counts but on disaggregated data that capture changes over
time in how individuals in recruiting firms cite a specific patent. Second, we employ a “difference-indifferences” (DD) approach to account for heterogeneity across patents. This avoids making the typical
(strong) assumption regarding comparability of the levels of citations received by “focal” patents (i.e.,
those involving an inventor who subsequently moves) and “control” patents (i.e., other similar patents).
Instead, our identification strategy relies upon a weaker (and hence more defensible) assumption
regarding the legitimacy of comparing relative changes in citation rates over time (in particular from the
pre-move to the post-move period). Third, to further address concerns regarding comparability of the
focal and control patents even despite these weaker assumptions, we replicate our initial analysis (which
relies upon a conventional matching approach) using a sample based on a more stringent matching
procedure that also takes into account the patent’s pre-move citation patterns and the inventor’s prior
patenting history in determining the control sample.4
We begin our analysis with a sample we construct using the matching criteria most prior studies
employ to identify control patents that are used as a baseline against which to compare focal patents: the
three-digit technology classification and the application year.5 The typical cross-sectional comparison of
the post-move citation levels for focal versus control patents rests on the (often unstated) assumption that

4

Admittedly, even our exploitation of longitudinal data, implementation of DD estimation, and use of more
stringent matching do not fully establish causality. As discussed in the concluding section, doing so would require a
suitable instrument or a natural experiment that randomly assigns the “treatment” (in our case, the “mobility event”).
5
Jaffe et al. (1993) pioneer this matching procedure. Thompson and Fox-Kean (2005) propose refinements to this
technology-based matching while also discussing the inherent challenges of using any such approach.

4

the above technology-based match suffices in dealing with the heterogeneity issue mentioned above.
However, we find evidence that this assumption is not reasonable; destination firms cite focal patents at a
higher rate than matched control patents even before the move. In recognition of this systematic
difference between focal and control patents, we use the DD approach to essentially “difference out” the
pre-move citation premium associated with focal patents. This allows us to distinguish the component of
the post-move citation rate that is more likely due to the “treatment” (attributable to the move) from the
component that is due to “selection” (attributable to the kind of inventor who is more likely to move).
To further address concerns regarding the closeness of matching that acts as our baseline, we
repeat our DD estimation using a different control sample constructed by employing a more stringent
matching procedure. We implement this using “coarsened exact matching” (CEM) (Iacus et al. 2009).
Among the additional matching criteria is information related to the patents’ pre-move citations received
as well as the inventors’ career histories. As the extensive literature on matching emphasizes, using
appropriately stringent matching may reduce endogeneity concerns (though can rarely eliminate them
completely) while also reducing the sensitivity of the subsequent regression-based estimation on specific
functional form assumptions. In our case, including pre-move citation counts (overall as well as from the
destination firm) among these criteria helps to eliminate the pre-move citation rate differences between
focal and control patents, improving their comparability in terms of expected future citation rates.
We find that hiring an inventor is associated with a firm subsequently increasing its use of the
new recruit’s prior ideas significantly: by approximately 202% on average (even after controlling for
changes in the firm’s propensity to cite other similar inventions). In absolute terms, the destination firm
increases its annual citation rate from 0.0140 to 0.0396 citations per year for each of the recruit’s prior
ideas.6 We show that this result is robust to a variety of specifications. In fact, we find the DD estimates
using the more stringent matching to be essentially the same qualitatively and very similar quantitatively.

6

For the reader who might be wondering why these absolute values look so small, note that these represent citations
from a particular firm to a particular patent in a particular year.

5

Having estimated the extent to which a destination firm uses its new recruit’s prior ideas, we next
turn our attention to examining the mechanism through which the firm accomplishes this. The extant
literature emphasizes the idea of “learning-by-hiring” (Song et al. 2003, Rosenkopf and Almeida 2003),
which effectively assumes that the recruit’s tacit knowledge diffuses internally and becomes a part of the
firm’s overall knowledge base shortly upon the recruit’s arrival. However, Simon (1991: 126) cautions
against such assumptions: “We must be careful about reifying the organization and talking about it as
‘knowing’ something or ‘learning’ something. It is usually important to specify where in the organization
particular knowledge is stored, or who has learned it.... Since what has been learned is stored in individual
heads, its transience or permanence depends on what people leave behind them when they depart from an
organization or move from one position to another. Has what they have learned been transmitted to others
or stored in ways that will permit it to be recovered when relevant?”
The above remark motivates our next set of analyses, where we distinguish between selfexploitation of the recruit's prior ideas and increased usage by others in the firm. Our results support
Simon’s observation. We discover that almost half of the boost in the use of the recruit’s prior ideas is due
to the recruit herself building upon her prior ideas after arriving at her new firm.7 Furthermore, when we
exclude citations by the recruit’s collaborators, we find that other inventors account for only a third of the
overall boost realized by the hiring firm. When we further examine the temporal patterns of citations,
expecting that the role of the recruit might start to diminish shortly after she arrives as her tacit knowledge
diffuses throughout the destination firm, we instead find that her role remains quite persistent over time.
These findings suggests the need to temper the prevalent learning-by-hiring view with a
recognition that, at least in our sample, we must attribute almost half of the knowledge boost to what can
better be described as “hiring-to-exploit-ideas.” This has important implications for how we should
interpret the mobility-knowledge flow link, given that reliance on a single employee for an important

7

Our results are consistent with the findings of Tzabbar et al. (2009), who report that having the recruit on an
inventing team in the destination firm significantly increases the likelihood of the team exploiting one of the
recruit’s prior inventions.

6

piece of knowledge may confer significant bargaining power to that individual, especially if she also has
other outside options (Becker 1962, Lazear 1986, Coff 1997, Moen 2005, Groysberg et al. 2008). The
significant role of the recruit in building upon her prior ideas might therefore imply that the recruit rather
than the hiring firm captures much of the rents associated with the firm’s seemingly better access to her
prior knowledge. This echoes Peteraf’s (1993: 187) remark: “A Nobel Prize-winning scientist may be a
unique resource, but unless he has firm-specific ties, his perfect mobility makes him an unlikely source of
sustainable advantage.”
We organize the remainder of the paper as follows. In Section 2, we outline our empirical
framework and distinguish it from the traditional cross-sectional approach. In Section 3, we describe the
construction of our two datasets, one corresponding to the conventional matching and the other based on
more stringent matching criteria. In Section 4, we present our empirical results. Finally, in Section 5, we
discuss implications of our findings, limitations of our study, and potential directions for future research.

2. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK
2.1. Patent data, mobility, and the use of ideas
Micro-level data suitable for examining the link between mobility and knowledge flow is hard
to come by. A notable exception is patent data, which researchers have commonly employed for this
purpose as they include detailed information on patent characteristics including inventor names,
application and grant dates, assignee organization name (if any), technological classification, etc. In
particular, patent data enable the researcher to infer inter-firm mobility by chronologically tracing
individual inventors as they appear on patents assigned to different firms at different times.
In addition, data on the citations a patent receives allow the researcher to infer when a
subsequent invention has used a particular idea.8 Admittedly, citations are not a perfect measure of

8

Using citations as a measure of knowledge flows does not assume that citations are a mechanism behind these
flows. As an analogy, a PhD student’s citations of his advisor’s research papers suggests that he has built upon the

7

knowledge flows. For example, they are often added for reasons such as avoiding litigation or
clarifying claims, and many are even added by patent examiners rather than the inventors themselves.
Despite this, however, scholars have shown that they correlate quite well with actual knowledge flow,
especially when employing large samples (Chapter 12 in Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002, Duguet and
MacGarvie 2005).9

2.2. The cross-sectional approach
We begin our empirical analysis by implementing a method of examining the link between
mobility and knowledge flow that follows the “best practice” from existing studies. First, we create a
sample of patents representing ideas developed by inventors who subsequently change firms. We refer to
these as “focal patents.” Second, we match each focal patent with a comparable “control patent” with the
same three-digit technology class and application year. Finally, we examine cross-sectional differences
between the focal and control patents in terms of the number of citations they receive from the destination
firm (the firm that recruits the focal inventor) in the time period following the move.
Formally, we define CITESi,t as the number of citations a patent i (focal or control) receives from
the destination firm in year t (any year following the move). The cross-sectional estimation equation we
employ (using observations just from the post-move period) is:
(1)

CITES i ,t  f ( R RECRUITi   t  appyear (i )   t   X X i   i ,t )
Here, RECRUITi is an indicator variable that equals one for observations corresponding to a focal

patent and zero for the corresponding control patent. Rather than assuming a specific functional form for
the temporal patterns of citations, the above model follows a non-parametric approach by more flexibly
accounting for patent age (using yearly indicator variables for the gap between patent i’s application year
advisor’s ideas, even if he actually has acquired those ideas by working closely with the advisor rather than by
reading his papers.
9
A specific concern is whether including examiner-added citations biases results (Alcacer and Gittelman 2006).
However, to the extent that inventors have strategic motives for omitting citations, including examiner-added
citations is actually desirable (Lampe 2008). While we would have liked to do a robustness analysis dropping
examiner-added citations, these data are not available in machine-readable form for our study's time period.

8

and the citing year t being considered) and citing year (using different indicator variables for each
calendar year t).
The baseline expectation is that ψF should be positive and significant. In other words, patents by
individuals who subsequently move from their original firm (the source firm) to the destination firm will
be more highly cited (by inventors at the destination firm after the mobility event) than control patents.
The vector Xi represents the variables we use to control for variation in key observables associated with
the destination firm, the source firm, the inventor, and the patent. We describe these variables in Section
3.2 below and list them (except for technology area indicators) for easy reference in Table 1.
Unfortunately, a cross-sectional approach like the one above is not satisfactory for dealing with
the unobserved heterogeneity across inventors and their patents. For example, better inventors may
generate higher-quality ideas (that naturally receive more citations from others, including from the
destination firm) and might also be more sought after as new recruits. A focal patent is also more likely to
come from a specific knowledge domain of greater relevance for the destination firm, despite the
corresponding control being drawn from the same broad three-digit technology class. In either case, the
recruit’s patent would receive more citations from the destination firm, irrespective of the move. To better
identify that component of the boost in knowledge use that is directly attributable to the move, we next
turn to a “difference-in-differences” research design that allows us to distinguish between the component
of the boost in post-move citation rate that is more likely due to the “treatment” (attributable to the move)
and the component that is instead due to “selection” (attributable to the kind of inventor who is more
likely to move).

2.3. Our “difference-in-differences” approach
Our “difference-in-differences” (DD) approach for examining the mobility-knowledge flow link
exploits the fact that we observe citations received by the focal and control patents not just post-move but
also in the years preceding the move. While post-move differences confound actual mobility-related
knowledge acquisition with differences in quality and/or relevance, we can at least partly identify these

9

effects by taking into account differences in citation rates that exist even pre-move. In other words, we
can use a pre-move difference in citation rates for focal versus control patents as a benchmark against
which to compare the post-move difference, helping us better identify the component of the post-move
difference that we can attribute to the move itself.10
We provide Figure 1 to illustrate how the DD approach conceptually differs from the crosssectional approach described above. For ease of exposition, the figure depicts the effect of mobility as a
sudden jump in what would have been the otherwise natural evolution of the citation rate of the focal
patent over time (our actual empirical analysis relaxes this assumption).11 The cross-sectional approach
above interprets a positive difference in post-mobility citation rates for the recruit’s patent (Ra) versus
control patent (Ca) as evidence of knowledge flow attributable to the mobility event. However, that is
misleading because had the move not taken place, then the expected citation rate to the recruit’s patent
(Re) would still be greater than that for the control patent (Ce). Comparing citation rates between the
recruit and control patents both before and after the move allows us to better estimate how the temporal
pattern in citation rate changes from the extrapolated path for the post-move period. In other words, the
DD logic suggests that we can better capture the effect attributable to the mobility event not by the extent
to which Ra > Ca but by the extent to which Ra – Re > Ca - Ce.
Implementing the above logic needs a patent-year dataset that includes observations from the
years not just after but also before the move. Defining POSTMOVEi,t as zero when the year t falls in the
pre-move period and one when it falls in the post-move period for a patent i (focal or control), the
estimation equation becomes:
(2)

CITES i ,t  f ( R RECRUITi   RP RECRUITi * POSTMOVEi ,t
  P POSTMOVEi ,t   t  appyear ( i )   t   X X i   i ,t )

10

For a good overview of the “difference-in-differences” methodology, see Chapter 5 in Angrist and Pischke
(2009). See Furman and Stern (2006) and Murray and Stern (2007) for instructive applications in the context of
citations.
11
Note that we allow for the possibility of a post-mobility bump even for the control patent. This could happen, for
example, if the move coincides with an overall shift in a firm’s technological focus, resulting in a general increase in
citation rate for the given technology. In the discussion section, we offer alternate interpretations.

10

Here, ψR captures systematic differences in the focal versus control patents that exist even before the
move, and ψP captures systematic shifts in how the destination firm increases its use of ideas in this
technology area between the pre- and post-move periods, irrespective of recruiting that particular
inventor. If mobility really does lead to an increased use in the recruit’s prior knowledge, ψRP should be
positive and significant in the estimation.
While the above framework allows for a systematic difference between focal and control patents,
we can generalize it further to allow even individual patents to be different in unobserved ways (e.g., due
to inventor characteristics we do not observe). In particular, we employ patent fixed effects analysis to
detect “abnormal” within-patent changes in the citation rate to a patent after an inventor moves. The
estimation relies on a deviation in the patent’s post-mobility citation rate from an expected rate, where we
derive the expected rate by extrapolating from the pre-move citation rate and assuming a temporal trend
analogous to other patents from the same technology-year cohort. We express this model as:
(3)

CITES i ,t  f ( RP RECRUITi * POSTMOVEi ,t
  P POSTMOVEi ,t   t  appyear ( i )   t   i   i ,t )

Here, i reflects the fixed (time invariant) effect corresponding to patent i. Since the fixed effect absorbs
unique patent characteristics, note that the model no longer includes direct effects of time-invariant,
patent-level variables (RECRUITi and Xi in the previous models). However, we can still estimate the DD
coefficient ψRP as it is based on an interaction effect.12

2.4. A more stringent matching approach
Intuitively, it is helpful to think of the above DD research design as replacing the conventional
assumption of direct comparability between focal and control patents of post-move citation rate levels
with the weaker assumption of comparability in terms of pre- and post-move citation rate trends.
12

See Murray and Stern (2007) for a similar specification. Since the lag between the patent application and the
move varies across focal patents, it is possible to carry out the estimation using just these patents. While we report
findings from such an analysis as well (effectively estimating the difference between Ra and Re in Figure 1), our
preferred approach is to use a sample that includes appropriately matched control patents.

11

However, even this weaker identifying assumption is subject to criticism given that the underlying sample
based on the conventional matching criterion (three-digit technology class and application year) might not
produce a control sample that is sufficiently similar to the focal patents. In particular, since inter-firm
mobility is an endogenous event, it seems particularly important to construct a control sample that
matches the focal sample as closely as possible on observed characteristics.
As we describe in detail in Section 3 below, we employ a CEM procedure to construct a control
sample based on discrete buckets for pre-move citations received by the patent (both overall and from the
destination firm) as well as the patenting history of the inventor (in terms of the number of past patents
and age in terms of years since the first patent).13 Note that we employ these criteria in addition to exact
matching (as before) on the conventional criteria of application year and three-digit technology class. We
also use the grant delay (i.e., the lag between the application and grant date) as yet another matching
criterion for the CEM. This improves comparability of the focal and control patents by allowing for the
possibility that the grant delay itself may be a result of important (and possibly unobserved) patent-level
characteristics and/or that the start of a patent's “citation clock” is more appropriately modeled using its
grant date rather than its application date (Mehta et al. 2010).

2.5. Our preferred specification
Since patent citations involve count data skewed to the right (and over-dispersed relative to
Poisson), scholars commonly employ negative binomial models for estimating parameters. For
comparability with previous research, we therefore start with negative binomial regressions. Our models
employ robust standard errors with clustering on the inventor in order to account for non-independence of
observations pertaining to the same cited patent and to different patents involving the same inventor. We
then implement analogous regressions using the corresponding linear (OLS) models, which have the
benefit of allowing more fine-grained indicator variables for technology (at the three-digit level rather

13

For a description of CEM, see Iacus et al. (2009). For a nice application, see Azoulay et al. (2010).

12

than two-digit level practical for non-linear models), inventor location (U.S. state or non-U.S. country),
inventor age (in years), and grant delay (in months).
For our preferred implementation of DD, however, we employ patent fixed effects to better
address concerns regarding unobserved heterogeneity across patents (e.g., differences in the intrinsic
quality or relevance to the destination firm that the pooled models do not capture). We first try
implementing the above using a conditional fixed effects Poisson framework (Wooldridge 1999).14
However, in addition to the usual challenges with interpreting DD coefficients in non-linear models
(especially when comparing across different models), we run into two issues specific to our setting. First,
the model does not converge when we include yearly indicator variables for the patent age and the
calendar year of citation to better saturate the models. Second, we must drop a very large fraction of the
sample due to no variation in the dependent variable (because of zero citations), and the observations
dropped are disproportionately control patents. As a result, our preferred approach is to employ fully
saturated linear regression specifications with patent fixed effects.15

3. DATASET CONSTRUCTION
3.1. Constructing matched samples of focal and control patents
We merge patent data obtained directly from the USPTO with patent data made available by
the National Bureau of Economic Research (Chapter 13 in Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002) and the
National University of Singapore-Melbourne Business School patent dataset. We then enhance these
along two dimensions. First, for each assigned patent, we determine the assignee organization by

14

We implement this in Stata using the “xtqmlp” procedure (written by Tim Simcoe and available for download at
http://people.bu.edu/tsimcoe/code/xtpqml.txt), which corrects the standard errors from a fixed effects Poisson model
for over-dispersion. This procedure addresses the concerns regarding interpreting a conditional fixed effects
negative binomial model as a true fixed effects estimator (Wooldridge 1999, Allison and Waterman 2002).
15
We verify that our findings are qualitatively robust to using pooled negative binomial estimation or Poisson
conditional fixed effects estimation, even though this typically means that the specification is not saturated as well
and/or that we drop a significant fraction of the sample. For further discussion on the tradeoffs involved in
employing linear models versus more sophisticated regression techniques, see Angrist and Pischke (2009).

13

carrying out an assignee name cleanup followed by a parent-subsidiary match.16 Second, we use not
just inventor names but also other data fields (i.e., technology classification, inventor address,
collaborator names, citation information) to create a unique identifier for each inventor on all patents.17
In order to obtain a dataset of reasonable size while allowing for a sufficient future time window
for observing subsequent inventor mobility and citations, we start with the population of patents with
application years 1981-1990 (across all technology classes). In detecting instances of subsequent interfirm mobility, we follow other researchers and infer mobility through observed changes in the assignee
firm on successive patents filed by an inventor (Almeida and Kogut 1999, Song et al. 2003).18
We restrict our sample (both focal and control) to patents with a single inventor to facilitate
straightforward comparability across patents (all have the same number of inventors: one) and an
unambiguous conceptualization of inter-firm mobility (or lack thereof) for any given patent. From this
subset, we draw our sample of focal patents for which the inventor exhibits inter-firm mobility anytime
between (and including) the third and tenth year following the application year (we exclude the first and
last two years so that there is at least some pre- and post-move citation data for each patent in order to
facilitate meaningful DD calculation even when we employ cited patent fixed effects).
One challenge is that, even when we do observe two successive patents from the same
inventor but at different firms, we cannot pinpoint the inventor’s exact move date within this window.
We thus base all analyses reported in this paper on mobility events for which this window is four years

16

We follow the assignee matching procedure used by Singh (2005), who relies upon NBER Compustat identifiers,
Stopford’s Directory of Multinationals, Who Owns Who directories, and Internet sources. To further reduce any
possibility of misclassifying different spellings, name changes, acquisitions, etc. as instances of mobility, we have
had a research assistant manually double-check instances of algorithmically detected mobility.
17
We base our name matching approach on Singh (2008), whose algorithms are similar to procedures implemented
by Trajtenberg (2006) and Fleming et al. (2007).
18
Patent data is only effective for identifying instances of mobility where an inventor successfully files for patents
both pre- and post-move. This is sufficient in a setting (like ours) where one does not need to measure the overall
extent of mobility. However, even in our setting, systematically ignoring certain types of mobility could produce
biases in either direction. One could imagine cases where a recruit does not patent post-move because her role is
now just to transfer knowledge to others (e.g., as a technical manager), in which omitting her from the sample leads
to a downward bias. On the other hand, if she stops patenting and also stops transferring knowledge (e.g., her
knowledge becomes outdated or she moves into a non-technical role), then not including her would produce an
upward bias.

14

or less, as a detailed temporal examination would not be as useful for cases where the move date is too
uncertain. Therefore, we drop about 30% of all observed inter-firm mobility events.19
Lacking precise information about the move date, we start by calculating the halfway point
between the last observed date at the source firm and the first observed date at the destination firm.
However, while the move could have taken place anytime after the start of this window, it would
probably have taken place at least a few months before the end of the window due to a lag between an
inventor joining a new firm and filing for a patent there. Further, we take the temporal unit of analysis
to be the year, rather than the day or month, to avoid any pretence of a precise estimated move date.
These two factors lead us to define the beginning of the calendar year of the window midpoint
calculated above as our estimate of when a move happened. Given the high uncertainty in the move
date, this somewhat ad-hoc assumption is unlikely to do much worse than more sophisticated
heuristics. On the other hand, it facilitates analysis by allowing classification of each calendar year as
being either completely before or after a given move, allowing us to work with a patent-year panel.
As the next step, we follow previous research in matching each focal patent with a corresponding
control patent (see Figure 2). We choose the control patent such that it originates in another firm, it also
has a single inventor, and its inventor does not exhibit any inter-firm mobility in the 12 years that
follow.20 Having a control patent for each mobile inventor patent helps account for general shifts in the
technological focus of the destination firm, as those will be reflected in an increased likelihood of citing
not just the original patent but also the control patent. In the relatively infrequent cases where we cannot
match the focal patent with a control patent on the above criteria, we drop the patent from the sample.
These steps lead to a final sample of 7,852 patents, exactly half (3,976 patents) of which are associated
19

Of the remaining, the uncertainty is zero to two years for 65% of the cases and three to four years for the rest.
Thus, an estimate of the move year based on the midpoint is off by not more than one year in two-thirds of the cases
and not more than two years for the rest. One might worry about representativeness of the final sample. For
example, since longer time windows imply fewer patents per year, the dropped observations could pertain to less
productive inventors. To rule out the possibility of any resulting biases, we redo the analyses reported in the paper
using different window cutoffs. The main results remain qualitatively unchanged.
20
What makes same-firm patents inappropriate as controls is the fact that the mobile inventor is very likely to carry
knowledge about not just her own patent but also about other same-technology patents from the same firm. So using
those as controls would systematically underestimate the benefits from mobility.

15

with an inventor who subsequently moves (focal patents) and the other half are the corresponding control
patents. For each of these, we count the annual number of citations made by the destination firm in the 12
years following the application year (see Figure 3). Having 12 observations for each of the above patents
results in a patent-year panel of 95,424 observations (we call this the “original sample”).
One might worry that the conventional matching procedure used above might not produce a set of
control patents that is sufficiently comparable to the focal patents, despite the weaker comparability
requirements inherent in our DD approach (comparison of trends) relative to the commonly employed
cross-sectional approach (comparison of levels). A more stringent matching procedure would offer two
potential benefits (Imbens 2004). First, to the extent that the likelihood of treatment (in our case, the
“mobility event”) correlates with the additional matching criteria employed, we would reduce concerns
about bias due to endogenous treatment (though not eliminate them, as it is impractical to capture all
relevant drivers of the move).21 Second, more stringent matching would also reduce sensitivity of the
findings to specific functional form assumptions. As Moffitt (2004: 1) notes: “compared to least squares
estimation of the relationship, with its attendant assumptions of linearity and additivity that can only
awkwardly be relaxed in full, matching provides a method by which no functional form restrictions on the
relation between [the variables] need be made.”22
To achieve more stringent matching, we employ the CEM procedure (Iacus et al. 2009) and
construct another sample that relies upon not just a match on the three-digit technology class and
application year but also on discrete buckets based on five additional criteria: 1) overall pre-move
citations received by a patent (four buckets: zero citations, one-two citations, three-seven citations, and
eight or more citations), 2) pre-move citations received from the destination firm (four buckets: zero
21

The consistency of matching-based estimates relies heavily upon a “selection on observables” assumption. Since
the likelihood of treatment might in reality also depend on unobservables or on observables that are impractical to
fully match on, any matching-based procedure (in the absence of an exogenous instrument or a natural experiment)
can only reduce endogeneity concerns rather than completely eliminate them (Heckman and Navarro-Lozano 2004).
22
The potential benefits from stringent matching must be weighed against the reduced likelihood of finding a match
and thus the bias that could result if the focal patents that we match are systematically different from the ones that
we drop. In the results section, we present evidence that this is a real concern in our setting. In the concluding
section, we return to the implications of and a broader discussion of this point.

16

citations, one citation, two-three citations, and four or more citations), 3) number of previous patents by
this inventor (three buckets: zero or one patents, two-12 patents, and 13 or more patents), 4) number of
years since the first patent by this inventor (three buckets: zero or one years, two-nine years, and 10 or
more years), and 5) the delay between the application and grant date (three buckets: 490 or less days, 491832 days, and 833 or more days).23
With this set of criteria and corresponding buckets, we are able to find matches for 2,543 of the
3,976 mobile inventor patents from the “original sample,” resulting in a final sample of 5,086 (2,543 X 2)
cited patents. Again following a procedure similar to the one described above (and illustrated in Figure 3),
we construct a patent-year dataset of 61,032 (5,086 X 12) observations, which we call the “CEM sample.”
Later in the paper we present statistics to demonstrate that the “CEM sample” is indeed better matched
than the “original sample” and therefore use it for carrying out detailed analyses of how firms exploit the
prior inventions of new hires.

3.2. Variables
Dependent Variables
Table 1 summarizes our dependent variables as well as other key variables. 24 Our first dependent
variable, all cites, includes all citations the recruit’s patent receives from the hiring firm in the focal year.
We define the next dependent variable, cites excluding inventor self-cites, analogously to all cites but
exclude self-citations made by inventors to their own patents. By eliminating an inventor’s citations, this
variable measures the use of an idea by individuals at the destination firm other than the inventor herself.
This distinction is important since abundant self-exploitation by a recruit may reflect a setting where the
23

Choosing the matching criteria involves a tradeoff between the stringency of the match and the fraction of the
sample for which a match can be found. We choose to be most stringent on criteria 1) and 2) to ensure that pre-move
citation patterns are practically identical for the recruit versus control patents. For criteria 3), 4), and 5), we form
boundaries for the three buckets using the 25th and 75th percentiles as cutoffs.
24
To understand why mean values for the dependent variables appear so small, recall that we are dealing with
highly disaggregated data: these variables capture citations received by a patent from the firm to which the mobile
inventor moves. Naturally, the probability of a specific firm citing a specific patent in a specific year is extremely
low. For example, all cites has a non-zero value for only around 1.8% of the observations in the “original sample.”

17

firm is less able to appropriate the benefits from hiring an inventor with a valuable stock of ideas since its
ability to exploit her idea may depend on her staying there.
To the extent that the recruit’s tacit knowledge does diffuse through the destination firm, we are
interested in estimating how widely this occurs. On the one hand, close interpersonal ties such as those
formed by collaboration can be very helpful for knowledge diffusion (Hansen 1999, Singh 2005). On the
other hand, broader intra-firm interpersonal networks or knowledge diffusion mechanisms might enable
and encourage a wider employee base in the destination firm to build upon the recruit’s prior ideas. To
examine this issue, we construct another dependent variable, cites excluding inventor self-cites and
collaborator cites, as the count of citations made by those who have also not directly collaborated (as coauthors on previous patents) with the inventor before the citing year under consideration.
Key Explanatory Variables
Our two key explanatory variables are recruit and post-move. In fact, the estimated coefficient on
the interaction of these terms is the focus of our empirical analysis. We use the indicator variable recruit
to classify inventions made by individuals who are subsequently recruited and move to a new firm, the socalled destination firm. In other words, we use recruit to distinguish between our “treated” versus
untreated, or control, patents. We classify a given patent-year observation as post-move if it occurs after
the estimated move date using the indicator variable post-move.
Control Variables
For the pooled estimation models, we employ several control variables, though these are not
needed in our preferred models that employ patent fixed effects (as they are time-invariant). Specifically,
we include controls for key observed characteristics of: 1) the destination firm (overall level of inventive
activity, level of inventive activity in the same technology class as the recruit’s patent),25 2) the source
firm (overall level of inventive activity), 3) the inventor (number of prior patents, number of years since
25

It is important to control for the destination firm’s patent pool since having more patents naturally increases
citation likelihood to the focal patent, with this tendency being greatest for firms with more patenting activity in the
same technology. However, to prevent circularity wherein the move itself affects the size of the patent pool, we
calculate the patent pool as of the move year itself (rather than as of a citing year subsequent to the move).

18

first patent, U.S. resident indicator), and 4) the patent itself (number of claims, number of patent
references, number of non-patent references, technology area).26 We provide definitions and descriptive
statistics for these control variables (except the technology area indicators) in Table 1.

4. RESULTS
We now report our findings on four topics: 1) a comparison of our estimates for the mobilityknowledge flow relationship using the traditional cross-sectional method versus our DD approach, 2) an
estimate of the sensitivity of our findings to the more stringently matched “CEM sample,” 3) an estimate
of the fraction of the boost in use of the recruit’s prior ideas that is due not to “learning” but rather to
exploitation of those ideas by the recruit herself, and 4) an estimate of the persistence over time of the
recruit as the destination firm’s primary user of her stock of prior ideas.

4.1. Summary Statistics
Before delving into the regression analysis, we present the basic intuition behind our approach
using summary statistics for the pre-move and post-move subsamples corresponding to the focal versus
control patents. We report these statistics in Table 2. (It is also helpful to refer to Figures 1 and 3 for
interpreting these.)
We begin with the means reported for the variable all cites for each of the four subsamples.
Recall from Table 1 that this variable is a count of all citations the focal (or control) patent receives from
the destination firm in a given year, including self-citations made by the inventor after she moves. As the
column corresponding to the post-move period indicates, focal patents have a greater average annual
citation rate (0.0396) than control patents (0.0061), reflecting a difference of 0.0335 citations per year
26

While the pooled negative binomial models employ technology indicators at the one-digit NBER category level,
the pooled linear models employ indicators for the three-digit technology class. Also, we only use inventor age, U.S.
inventor, and grant delay in the pooled negative binomial models, as the pooled linear estimation allows us to use a
full set of indicator variables for inventor age (in years), inventor location (U.S. state or non-U.S. country), and grant
delay (in months). For more discussion on the importance of saturating such models, particularly on the temporal
dimension, see Levin and Stephan (1991), Hall et al. (2007), and Mehta et al. (2010).

19

between the two. However, it would be misleading to attribute all of this difference to mobility since the
annual citation rate is greater even pre-mobility (0.0140 for recruits’ patents versus 0.0051 for controls,
reflecting a difference of 0.0089). Therefore, rather than attributing the whole post-mobility difference to
the move itself, it seems more reasonable to attribute to the move only the difference, 0.0246 (i.e., 0.0335
– 0.0089), between the post-mobility and pre-mobility differences.
We now turn to the analogous calculation for the variable cites excluding inventor self-cites,
which excludes self-citations made by the mobile inventor to her own patent. The post-move mean for
cites excluding inventor self-cites for recruits’ patents is 0.0250, which is significantly smaller than the
corresponding all cites mean of 0.0396, suggesting that roughly 37% (i.e., 1 – (0.0250/0.0396)) of the
overall citations are self-cites by the mover. Repeating the earlier calculation for cites excluding inventor
self-cites leads to a DD summary statistic of 0.0100, which is much smaller than the corresponding all
cites DD statistic of 0.0246. In other words, interpreting overall changes in citation patterns as all being
“learning-by-hiring” would be a clear overestimation.

4.2. Regression Analysis: Recruiting and the Citation Premium
Since the above statistics are only meant to illustrate the main intuition behind our DD approach,
we now turn to the regression framework, which is more appropriate for a rigorous analysis. Table 3
reports our baseline analysis using the “original sample,” employing all cites as the dependent variable.
Column (1) reports cross-sectional findings from the post-move subsample, in effect replicating the
current “best practice” of employing such comparisons of the post-move citation frequency for focal
versus control patents. 27 The estimates appear to be both statistically and economically quite significant:
the citation rate implied by the negative binomial regression coefficients is 566% (e1.896 - 1) greater in the
focal sample than in the control sample.

27

For variables that are highly skewed, the pooled regression analysis employs a logarithmic transformation, first
adding one to allow the transformation even in instances where the value could be zero. The results are robust to
changing the size of the offset or using the untransformed variables for the analysis.

20

The findings reported in Column (2) highlight why interpreting the above effect as being driven
entirely due to the inventor move itself is inappropriate. We base the results reported in this column on a
pooled analysis of the entire “original sample,” with the indicator variable post-move used to distinguish
the citing years following the move date from those preceding it. The positive and significant coefficient
on recruit, despite now having a separate term for recruit X post-move, demonstrates that focal patents
systematically receive more citations even before the move actually takes place. Stated another way, the
cross-sectional analysis employed in Column (1) confounds selection effects with treatment effects.
Nevertheless, since the estimate of the coefficient on recruit X post-move is also positive in Column (2),
we still have evidence consistent with an increase in knowledge use associated with mobility even if the
effect is smaller than what a cross-sectional analysis would lead us to believe. (Interpreting magnitude of
interaction effects in non-linear models, particularly in a way that allows cross-model comparison, is not
straightforward. Therefore, we postpone that discussion until we come to our preferred specification
below: fully saturated linear models with patent fixed effects.)
We next replicate the pooled analyses from Columns (1) and (2) using linear models before
turning to our preferred (fixed effects) specification. As the results in Columns (3) and (4) show, there is
again clear evidence that focal patents are systematically more highly cited even pre-move.28 As a
benchmark note that the average number of citations received by a control patent in the post-move
subsample is 0.0061 (Table 2). Compared with the Column (3) estimate of 0.0356, this represents a 484%
(0.0356/0.0061 - 1) increase in citations to the focal patents; this estimate is similar in magnitude to the
Column (1) estimate discussed earlier.
The specification employed in Column (4) again takes into account the concern that a crosssectional association between mobility and citations confounds selection with treatment. The estimated
28

Given that we are working with highly disaggregated data (citations to a specific patent from a specific firm in a
specific year), the low R2 values are not a surprise. The more important statistics here are the F-statistic for the
model as a whole and the t-statistics for the key variables, which are statistically significant. If increasing R2 were an
end in itself, we would use a more aggregate unit of analysis (e.g., firm pairs) to remove unsystematic individuallevel noise. However, doing so would not utilize the longitudinal micro-level information we want to exploit. In fact,
a low R2 is common when using such disaggregated data; prominent examples include labor market outcomes (e.g.,
Angrist and Krueger 1994, Malamud and Pop-Eleches 2010) and short-term stock returns (e.g., Llorente et al. 2002).

21

coefficient for recruit X post-move in Column (4) suggests that, once we use recruit to account for the
systematic difference between focal and control patents that exists even pre-move, a move is associated
with a smaller but still significant increase of 0.0251 citations per year. Compared to the average number
of citations received by the focal patents prior to the mobility event (0.0140 from Table 2) and controlling
for the baseline rise in citations for that technology class as captured by the control patents, this estimate
implies a 179% (0.0251/0.0140) increase in the citation rate. Comparing the estimates from Columns (3)
and (4) indicates that selection accounts for almost half, 42% (0.0356/0.0251 – 1), of the effect that crosssectional models comparable to our Column (3) would (incorrectly) attribute to the inventor move itself.
While cross-sectional analyses typically use post-move citation rates for control patents as a
benchmark, our longitudinal design enables the use of citation rates for the focal patents themselves
(adjusted for time trends) during the pre-move period as a benchmark. The latter interpretation seems
more desirable as it is based directly on the “treatment” of interest (while recognizing that we are still
estimating the “treatment on the treated” since mobility is not assigned randomly, a topic we discuss in
the conclusion). A comparison of the natural percentage interpretations associated with the estimates
from Columns (3) and (4) implies that using a purely cross-sectional comparison of post-move citation
rates exaggerates the percentage increase in benefits attributable to mobility by 170% (484%/179% - 1).
Before turning to our DD regression with patent fixed effects using the complete sample, it is
instructive to examine the estimates for a similar model when we use a sample of just focal patents (no
controls). This model is still identifiable due to variation in application years and move years across focal
patents. We report these results in Column (5). Note that since recruit is one for all observations
corresponding to the focal patents, we no longer separately identify recruit X post-move from post-move.
Given that the post-move effect itself is positive in the Column (4) model employing both focal and
control patents, the focal-patent-only sample estimate for recruit X post-move in Column (5) is naturally
greater. While the difference in magnitudes compared with Column (4) estimates (as well as the estimates
in subsequent models) is not trivial, it is also not large enough to change the qualitative conclusions.

22

The model estimated in Column (6) is our specification of choice; it employs patent fixed effects
and includes control patents (although it does not employ our stringent CEM-based matching, an issue we
turn to shortly). The DD estimate for the coefficient on recruit X post-move is 0.0283, reflecting an
increase of 202% (0.0283/0.0140) relative to the average number of cites a recruit’s invention receives
from the destination firm pre-move (after controlling for the baseline increase in citations in that
technology class). This is our primary estimate of the “recruitment effect.”
Notice that the Column (6) DD estimate is similar in magnitude to the recruit X post-move
estimate from the pooled analysis reported in Column (4). This offers additional confidence that once we
account for observed patent characteristics (including, importantly, the focal patent indicator) and the
model has been fully saturated, other (unobserved) sources of heterogeneity do not appear to be too major
a concern when we employ the DD approach. Nevertheless, we continue to employ a fixed effects model
as the preferred specification going forward.
At this point, it is useful to take stock of the empirical issues we have addressed so far and those
that remain outstanding. We have demonstrated that ignoring heterogeneity across patents is problematic
when making inferences based on a comparison of post-move citations due to selection bias. We have
also shown that applying a DD approach to panel data can mitigate this issue by exploiting cross-patent
heterogeneity in pre-move citations to adjust estimates (assuming that focal and control patents are more
comparable on trends than levels). However, even our DD estimates do not necessarily imply causality.
For example, it is still possible that an unobserved factor (such as a shift in the specific domain focus of
the firm that the technology classification match does not capture) drives both the hiring of a specific
individual and an increased use of their ideas.
While possibilities such as the one above are difficult to rule out altogether, we can potentially
further reduce the latitude for non-causal explanations by examining the temporal patterns of knowledge
use. In particular, we look for evidence of the destination firm increasing its use of the inventor’s ideas in
the years prior to the move actually taking place. Such an uptick would heighten concerns that
unexplained time trends not directly related to the move might be driving the DD findings.

23

We implement the above by including the additional indicator variables recruit X pre-move
period 1 and pre-move period 1 in the specification reported in Column (7). The estimated coefficient on
recruit X pre-move period 1 suggests an annual citation rate that is clearly much smaller (coefficient
0.0083) in the two years leading up to the move than the average in the years after the move (coefficient
0.0328, an estimate that would be even greater had we separately estimated the effect for just the two-year
period post-move). Nevertheless, even this relatively small uptick in citations pre-move causes some
concern about a time trend independent of the move, raising issues about the comparability of the focal
and control patents even under the (weaker) DD assumptions. We would ideally prefer that the treated
and control groups show a similar trend pre-treatment so that we can more confidently assume they would
continue to follow parallel paths in the post-treatment period (in the absence of the treatment). This
motivates our efforts to implement a more stringent matching procedure, which we turn to next.

4.3. Estimates based on a more stringently matched sample
Table 4a summarizes several characteristics of focal versus control patents for the “original
sample” and shows that the two subsamples differ significantly on several key dimensions. In particular,
focal patents systematically: 1) receive more overall citations, 2) receive more pre-move citations from
the destination firm, and 3) are created by more experienced inventors. Clearly there is room for
improving the closeness of the match, especially given the relatively large number of patents per threedigit technology class that have the same application year.
As described earlier, we construct an alternate sample (which we call the “CEM sample”) with
exactly this in mind. Our CEM procedure relies upon not just a match on the three-digit technology class
and application year (already used in constructing the “original sample”) but also on discrete buckets
constructed using the first five patent characteristics listed in Table 4a: 1) overall pre-move citations
received, 2) pre-move citations received from the destination firm, 3) number of previous patents by the
inventor, 4) number of years since the first patent by the inventor, and 5) the delay between the

24

application and grant dates. A comparison of Table 4b with 4a reveals that the focal and control patent
subsamples are indeed much more comparable for the “CEM sample” than for the “original sample.”
Before returning to formal regression analysis for the “CEM sample,” Table 5 reports CEM
summary statistics corresponding to those reported in Table 2. The pre-move means for citations received
are now very similar for focal versus control patents since cumulative pre-move citation count is one of
the matching criteria.29 This makes interpreting the DD statistic calculation easier and the underlying
assumptions less stringent, as the estimated DD effect now (roughly) coincides with a direct comparison
of the focal and control patent citation rates post-move.
The two main insights from Table 2 persist. First, there is a positive DD effect for all cites,
suggesting an increase in citation rate attributable to mobility (with the magnitude 0.0296 being
somewhat greater but not too dissimilar from the value of 0.0246 reported in Table 2 for the “original
sample”). Second, comparing the DD statistic for cites excluding inventor self-cites with that for all cites
(0.0167 versus 0.0296, respectively) again suggests that only a part of the apparent increase associated
with the move arises from learning-by-hiring; a significant fraction of the destination firm’s jump in
usage of the recruit’s prior ideas is due to self-citations by the recruit herself.
Once more, we turn to a regression approach for a more rigorous analysis and report our findings
in Table 6. For ease of readability, we have replicated all the specifications from Table 3 in Table 6.
However, one should not compare coefficients across the tables for the first two columns since non-linear
regression estimates are not directly comparable across samples. The estimated coefficient for recruit in
Columns (2) and (4) is now (almost) zero, which is not surprising given that the cumulative pre-move
citation count is one of the CEM criteria. Further evidence of the matching working as expected is that,
unlike in Table 3, the estimate for recruit X pre-move period 1 (Column (7)) is now (practically) zero,
indicating no pre-move trend.

29

The stringent matching, however, has come at a cost: the focal patents matched during CEM have systematically
lower pre-move citations rates (compare Tables 2 and 5). We will return to this point later.

25

Interestingly, the estimates for the DD coefficient of interest – recruit X post-move – are very
similar to those reported in Table 3. Comparing our preferred specification, Column (6), across tables, we
find that the estimate of interest is 0.0283 earlier and only slightly greater at 0.0296 now. This offers
additional confidence in the robustness of the result. We base the remaining analyses reported in the paper
on the specification of choice (Column (6)) and the “CEM sample,” although the findings are similar
across different specifications and samples.30

4.4. Learning-by-hiring?
Next, we explore the extent to which the increase in use of the recruit’s prior ideas is due to
subsequent inventions by the recruit herself versus diffusion to others in the firm. The analysis reported in
Table 7 examines this by analyzing the “CEM sample” using fully saturated linear models with patent
fixed effects (corresponding to Column (6) from Table 6) and two additional dependent variables (already
defined in Table 1): cites excluding inventor self-cites and cites excluding inventor self-cites and
collaborators. For easy comparison, Column (1) reproduces the aggregate findings from Column (6) of
Table 6 (using all cites as the dependent variable).
Column (2) uses cites excluding inventor self-cites as the dependent variable, a measure
analogous to all cites but excluding inventor self-citations. The estimate for recruit X post-move is
0.0161, which represents only 54% (0.0161/0.0296) of the destination firm’s overall increase in the use of
the recruit’s prior ideas. In other words, almost half of the boost in use of the recruit’s prior ideas has
nothing to do with learning at all. Rather, it is due to the recruit building upon her own prior ideas. While
this may be just as useful for overall value creation, it is likely to reduce the destination firm’s relative
30

Comparing the Column (5) findings from Tables 3 and 6, one might wonder why the “CEM sample” demonstrates
a greater post-move increase in citation rate than the “original sample” for a focal-patent-only analysis. Recall that
the “CEM sample” only includes the subset of original focal patents that get matched in the CEM procedure. Further
analysis reveals that the Column (5) difference is driven primarily by the few focal patents that are highly cited premove but do not find a CEM match on this dimension. When we repeat the “original sample” analysis using just the
same focal patents as the “CEM sample,” then Column (5) estimates are somewhat greater than the CEM-based
findings. This is consistent with a view that, for a given sample of focal patents, less stringent matching leads to a
larger (not smaller) estimated effect of mobility. Note that the difference between the two tables is much smaller in
our preferred DD specification that includes control patents (Column (6)).

26

bargaining power in terms of the portion of this value it can appropriate (a point we return to in the
conclusion).
We further explore the limits to widespread diffusion of the tacit knowledge associated with the
recruit’s prior ideas by excluding not only the inventor’s self-citations but also citations made by the
inventor’s collaborators (individuals who appear as co-inventors with the recruit on past patents).31 The
analysis reported in Column (3) uses cites excluding inventor self-cites or collaborator cites as the
dependent variable. The estimated coefficient on recruit X post-move is 0.0095 and represents only 32%
(0.0095/0.0296) of the overall increase. This further suggests that learning-by-hiring is actually quite
localized; on average, only a third of the hiring firm’s boost in the use of a recruit’s stock of prior ideas is
due to individuals other than the recruit and her collaborators.

4.5. Do the recruit’s ideas diffuse through the hiring firm over time?
Finally, we explore the degree to which our “limited learning” result from the prior section
persists over time. In Table 8, we use nine indicator variables (summarized in Table 1) corresponding to
five post-move, two-year periods and four pre-move periods, with the two-year period immediately
preceding the move (corresponding to pre-move period 1) being the reference. For ease of visual
interpretation, we plot coefficient estimates for the DD interaction effects in Figure 4.
This figure facilitates three observations. First, with respect to both of our dependent variables,
all cites and cites excluding inventor self-cites, there is a sharp discontinuity in the annual citation rate at
the time of the mobility event (without any discernable uptick in the years leading up to it). While the
tight timing of the mobility-idea usage relationship does not necessarily imply causality, it is certainly

31

In classifying a citation, we use the shortest path of connectedness between the inventors of the cited and citing
patents. So, if a cited patent’s inventor and some of her former collaborators collectively develop a new patent that
cites her previous patent, then we classify that citation as an inventor self-cite (rather than a collaborator cite). We
classify a citation as a collaborator cite only when the citing patent’s inventing team includes one or more former
collaborators of the cited inventor without involving the cited inventor herself.

27

consistent with the assertion that recruiting facilitates enhanced access to an individual’s ideas. (We
discuss caveats for this interpretation in the conclusion.)
Second, a comparison of the estimated citation rate for cites excluding inventor self-cites versus
all cites in the period immediately following the mobility event illustrates that the recruit accounts for
approximately half of the hiring firm’s increased use of her ideas right after she arrives.
Third, and perhaps most surprisingly, comparing the findings for cites excluding inventor selfcites versus all cites over the duration of the post-move period, we see that the recruit continues to
account for more than a third of the cites to her prior ideas for at least the first four periods (eight years)
after her arrival. Although one might expect the recruit’s relative role to diminish rapidly as the
knowledge associated with her ideas diffuses across her new firm, this actually occurs only very
gradually: during the first eight years there is only a slight increase in the fraction of cites that are not
inventor self-cites. In other words, the importance of the recruit to the hiring firm (in terms of her direct
involvement in the firm’s use of her prior ideas) seems to be relatively persistent over time.

5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
What are the implications of our findings for managers and policymakers? Let us start with our
finding that firms do indeed increase their use of their recruits' prior ideas. From the policymaker’s
perspective, it is tempting to conclude from this that restrictions on inter-firm mobility, such as noncompete covenants, are detrimental for the circulation of ideas and knowledge spillovers that would
otherwise enhance regional growth. From the point of view of the source firm, one might infer that
mobility of employees leads to “leakage” of ideas to competitors, an outcome that must be guarded
against. Finally, for the hiring firm, poaching employees from others seems an attractive way to access
external ideas. While there may well be merit to all of the above arguments, these conclusions do not
unambiguously follow from our results. We describe some of the key nuances below.
First, the policy implications are not obvious. On the one hand, when mobility is restricted, ideas
are less likely to circulate among different firms in the form of knowledge spillovers, which may indeed

28

inhibit growth. On the other hand, firms may be more willing to invest in innovation and human capital
development for their employees when they are less worried about inventors leaving and sharing their
ideas with competitors.
Second, the implications for the source firm are also nuanced. Although the source firm has lost
an employee, that individual’s use and diffusion of the ideas that she patented while at the source firm
may increase the value of those patents, which the source firm could realize through licensing, sale of the
intellectual property, or some type of strategic partnership. In addition, if she maintains ties with
individuals in the source firm, then these ties might become a conduit enabling the source firm to better
access external ideas (Agrawal et al. 2006, Oettl and Agrawal 2008, Corredoira and Rosenkopf 2010).
Third, even the implications for the hiring firm are more nuanced than they first appear. Our
findings temper the “learning-by-hiring” view prevalent in the literature. Although we find that others at
the destination firm do learn about the recruit’s ideas, the role the recruit and her immediate collaborators
play in realizing the destination firm’s use of her prior ideas is particularly prominent, a phenomena that
persists over time. This implies that the distribution of bargaining power between the recruit and the
destination firm may favor the recruit, particularly when the value of her ideas is significant. The extent to
which the firm itself is able to capture rents from better access to the inventor’s ideas through recruiting is
therefore not obvious (Becker 1962, Lazear 1986, Coff 1997).
Managers may be tempted to conclude from the above that active steps are needed to ensure that
the ideas of new recruits are more widely dispersed and that a smart strategy is therefore to increase
investments in systems for sharing knowledge so that more individuals utilize the recruit’s ideas and
consequently reduce the firm’s dependence on the recruit herself. However, before adopting such a view,
we must consider why we observe the recruit playing such a prominent role. Here, it is important to note
that although sharing knowledge creates benefits, it also incurs costs. Such costs may arise from an
increased need for coordination and the opportunity cost of inventors’ time. Individuals engage in
knowledge sharing up to the point where their private marginal benefit from doing so equals their private
marginal cost. Therefore, the absence of knowledge sharing among particular individuals in a firm reflects

29

that the benefits from doing so do not outweigh the costs from the perspective of at least one of the
individuals involved. Firms should only intervene in the knowledge-sharing process if they have reason to
believe that employees are under-investing in the sharing of knowledge among each other relative to what
is best for the firm. Employee incentives or investments in systems to promote knowledge sharing may be
very effective, but managers should keep in mind that pursuing such a strategy relies on the existence of a
divergence between the objective of the firm and that of its employees.
In addition, we must also clarify a general limitation to a causal interpretation of our findings.
Although our use of a longitudinal dataset, a DD estimation approach, and more stringent matching move
us closer to a causal interpretation than previous related studies afford, we still have a way to go. Due to
our research design, we are limited in terms of how far we can extrapolate from our specific context to
other settings. Recall that we construct our sample by identifying patents associated with inventors who
subsequently move to another firm, interpret this “mobility event” as the “treatment,” and examine its
affect on patterns of knowledge flow. But mobility is endogenous, not random; firms make deliberate
choices about whom to recruit for a reason. So what we estimate is not the “treatment effect” per se (the
effect of recruitment on knowledge flow under random assignment of mobility) but rather the “treatment
effect on the treated” (the effect of recruitment conditional on a sample of individuals that are actually
recruited).
Thus, one must be careful about extending our findings from the treated sample to the overall
population since the two may have importantly different properties. At a minimum, even if the qualitative
results reported in the paper hold for the overall population, the magnitude of the effect could be quite
different. For example, if firms recruit the inventors whose ideas they value most, then the ideas of the
marginal inventor, the “last” inventor to be recruited, will be less valuable than those of the average
recruited inventor. This is an important caveat to the implication that firms can increase their access to
particular ideas by recruiting the inventor.
In terms of our own interpretation, we prefer using the term “facilitates” rather than “causes.”
Hiring an inventor does not cause the firm to increase its use of that individual’s ideas, but it may

30

facilitate greater use. However, even our (weaker) interpretation that mobility facilitates knowledge use
has limitations. For example, consider a scenario where a firm increases its use of a particular inventor’s
ideas (without help from the inventor) at exactly the same time that it hires the inventor (for other
reasons). Although the increase in idea use would take place even in the absence of recruitment, our DD
model is not able to distinguish this scenario from an observationally similar one where the recruitment
does facilitate a subsequent rise in idea use. (However, if the scenario instead is that the firm begins to use
the ideas before the move takes place, then our methodology will correctly spot that the move does not
drive the boost in the use of the idea.)
While we have emphasized the benefits of our more stringent CEM-based matching in making
progress on some of the above issues, the fact that an appropriate match cannot be found for a significant
fraction of the focal patents also raises questions. As already noted, focal patents that we drop during
CEM have higher pre-move citations rates. Thus, the “CEM sample” is comprised of patents that, on
average, are of lower quality and/or lower relevance to the destination firm. On the one hand, this raises
concerns regarding generalizability of the findings based on this sample. On the other hand, if including
the dropped patents is problematic anyway (e.g., if greater pre-move citation is symptomatic of more
severe endogeneity issues), excluding them might actually be desirable. We have no direct way of
verifying which has more merit. However, it is reassuring to note that our (preferred) DD-based estimates
for the “original sample” are not too different from those using the “CEM sample.”
One promising way forward on the causality issue is to find sources of exogenous variation in
mobility, such as closure of establishments (Dahl and Sorenson 2010), changes in non-compete laws
(Marx et al. 2009), or death of close colleagues (Azoulay et al. 2010, Oettl 2009). Even in the absence of
such natural experiments or instruments, however, progress can be made by more explicitly modeling the
likelihood of being exposed to the (endogenous) treatment. For example, Azoulay et al. (2009) apply the
“Inverse Probability of Treatment Weighted” estimation approach to model a life scientist's selection
into patenting behavior by employing rich data on time-varying characteristics of individuals. Researchers
could use similar methodologies for modeling mobility events based on observables, although doing so

31

convincingly is likely to involve extensive compilation of individual-level data (beyond just the patentbased characteristics already used in our study). For a better understanding of the antecedents as well as
consequences of mobility, future research could also benefit from stronger links to the rich literature on
job matching (e.g., Jovanovic 1979, Simon and Warner 1992). This involves explicitly incorporating the
dynamic process wherein inter-firm mobility is a result of individuals and firms optimizing their match in
the labor market.
The focus of our study is on how mobility enhances access to pre-move knowledge associated
with the recruit herself. However, we can further (speculatively) interpret our findings as also providing
suggestive evidence that hiring facilitates a firm’s overall “absorptive capacity” in a knowledge domain
(Cohen and Levinthal 1989). Referring back to Column (6) in Table 6, the estimate for post-move is
significant (even though smaller than the DD estimate corresponding to recruit X post-move). A
conservative interpretation implicit in our analysis is that this reflects the destination firm’s change in
technological focus towards knowledge domains related to the recruit’s expertise (from which we also
draw the control patent). However, we can also give this estimated coefficient a (more speculative)
interpretation that the recruit may be responsible for improving the firm’s absorptive capacity in this
knowledge domain, hence driving the post-move boost in citations made even to the control patent.
Comparing the coefficient on post-move in Column (1) with Column (2) in Table 7, we see that the
increase in the firm’s use of the control patent is 0.0092 in terms of all cites and 0.0054 in terms of cites
excluding the mover, suggesting that the mover is indeed responsible for a significant portion of the
increase in citations to the control patent. This absorptive capacity interpretation is intriguing and worthy
of further research
Despite these caveats regarding our research design, our study does offer a methodological
contribution for those who study mobility and knowledge flows. Other researchers can apply our idealevel, longitudinal, DD framework for examining a broad range of mobility-related questions. For
example, one could examine the destination firm’s use of not just the recruit’s own prior inventions (as in
this study) but of any prior knowledge that the mobile inventor could serve as a carrier for. This might

32

include access to other knowledge originating from the mover’s original firm or her original geographic
region. In addition, one might examine how mobility affects not just the destination firm’s use of the
recruit’s stock of ideas but also use by the source firm or by third parties not directly involved with the
inventor.
Extending beyond just usage of knowledge that exists pre-move, researchers could also examine
other interesting mobility-related relationships using our approach, such as measuring changes in
productivity of the mover herself or of other employees who might benefit or lose out because of the
move (Groysberg et al. 2008). Identification issues are likely to be more accentuated for examining such
questions (Lacetera et al. 2004), although our framework, perhaps with adjustments, might still be useful.
More generally, any line of inquiry related to the antecedents and consequences of mobility will
greatly benefit from investigating longitudinal data and emphasizing temporal patterns that bring us closer
to uncovering underlying relationships and micro-level mechanisms. In this paper, we have offered one
approach for moving this topic forward. The relationship between inventor mobility and the use of ideas
is economically important for both firm strategy and public policy, and we still have much to learn.

REFERENCES
Agarwal, R., R. Echambadi, A. Franco, MB Sarkar. 2004. Knowledge transfer through inheritance: spinout generation, development, and survival. Academy of Management Journal. 47(4) 501–522.
Agarwal, R., M. Ganco, R. Ziedonis. 2009. Reputations for toughness in patent enforcement: Implications
for knowledge spillovers via inventor mobility. Strategic Management Journal. 30 1349–1374
Agrawal, A., I. Cockburn, J. McHale. 2006. Gone but not forgotten: Labor flows, knowledge spillovers,
and enduring social capital. Journal of Economic Geography. 6(5) 571-591.
Angrist, J.D., A.B. Krueger. 1994. Why do World War II veterans earn more than nonveterans? Journal
of Labor Economics 12 (1) 74-97
Angrist, J.D., J. Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton
University Press.
Alcacer. J., M. Gittelman. 2006. Patent citations as a measure of knowledge flows: The influence of
examiner citations. Review of Economics and Statistics. 88(4) 774-779.
Allison, P.D., R.P. Waterman. 2002. Sociological Methodology. 32: 247-265.
Almeida, P., B. Kogut. 1999. The localization of knowledge and the mobility of engineers in regional
networks. Management Science. Vol. 45(7) 905-917.
33

Arrow, K. J. 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In R. R. Nelson (ed.),
The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors. Vol. 13 of NBER Special
Conference Series, Princeton University Press, New Jersey, pp. 609-625.
Azoulay, P., W. Ding, T. Stuart. 2009. The impact of academic patenting on the rate, quality and direction
of (public) research output. Journal of Industrial Economics LVII(4) 637-676.
Azoulay, P., J. S. Graff Zivin, J. Wang. 2010. Superstar Extinction. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Forthcoming.
Barney, J. 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management. 17(1) 99120.
Becker, G.S. 1962. Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Political Economy.
70(5) 9-49.
Breschi, S., F. Lissoni. 2009. Mobility of skilled workers and co-invention networks: an anatomy of
localized knowledge flows. Journal of Economic Geography 9(4) 439-468.
Chesbrough, H. 2003. Open Innovation. Boston, Harvard Business School Press.
Coff, R.W. 1997. Human assets and management dilemmas: Coping with hazards on the road to resourcebased theory. The Academy of Management Review. 22(2) 374-402.
Cohen, W.M., D.A. Levinthal. 1989. Innovation and learning: The two faces of R&D. Economic Journal.
99(397) 569-596.
Corredoira, R.A., L. Rosenkopf. 2010. Should auld acquaintance be forgot? The reverse transfer of
knowledge through mobility ties. Strategic Management Journal. 31 159-181.
Dahl, M.S., O. Sorenson. 2010. The migration of technical workers. Journal of Urban Economics 67.
DiMaggio, P., W.W. Powell. 1983. The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective
rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological Review. 48(2) 147-160.
Dosi, G. 1988. Sources, procedures and microeconomic effects of innovation. Journal of Economic
Literature. 26(3) 1120-1171.
Duguet, E., M. MacGarvie. 2005. How well do patent citations measure knowledge spillovers? Evidence
from French innovation surveys. Economics of Innovation and New Technology. 14(5) 375-393.
Fleming, L. 2001. Recombinant uncertainty in technological search. Management Science. 47(1) 117-132.
Fleming, L., C. King, A. Juda. 2007. Small worlds and innovation. Organization Science. 18(6) 938-954.
Franco, A.M., M.F. Mitchell. 2008. Covenants not to compete, labor mobility, and industry dynamics.
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy. 17 581-606.
Furman, J.L., S. Stern. 2006. Climbing atop the shoulders of giants: the impact of institutions on
cumulative research. NBER Working Paper 12523.
Gompers, P., J. Lerner, D. Scharfstein. 2005. Entrepreneurial spawning: public corporations and the
genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999. Journal of Finance. 60(2) 517–614.
Grossman, G., E. Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the World Economy. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Groysberg, B., L.E. Lee, A. Nanda. 2008. Can they take it with them? The portability of star knowledge
workers’ performance. Management Science.1-18.

34

Hall, B. H., J. Mairesse, L. Turner. 2007. Identifying age, cohort and period effects in scientific research
productivity: Discussion and illustration using simulated and actual data on French physicists.
Economics of Innovation and New Technology. 16 159-177.
Hansen, M.T. 1999. The search-transfer problem: The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across
organization subunits. Administrative Science Quarterly. 44(1) 82-111.
Hausman, J., B. Hall, Z. Griliches. 1984. Econometric models for count data with an application to the
patents-R&D relationship. Econometrica. 52(4) 909-38.
Heckman, J., S. Navarro-Lozano. 2004. Using matching, instrumental variables, and control functions to
estimate economic choice models. The Review of Economics and Statistics. 86(1) 30-67.
Iacus, S.M., G. King, G. Porro. 2009. Causal inference without balance checking: Coarsened exact
matching. Working Paper, Harvard University.
Imbens, G.W. 2004. Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: A review.
The Review of Economics and Statistics. 86(1) 4-29.
Jaffe, A.B., M. Trajtenberg, 2002. Patents, Citations & Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge
Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Jovanovic, B. 1979. Job matching and the theory of turnover. Journal of Political Economy. 87(5)972-90.
Klepper, S., S. Sleeper. 2005. Entry by spin-offs. Management Science. 51(8) 1291–1306.
Lacetera, N., I.M. Cockburn, R.M. Henderson. 2004. Do firms change capabilities by hiring new people?
A study of the adoption of science-based drug discovery. In A.M McGahan & J.A.C. Baum (Ed.),
Advances in Strategic Management. Vol. 21. Greenwich CT: JAI Press.
Lampe R. 2008. Strategic citation. SSRN Working Paper #984123.
Lazear, E.P. 1986. Raids and offer matching. Research in Labor Economics. 8 141-165.
Levin, S.G., P.E. Stephan. 1991. Research productivity over the life cycle: Evidence for academic
scientists. American Economic Review. 81 114-132.
Llorente, G., R. Michaely, G. Saar, J. Wang. 2002. Dynamic volume-return relation of individual stocks.
The Review of Financial Studies 15(4) 1005-1047.
Malamud, O., C. Pop-Eleches. 2010. General education versus vocational training: Evidence from an
economy in transition. The Review of Economics & Statistics. XCII(1) 43-60.
March, J.G. 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization Science. 2(1) 7187.
Marx, M., D. Strumsky, L. Fleming. 2009. Mobility, skills, and the Michigan non-compete experiment.
Management Science. 55(6) 875-889.
Mehta, A., M. Rysman, T. Simcoe. 2010. Identifying the age profile of patent citations: New estimates of
knowledge diffusion. Journal of Applied Econometrics, Forthcoming.
Moen, J. 2005. Is mobility of technical personnel a source of R&D spillovers? Journal of Labor
Economics. 23(1) 81-114.
Moffitt, R.A. 2004. Introduction to the symposium on the econometrics of matching. The Review of
Economics and Statistics. 86(1) 1-3.

35

Murray, F., S. Stern. 2007. Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of scientific
knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization. 63(4) 648-687.
Nelson, R.R., S.G. Winter. 1982. An evolutionary theory of economic change. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Oettl, A., A. Agrawal. 2008. International labor mobility and knowledge flow externalities. Journal of
International Business Studies.39 1242-1260.
Oettl, A. 2009. Productivity and Helpfulness: A New Taxonomy for Star Scientists. Working Paper,
Georgia Institute of Technology
Penrose, E.T. 1959. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Peteraf, M.A. 1993. The cornerstones of competitive advantage: A resource-based view. Strategic
Management Journal. 14(3) 179-191.
Rosenkopf, L., P. Almeida. 2003. Overcoming local search through alliances and mobility. Management
Science. 49(6) 0751-0766.
Samila, S., O. Sorenson. 2009. Non-compete covenants: Incentives to innovate or impediments to growth.
Working paper, Yale School of Management.
Saxenian, A.L. 1994. Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Simon, H.A. 1991. Bounded rationality and organizational learning. Organization Science. 2(1) 125-134.
Simon, C.J., J. Warner. 1992. Matchmaker, matchmaker: The effect of old boy networks on job match
quality, earnings, and tenure. Journal of Labor Economics. 10(3) 306-330.
Singh, J. 2005. Collaborative networks as determinants of knowledge diffusion patterns. Management
Science. 51(5) 756-770.
Singh, J. 2008. Distributed R&D, cross-regional knowledge integration and quality of innovative output.
Research Policy. 37(1) 77-96.
Song, J., P. Almeida, G. Wu. 2003. Learning by hiring: When is mobility more likely to facilitate
interfirm knowledge transfer? Management Science. 49(4) 351-365.
Thompson, P., M. Fox-Kean. 2005. Patent citations and the geography of knowledge spillovers: A
reassessment. American Economic Review. 95(1) 450-460.
Trajtenberg, M. 2006. The "names game": Harnessing inventors' patent data for economic research.
NBER Working Paper 12479.
Tzabbar, D., B.S. Silverman, B.S. Aharonson. 2009. Learning by hiring or hiring to avoid learning?
Organizational exploration via individuals’ exploitation. Working Paper.
Weitzman, M. 1998. Recombinant growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics CXIII(2) 331–360.
Wooldridge, J. M. 1999. Distribution-free estimation of some nonlinear panel data models. Journal of
Econometrics. 90(1) 77–97.

36

Table 1. Variable definitions and summary statistics for the “original sample” (N = 95,424)
Dependent variables:
all cites

All citations to the focal patent from the destination firm (in the given year)

Mean
0.018

Std Dev
0.200

Min
0

Max
11

cites excluding inventor self-cites

Destination firm citations coming from individuals other than the patent's
inventor herself

0.013

0.164

0

11

cites excluding inventor self-cites
or collaborator cites

Destination firm citations coming from individuals other than the patent's
inventor herself or any of her prior collaborators

0.011

0.147

0

11

0.50

0.50

0

1

1041.9

1433.1

0

8260

26.9

75.8

0

1375

1120.1

1157.0

0

5504

11.53

9.36

1

155

Explanatory & control variables:
recruit

Indicator for whether the given patent is a focal patent involving a move or a
control patent

destination firm patents

Number of patents assigned to the destination firm in the five years
preceding the inventor's move year

destination same-class patents

Number of destination firm patents that belong to the same 3-digit technology
class as the focal patent

original firm patents

Number of patents assigned to the original firm in the five years preceding
the focal patent's application year

claims

Number of claims made by the focal patent

patent references

Number of backward citations that the focal patent makes to other patents

6.78

7.01

0

171

non-patent references

Number of non-patent references made by the focal patent

0.86

2.28

0

37

inventor patents

Number of previous patents successfully applied for by the same inventor

7.76

13.07

0

202

inventor age

Number of years since the inventor applied for her first successful patent

4.47

4.34

0

26

U.S. inventor

Indicator for whether the focal patent's inventor has a US address or not

0.54

0.50

0

1

grant delay

The delay between application date and grant date for the focal patent (in
months)

22.69

10.82

1

136

post-move

Indicator for whether the citing year falls after the estimated move date

0.636

0.481

0

1

pre-move period 1

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 1st or 2nd year before the move

0.167

0.373

0

1

pre-move period 2

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 3rd or 4th year before the move

0.109

0.312

0

1

pre-move period 3

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 5th or 6th year before the move

0.058

0.234

0

1

pre-move period 4

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 7th or 8th year before the move

0.024

0.153

0

1

pre-move period 5

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 9th or 10th year before the move

0.007

0.081

0

1

post-move period 1

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 1st or 2nd year after the move

0.167

0.373

0

1

post-move period 2

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 3rd or 4th year after the move

0.160

0.367

0

1

post-move period 3

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 5th or 6th year after the move

0.143

0.350

0

1

post-move period 4

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 7th or 8th year after the move

0.109

0.311

0

1

post-move period 5

Indicator for whether the citing year is the 9th or 10th year after the move

0.057

0.233

0

1

Timing-related variables:

Notes: We base the summary statistics on the “original sample” constructed as illustrated in Figures 2 and 3 and describe them in
the notes corresponding to those figures. The overall sample size of 95,424 arises from 12 yearly observations for each of the
3,976 focal cited patents and another 12 yearly observations for each of the 3,976 control patents.

37

Table 2. Annual patent citation frequency for the “original sample”
Average annual citations received from the destination firm
Pre-move
Post-move
Patents involving move

Subsample mean:
all cites = 0.0140
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0140
(N = 17383)

Control patents

Subsample mean:
all cites = 0.0051
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0051
(N = 17383)

First difference (column):
all cites = 0.0089
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0089
(N = 34766)

Subsample mean:
all cites = .0396
cites excluding inventor self-cites = .0250
(N = 30329)

Subsample mean:
all cites = 0.0061
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0061
(N = 30329)

First difference (column):
all cites = 0.0335
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0189
(N = 60658)

First difference (row):
all cites = 0.0256
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0110
(N = 47712)

First difference (row):
all cites = 0.0010
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0010
(N = 47712)

Difference-in-differences:
all cites = 0.0246
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0100
(N = 95424)

Notes: We base this analysis on the “original sample” constructed as illustrated in Figures 2 and 3 and describe it in the notes
corresponding to those figures. Each box in this “2X2” matrix summarizes the average value of the all cites and cites excluding
inventor self-cites variables in the corresponding subsample (see Table 1 for variables definitions). Note that all cites and cites
excluding inventor self-cites are identical pre-move since the inventor is not yet an employee of the destination firm; therefore, by
construction there are no inventor self-cites from the destination firm that involve this inventor in the pre-move period.

38

Table 3. Difference-in-differences regression analysis for the “original sample”
Dependent Variable:
Regression Model:

(1)
all cites

(2)
all cites

(3)
all cites

(4)
all cites

(5)
all cites

(6)
all cites

(7)
all cites

Negative
binomial

Negative
binomial

Linear

Linear

Linear
(Patent FE)

Linear
(Patent FE)

Linear
(Patent FE)

Original
sample

Original sample
(post move only)

Original
sample

Original sample
(focal patents only)

Original
sample

Original
sample

1.017***
(0.213)
0.907***
(0.230)
0.157
(0.207)

0.0356***
(0.0034)

0.0101***
(0.0022)
0.0251***
(0.0037)
0.0033
(0.0025)

0.0367***
(0.0043)

0.0283***
(0.0027)
0.0045*
(0.0027)

0.0328***
(0.0035)
0.0091**
(0.0036)
0.0083**
(0.0042)
0.0035
(0.0031)

0.428***
(0.050)
-0.215***
(0.045)
0.013
(0.040)
0.085
(0.083)
0.027
(0.083)
0.149
(0.093)
-0.129
(0.092)
0.112
(0.105)
0.662***
(0.156)
0.123
(0.136)

0.497***
(0.048)
-0.202***
(0.040)
0.003
(0.038)
0.096
(0.078)
0.074
(0.077)
0.073
(0.091)
-0.112
(0.085)
0.053
(0.098)
0.611***
(0.138)
-0.011
(0.131)

0.0085***
(0.0012)
-0.0039***
(0.0010)
0.0010
(0.0013)
0.0049**
(0.0024)
0.0009
(0.0028)
0.0036
(0.0027)
-0.0013
(0.0018)

0.0075***
(0.0010)
-0.0028***
(0.0007)
0.0008
(0.0009)
0.0041**
(0.0018)
0.0019
(0.0019)
0.0018
(0.0020)
-0.0007
(0.0013)

60658
7952
-5238
841.9***

95424
7952
-6806
48236***

60658
7952

95424
7952

47712
3976

95424
7952

95424
7952

0.037
4.47***

0.029
5.43***

0.006
9.02***

0.004
11.76***

0.004
11.50***

Patent-Year Sample: Original sample
(post move only)
recruit

1.896***
(0.137)

recruit X post-move
post-move
recruit X pre-move period 1
pre-move period 1
ln(destination same-class patents)
ln(destination firm patents)
ln(original firm patents)
ln(claims)
ln(patent references)
ln(non-patent references)
ln(inventor patents)
ln(inventor age)
U.S. inventor
ln(grant delay)

Number of observations
Number of cited patents
Log likelihood
Wald chi2
R-squared
F-statistic

Notes: We base this regression analysis on the “original sample” already summarized in Tables 1 and 2. All models include
yearly indicator variables for the citing year and the lag between the cited and citing year. The pooled linear models (Columns (3)
and (4)) also include indicator variables for the inventor age (in years), inventor location (U.S. states or non-U.S. countries), and
patent grant delay (in months), though the pooled non-linear models (Columns (1) and (2)) employ inventor age, U.S. inventor,
and grant delay variables to ensure convergence. We use robust standard errors clustered on the identity of the inventor in all four
pooled models and employ fixed effects for the cited patent in Columns (5) through (7), though results are practically identical if
we use fixed effects for the inventor instead. We also obtain qualitatively similar results when we employ a Poisson-based
conditional fixed effects regression approach, though we do not choose that as our preferred approach for two reasons: 1) the
estimation does not converge if the model is saturated with as many indicators as the linear models, and 2) we drop a large
fraction of the sample due to no variation in the dependent variable. Note that the reference period for interpreting the
“difference-in-differences” (DD) estimate of interest – recruit X post-move – is the entire pre-move period for Columns (2), (4),
(5), and (6) but the pre-move period excluding the two years just before the move in Column (7). A comparison of Columns (1)
and (2) as well as of Columns (3) and (4) indicates that purely cross-sectional results as reported in Columns (1) and (3) can be
misleading since mobile inventor patents receive systematically more citations than control patents even pre-move. Furthermore,
the positive and significant estimate for recruit X pre-move period 1 in Column (7) suggests that the upward trend in citation rate
in part starts pre-move, suggesting the need for a more stringent matching for at least partially mitigating concerns regarding
endogeneity of the move.
*** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

39

Table 4a. Mobile inventor patent versus control patent characteristics in the “original sample”
Patents involving move
obs

mean std dev

Control patents
obs

mean std dev

Difference in means
magnitude

t-stat

Cumulative overall pre-move citations

3976

2.98

4.50

3976

2.42

3.88

0.57

6.0

Cumulative pre-move citations from destination

3976

0.063

0.461

3976

0.023

0.272

0.040

4.8

Inventor patents

3976

9.13

14.64

3976

5.87

12.27

3.26

10.8

Inventor age

3976

4.98

4.29

3976

3.96

4.32

1.02

10.6

Grant delay

3976

22.78

10.72

3976

22.59

10.91

0.19

0.8

Claims

3976

11.73

9.68

3976

11.32

9.02

0.40

1.9

Patent references

3976

6.92

7.40

3976

6.64

6.58

0.28

0.7

Non-patent references

3976

0.88

2.32

3976

0.84

2.23

0.03

1.8

Originality (NBER measure)

3843

0.34

0.27

3828

0.35

0.28

-0.01

0.9

Notes: The “originality” measure (taken from the NBER database) measures breadth of search across different technology classes
and corresponds to one minus the Herfindahl of the backward citations made by a patent to previous patents from different
technologies (and is therefore undefined for patents with no backward citations). Note that the means of several key
characteristics of the focal and control patents differ significantly, motivating the need for a more stringent matching approach as
summarized in Table 4b.

Table 4b. Mobile inventor patent versus control patent characteristics in the “CEM sample”
Patents involving move
obs

mean std dev

Control patents
obs

mean std dev

Difference in means
magnitude

t-stat

Cumulative overall pre-move citations

2543

2.55

3.76

2543

2.50

3.83

0.05

0.5

Cumulative pre-move citations from destination

2543

0.010

0.136

2543

0.010

0.136

0.000

0.0

Inventor patents

2543

7.59

11.36

2543

7.40

14.52

0.19

0.5

Inventor age

2543

4.50

4.05

2543

4.61

4.18

-0.12

1.0

Grant delay

2543

23.11

10.62

2543

22.95

10.58

0.16

0.6

Claims

2543

11.39

9.01

2543

11.18

8.67

0.21

0.8

Patent references

2543

6.40

5.97

2543

6.38

5.25

0.02

0.1

Non-patent references

2543

0.85

2.14

2543

0.78

1.98

0.07

1.2

Originality (NBER measure)

2464

0.33

0.28

2457

0.34

0.28

-0.01

1.4

Notes: We construct the “CEM sample” using a CEM procedure that relies upon not just an exact match on the three-digit
technology class and application year (used in constructing the “original sample”) but also on an exact match on discrete buckets
based on five additional criteria: 1) overall pre-move citations received by a patent (four buckets: zero citations, one-two
citations, three-seven citations, and eight or more citations), 2) pre-move citations received from the destination firm (four
buckets: zero citations, one citation, two-three citations, and four or more citations), 3) number of previous patents successfully
filed for by this inventor (three buckets: zero or one patents, two-12 patents, and 13 or more patents), 4) number of years since
the first patent by this inventor (three buckets: zero or one years, two-nine years, and 10 or more years), and 5) the delay between
the application date and grant date for the patent (three buckets: 490 or less days, 491-832 days, and 833 or more days). Also note
that the overall sample size is now smaller – there are 2,543 focal patents and as many corresponding control patents in contrast
to 3,976 focal patents and as many control patents in Table 4a – since we drop the mobile inventor patents for which we find no
match in the CEM procedure. A comparison of Tables 4a and 4b reveals that the mobile inventor patents and control patents are
much more comparable for the “CEM sample” than for the “original sample” on a variety of key characteristics.

40

Table 5. Annual patent citation frequency for the “CEM sample”
Average annual citations received from the destination firm
Pre-move
Post-move
Patents involving move

Subsample mean:
all cites = 0.0022
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0022
(N = 10981)

Control patents

Subsample mean:
all cites = 0.0022
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0022
(N = 10981)

First difference (column):
all cites = 0
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0
(N = 21962)

Subsample mean:
all cites = .0345
cites excluding inventor self-cites = .0216
(N = 19535)

Subsample mean:
all cites = .0049
cites excluding inventor self-cites = .0049
(N = 19535)

First difference (column):
all cites = 0.0296
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0167
(N = 39070)

First difference (row):
all cites = 0.0323
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0194
(N = 30516)

First difference (row):
all cites = 0.0027
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0027
(N = 30516)

Difference-in-differences:
all cites = 0.0296
cites excluding inventor self-cites = 0.0167
(N = 61032)

Notes: This analysis replicates the summary analysis from Table 2 (based on the “original sample”) for the “CEM sample.” Note
that the pre-move means for citations received are now practically the same for the focal and control patents, since cumulative
pre-move citation count is one of the criteria used for the matching done in constructing the “CEM sample.” Also note that the
overall sample size is now smaller – 61,032 here versus 95,424 in Table 2 – since we drop the mobile inventor patents for which
we do not find the more stringent match when constructing the “CEM sample.”
*** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

41

Table 6. Difference-in-differences regression analysis for the “CEM sample”

Dependent Variable:
Regression Model:
Patent-Year Sample:

recruit

(1)
all cites

(2)
all cites

(3)
all cites

(4)
all cites

(5)
all cites

(6)
all cites

(7)
all cites

Negative
binomial

Negative
binomial

Linear

Linear

Linear
(Patent FE)

Linear
(Patent FE)

Linear
(Patent FE)

CEM sample
(post move only)

CEM
sample

CEM sample
(post move only)

CEM
sample

CEM sample
(focal patents only)

CEM
sample

CEM
sample

1.927***
(0.185)

0.007
(0.376)
1.945***
(0.407)
0.895***
(0.319)

0.0316***
(0.0040)

0.0012
(0.0013)
0.0295***
(0.0039)
0.0069**
(0.0028)

0.0447***
(0.0048)

0.0296***
(0.0029)
0.0092***
(0.0029)

0.0289***
(0.0038)
0.0115***
(0.0039)
-0.0012
(0.0045)
0.0028
(0.0034)

0.450***
(0.067)
-0.275***
(0.059)
-0.066
(0.051)
-0.014
(0.108)
0.207*
(0.113)
0.053
(0.125)
-0.175
(0.117)
0.158
(0.145)
0.544***
(0.198)
-0.103
(0.192)

0.509***
(0.066)
-0.272***
(0.057)
-0.063
(0.049)
-0.014
(0.106)
0.182*
(0.107)
0.082
(0.121)
-0.133
(0.114)
0.092
(0.141)
0.411**
(0.188)
-0.119
(0.183)

0.0076***
(0.0013)
-0.0037***
(0.0011)
-0.0016
(0.0018)
0.0022
(0.0032)
0.0050
(0.0035)
-0.0009
(0.0029)
-0.0022
(0.0023)

0.0056***
(0.0009)
-0.0024***
(0.0007)
-0.0010
(0.0012)
0.0012
(0.0021)
0.0033
(0.0023)
-0.0000
(0.0019)
-0.0013
(0.0015)

39070
5086
-4153
988.9***

61032
5086
-4525
42198***

39070
5086

61032
5086

30516
2543

61032
5086

61032
5086

0.033
2.93***

0.025
3.48***

0.009
13.12***

0.006
18.66***

0.006
17.64***

recruit X post-move
post-move
recruit X pre-move period 1
pre-move period 1
ln(destination same-class patents)
ln(destination firm patents)
ln(original firm patents)
ln(claims)
ln(patent references)
ln(non-patent references)
ln(inventor patents)
ln(inventor age)
U.S. inventor
ln(grant delay)

Number of observations
Number of cited patents
Log likelihood
Wald chi2
R-squared
F-statistic

Notes: The regression models employed here are identical to the corresponding ones employed in Table 3, including all indicator
variables not reported in that table to conserve space, but the sample used is now the “CEM sample.” The sample sizes are now
smaller since we drop patents for which the CEM procedure does not find a match when constructing the “CEM sample.” Unlike
in Table 3, the estimated coefficient for recruit in Columns (2) and (4) are practically zero since the cumulative pre-move citation
count is one of the matching criteria used in constructing the “CEM sample.” Further evidence of the matching working well is
that the estimate for recruit X pre-move period 1 (Column (7)) is now practically zero, indicating that there is no pre-move trend
in the citation rate.
*** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

42

Table 7. Learning-by-hiring?
(1)
all cites

(2)
cites excluding
inventor self-cites

Linear
(Patent FE)

Linear
(Patent FE)

(3)
cites excluding
inventor self-cites or
collaborator cites
Linear
(Patent FE)

CEM sample

CEM sample

CEM sample

0.0296***
(0.0029)
0.0092***
(0.0029)

0.0161***
(0.0024)
0.0054**
(0.0024)

0.0095***
(0.0020)
0.0067***
(0.0020)

61032
5086
11.31***

61032
5086
6.03***

61032
5086
4.18***

Dependent Variable:

Regression Model:
Patent-Year Sample:
recruit X post-move
post-move

Number of observations
Number of cited patents
F-statistic

Notes: We base this regression analysis on the “CEM sample” already used in Table 6. We use our preferred specification as in
Column (6) of Tables 3 and 6 (including all indicator variables not reported to conserve space). For ease of comparison, Column
(1) simply replicates the analysis from Column (6) of Table 6, which uses all cites as the dependent variable. In Column (2), we
examine the extent to which the estimated boost in citation rates post-mobility diminishes when citation counts exclude inventor
self-cites. Similarly, in Column (3), we analyze the extent to which the estimated boost in citation rates post-mobility diminishes
when citation counts exclude not just inventor self-cites but also cites made by collaborators in the destination firm. Note that the
reference period for interpreting the DD estimate of interest – recruit X post-move – is the entire pre-move period.
*** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

43

Table 8. Does the importance of self-exploitation by the recruit persist over time?
(1)
all cites

(2)
cites excluding
inventor self-cites

Regression Model:

Linear
(Patent FE)

Linear
(Patent FE)

(3)
cites excluding
inventor self-cites or
collaborator cites
Linear
(Patent FE)

Patent-Year Sample:

CEM sample

CEM sample

CEM sample

0.0378***
(0.0045)
0.0348***
(0.0045)
0.0326***
(0.0047)
0.0125**
(0.0051)
0.0157**
(0.0065)
0.0023
(0.0052)
0.0046
(0.0066)
0.0047
(0.0098)
0.0017
(0.0184)
0.0053
(0.0042)
0.0090
(0.0063)
0.0122
(0.0087)
0.0160
(0.0112)
0.0207
(0.0139)
-0.0041
(0.0045)
-0.0042
(0.0070)
-0.0108
(0.0104)
-0.0189
(0.0167)

0.0197***
(0.0037)
0.0196***
(0.0037)
0.0186***
(0.0038)
0.0078*
(0.0042)
0.0131**
(0.0053)
0.0023
(0.0042)
0.0034
(0.0054)
0.0049
(0.0080)
0.0002
(0.0151)
0.0032
(0.0034)
0.0043
(0.0051)
0.0049
(0.0071)
0.0066
(0.0092)
0.0080
(0.0114)
-0.0017
(0.0036)
0.0009
(0.0057)
-0.0032
(0.0085)
-0.0087
(0.0136)

0.0165***
(0.0032)
0.0118***
(0.0032)
0.0064*
(0.0033)
0.0054
(0.0036)
0.0086*
(0.0045)
0.0032
(0.0036)
0.0034
(0.0046)
0.0043
(0.0069)
-0.0007
(0.0130)
0.0031
(0.0030)
0.0038
(0.0044)
0.0041
(0.0061)
0.0052
(0.0079)
0.0041
(0.0098)
-0.0012
(0.0031)
0.0021
(0.0049)
-0.0012
(0.0073)
-0.0058
(0.0117)

61032
5086
8.46***

61032
5086
4.39***

61032
5086
3.21***

Dependent Variable:

recruit X post-move period 1
recruit X post-move period 2
recruit X post-move period 3
recruit X post-move period 4
recruit X post-move period 5
recruit X pre-move period 2
recruit X pre-move period 3
recruit X pre-move period 4
recruit X pre-move period 5
post-move period 1
post-move period 2
post-move period 3
post-move period 4
post-move period 5
pre-move period 2
pre-move period 3
pre-move period 4
pre-move period 5

Number of observations
Number of cited patents
F-statistic

Notes: Again using the “CEM sample” and the same underlying regression model (including all unreported indicator variables),
this analysis extends from Table 7 by employing fine-grained indicator variables for a series of two-year time windows pre-move
as well as post-move in order to examine the temporal patterns of citation rate changes associated with the move. Note that,
unlike in Table 7, the reference period for interpreting the regression estimates is now pre-move period 1 (the omitted timing
category). Figure 4 graphically illustrates the DD results (i.e., the interaction term coefficients) from this table.
*** p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1

44

Figure 1. Motivating a “difference-in-differences” approach for estimating the effect of mobility

Ra = actual citation rate for the recruit’s patent
Re = extrapolated citation trend for the recruit’s patent
Ca = actual citation rate for the control patent
Ce = extrapolated citation trend for the control patent

Citation
Rate

Ra
Re

Ca
Ce
Patent
Origin

Recruit’s
Move Date

Time

Notes: This figure motivates our DD approach for examining how firms exploit the prior inventions of new recruits. The key point is that a post-move comparison of the citation
rates for focal versus control patents ignores the possibility that these citation rates may differ not just due to the recruit’s move per se but also because focal versus control patents
might be inherently different to start with. Our DD approach in controlling for the latter involves extrapolating from information on citations received pre-move to estimate the
likely citation trends if the move does not take place. Crudely speaking, we can better estimate the effect of mobility as a DD statistic (Ra – Re) – (Ca – Ce) instead of calculating it
as just a post-move difference (Ra – Ca). We can further reduce potential biases in the estimates that might still arise from the endogeneity of the move by matching the focal and
control patents more stringently using pre-move citation trends and inventor-related information. We do this in the construction of our “CEM sample.”

45

Figure 2. Constructing a matched sample of potentially cited patents

Inventor recruited
by destination firm

Original Firm
Recruit’s
Patent

Compare
citation rates

Same application
year & three-digit
technology

Destination Firm

Control
Patent

Notes: We begin the sample construction process by identifying a set of focal patents, each created by a single inventor who subsequently moves to another firm between the third
and 10th year after the original patent’s application date. (Excluding the first two years ensures a pre-move observation window, data upon which the DD approach relies.) In
constructing the “original sample,” we match each focal patent with a “control” patent (from a different firm and by a single inventor who shows no evidence of moving in the first
12 years) such that each control patent has the same application year and three-digit primary technology class as the corresponding focal patent. Construction of the “CEM
sample” follows a similar procedure except that we use additional observables (including pre-move citation and inventor information) to carry out a more stringent match between
focal and control patents using the CEM technique.

46

Figure 3. Constructing a longitudinal dataset of citations received from the destination firm

Rt = citations received by the recruit’s prior patent from the destination firm in year t
Ct = citations received by the matched control patent from the destination firm in year t

Recruit’s
Patent
1983

Control
Patent
1983

R1984

R1985

R1986

C1984

C1985

C1986

R1987

C1987

R1988

R1989

R1990

R1991

R1992

R1993

R1994

R1995

C1988

C1989

C1990

C1991

C1992

C1993

C1994

C1995

Recruit’s
Move Date

Notes: This figure illustrates how we use either of the matched samples of patents as described in the notes to Figure 3 to construct a longitudinal patent-year dataset of citations to
employ for our DD analysis. The resulting dataset has 12 yearly observations for each (focal or control) cited patent, corresponding to the 12 years directly following the patent’s
application year. In the above example, the focal patent (involving a future move) and the corresponding control patent originate in year 1983, so each of them gives rise to one
observation per year for the period 1984-1995. We show the estimated move date to be January 1, 1988, so we classify the four annual observations corresponding to the period
1984-1987 as being pre-move (indicator post-move = 0) and the eight annual observations corresponding to the 1988-1995 as post-move (indicator post-move = 1). Following a
similar procedure, we construct the “original sample” to have 95,424 observations (3,976 X 12 X 2) corresponding to 3,976 focal patents and as many corresponding control
patents. In contrast, the “CEM sample” has 61,032 observations (2,543 X 12 X 2) corresponding to 2,543 focal patents and as many corresponding control patents, since we drop
the focal patents that cannot find a match when employing the stringent CEM procedure.

47

Figure 4. Estimated temporal trends in citations received from the destination firm

0.04

all cites
cites excluding inventor-self cites

Annual citation rate

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
Pre-move
period 5

-0.01

Pre-move
period 4

Pre-move
period 3

Pre-move
period 2

Pre-move
period 1

Post-move
period 1

Post-move
period 2

Post-move
period 3

Post-move
period 4

Post-move
period 5

Recruit’s
Move Date

Notes: This figure plots the DD estimates from regression analysis of temporal patterns of citation rate changes associated with the move, as reported in Table 8. Specifically, it
plots the interaction coefficients of recruit with different pre-move and post-move periods as listed in the table. Since the reference period for the regression analysis is pre-move
period 1, the DD coefficient for that period is set to zero in plotting the regression coefficients above. We base these results on analysis of the “CEM sample.”

48

