                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MACROECONOMIC STABILIZATION THROUGH
                     TAXATION AND INDEXATION:
               THE USE OF FIRM—SPECIFIC INFORMATION



                        Richard C. Marston

                       Stephen J. Turnovsky



                      Working Paper No. 1586




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 1985




Forthcoming in the Journal of Monetary Economics. An earlier
version of this paper was presented to the NBER Summer Institute in
International Studies, August 198)4. We would like to thank Joshua
Aizenman, Matthew Canzoneri, Jacob Frenkel, Robert Hodrick, Charles
Plosser, AssaC Razin, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments
and suggestions. The research reported here is part of the NBERs
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors anc not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1586
                                               March 1985




                   Macro economic S tab ii izat ion Through
                        Taxation and Indexation:
                  The Use of Firm—Specific Information



                                  ABSTRACT•



 This paper considers two alternative
                                        approaches to stabilizing an economy with
 firm—specific   productivity disturbances. The first uses wage contracts tying

wages in each firm to these disturbances as well as the
                                                             price level. The
second uses a tax on firms which modifies their
                                                   supply behavior together with
a simple waqe indexation rule tying wages to prices alone. Both these schemes

are viable as long as the firm-specific disturbance is known to all agents.

If the firm alone observes the
                                 productivity disturbance, under either scheme
it has an incentive to misrepresent
                                      current conditions. However, a
combination of these two schemes is both welfare maximizing and incentive

compatible.



      Stephen J. Turnovsky                    Richard C. Marston
      Department of Economics                 Wharton School
      University of Illinois                  2300 Steinberg—Dietrjch Hall
      330 Commerce West
                                              University of Pennsylvania
      1206 South Sixth St.
                                              Philadelphia, P& 19104
      Champaign, Ill. 61820
      217—333—2354                            215—898—7626
  1 •   INTRODUCTION

         Wage indexation offers one solution to stabilizing an economy with labor

 contracts which fix wages on the basis of lagged information.     Beginning with
 the contributions of Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977), a number of studies have

 examined how wages might be adjusted to current information in such a way as

 to replicate a full information, frictionless economy-—one without wage

 contracts. The objective of the indexation scheme, in effect, is to undo the

 rigidities due to the contracts. One of the main conclusions of this

 literature is that indexation of wages to prices is in general incapable of

 replicating a frictionless economy. Full wage indexation to the domestic

 price level will stabilize the economy against monetary disturbances, but may

accentuate the destabilizing effects of real disturbances. The optimal degree

of indexation, which depends upon the relative importance of real and monetary

disturbances, can at best minimize but not eliminate undesirable variations of

output.

        Recent studies, however, have shown how it is possible for more complex

forms of wage indexation to replicate exactly a frictionless economy. Karni

(1983), for example, demonstrates that if the wage is indexed not only to

current prices, but also to current aggregate output, then it is indeed

possible to stabilize the economy perfectly relative to the frictionless

economy.1 The scheme, however, requires that information on aggregate output,

the crucial variable to be stabilized, be available
                                                      virtually instantaneously,
or at least within the time interval envisaged by the model. Such an

assumption may be reasonable if every firm in the economy is subject to the

same productivity disturbances, since then each firm would be able to infer

the size of the aggregate disturbances from those occurring at the individual

firm level. But if the productivity disturbances are at least partially firm—
specific, then the observations of any one firm give only partial information

about the aggregate disturbances. Moreover, if labor is less than perfectly

mobile between firms during the current period, then information about firm—

specific disturbances, rather than just aggregate disturbances, must be

incorporated in the indexation rule since wages in a competitive economy will

vary from one firm to another.

       In this paper we offer two alternative approaches to stabilizing an

economy subject to firm—specific disturbances.      One approach relies on

privately-negotiated wage contracts which tie wages in each firm to firm—

specific variables, as well as to the price level. This indexation rule is

analogous to Karni 's rule, except that the wage rate is tied to the output of
the individual firm, or equivalently1 to firm-specific disturbances, rather
than   to the aggregate output level.

       As an alternative, we propose a taxation scheme to accompany a wage

indexation rule tying wages to prices alone. Like the more complex indexation

scheme, this combination of taxation and indexation enables the contract

economy to replicate output in the competitive, full information economy. The

tax is a levy on the net revenue of the firm with a corresponding tax
                                                                             credit
for the employment of labor. It is designed to reduce the response of the

firm's demand for labor to changes in prices or productivity disturbances,

thereby mimicking the firm's output behavior in a competitive benchmark

economy. The essential feature of the tax     is   that it makes use of firm—

 specific information, by inducing firms to modify their labor use in response

 to a productivity disturbance, but does not require that wages be tied to any

 firm—specific information.

       Both of these schemes are viable as long as the firm—specific disturbance

 is known to all agents, including labor and the government, as well as



                                        —2—
 firms. There is no particular need for the tax scheme in this case of
 symmetric information since the privately-negotiated wage contract described
 above is able to replicate the competitive, full information economy. If the
 firm alone observes the productivity disturbance, however, then the tax scheme
 plays a role in making the privately—negotiated contract incentive-.
 compatible.   With asymmetric information, the firm has an incentive to

 misrepresent current economic conditions. By doing so, it can reduce its wage

 bill in the case of the indexation scheme or reduce its tax liability in the

 case of the tax scheme. But, as we show below, a combination of the tax

 scheme with the privately-negotiated contract not only succeeds in replicating

output in the competitive, full information economy, but also eliminates the

incentive on the part of firms to misrepresent. This incentive—compatible

scheme involves wage indexation to both the price level and the firm—specific

disturbance coupled with an appropriate taxation scheme on the firm's revenue.

       In the case where the productivity disturbance is known only to firms,

departures from Pareto optimality can occur due to the incompleteness of

private markets. It is this which creates the potential for welfare—improving

government intervention. While our analysis shows that a tax scheme can

improve welfare relative to an initial (incomplete) market situation, it sheds

no light on why markets are incomplete. Nor does our analysis explain why the

government has any advantage in improving welfare, since it does not explore

purely private contract schemes which might also restore the competitive

solution • 2

      The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes

a benchmark competitive economy, paying particular attention to the underlying

microeconomjc structure. The contract economy is discussed in Section 3. The

two partial schemes are discussed in Section 4, while the incentive-compatible



                                      —3—
scheme is derived and discussed in Section 5. Our conclusions are given in

Section 6. The analysis can be thought of as applying either to a closed

economy or toa small open economy operating in a world in which domestic and

foreign goods are perfect substitutes. Only a modest modification is required

to extend the results to an open economy in which domestic and foreign goods

are imperfect substitutes.


2. A BENCHMARK COMPETITIVE BONOMY

     We consider an economy consisting of K firms, each of which produces an

identical good by means of a Cobb-Douglas production function of the form



                              Y =   (L) e                                    (1)




   and L represent the output and labor used by each firm, while v is a

productivity disturbance, which is assumed to be firm specific. We assume

that the firm can observe its own current output and can therefore observe the

value of the disturbance v when it occurs. Throughout Sections 2—4, v is

also assumed to be known to the labor employed by the firm and the government.

In Section 5 we assume that it is known only to the firm and discuss the moral

hazard problems this raises. In the absence of disturbances, the output of

the representative firm is

                                Y = (L1)10                                  (1')



where the subscript o denotes the stationary equilibrium. Linearizing the

production function (1) about the stationary level (1') we obtain an

expression for the percentage change in output as a function of the percentage

change in labor and the productivity disturbance3




                                      —4—
                                 y (1 —                     +v    ,
                                                                                             (2)

  where y (y — Y1)/Y1,               (L   -
                                               L1)/L',      denote percentage changes.
       We assume that workers are mobile between firms from one period to

  another, so the wage paid in the stationary equilibriu (where disturbances

  are absent) is the same across firms. We
                                                        assume, however, that because of the
  significant costs of moving between firms, workers are immobile within the

 period, so wages can vary from firm to firm ex post once the supply

 disturbances are revealed to the firm. We believe this assumption is

 preferable to the usual one of perfect
                                                    mobility between firms, which in the
 presence of firm—specific disturbances requires an unrealistic degree of

 interfjrm mobility within every period.4

      In   an economy with spot labor markets, but with labor tied in the current

 period to individual firms, each firm has an incentive to exercise monopsony

 power over its labor. So the equilibriuni attained by such an economy will

 not, in general, be Pareto optimal. The benchmark equilibrium to be used for

welfare comparisons, however, should be that of an economy where both firms

and labor behave competitively. So the equilibrium we describe below is one

in which each firm behaves as if it were competitive in the labor market.5

Later we shall describe indexationcum_taxatjon
                                                              schemes which achieve this
same Pareto optimal equilibriu.

     Assuming that the representative firm behaves
                                                                  competitively, profit
maximization yields the following labor demand function expressed in terms of

percentage changes:
                             i   1
                                              —     i
                                                        +
                                                            ii
                                                            —v
                                                  w)             '                         (3)

where p, w denote the percentage changes in the price of output and the

firm—specific wage, respectively. The supply of labor, which is tied to the



                                              —5—
firm within the period, is given by


                               =            —            '       fl > 0                            (4)
                                   n(w                                     .




       Equating (3) and (4) yields the reduced form expressions for the

employment of labor, output, and the real wage in the benchmark economy

                                   i*               fl           j                                (5a)
                                                    + ne't
                                   i* =         1+n i                                             (5b)
                                                        —)v          ,




                               i*               =
                                                             1
                                                                                                  (5c)
                               w
                                                             in these real
where * denotes the benchmark economy. The percentage change
                                                                                  disturbance, but is
variables is a function of the firm—specific productivity

independent of any demand disturbance, insofar as these operate through the

nominal price level.

       Total output in the economy is


                                                    K
                                        L
                                                i=1
                                                       t
                                                    E y1.                                           (6)




 In stationary equilibrium, all firms produce the same output using the same

amount of labor and paying the same wage:

                                                 i
                          Yi = Y0/K, L0 = L0/K, W0 = W0
                                      i

                           0

                                                                          total output is a function of
 In   an economy with supply disturbances, however,

 the aggregate supply disturbance. In percentage terms, the aggregate supply

 disturbance can be expressed as an average of the firm—specific

 disturbances, v =       Ev. Each firm—specific disturbance, in turn, can be

decomposed into the common aggregate disturbance and a firm—specific



                                                 —6—
  Component, e
                                    1                   1        K.1
                                   Vt =      v e   +        '

                                                                1=1
                                                                            =0   .
                                                                                                         (7)


  Both v and e have means of zero and are serially uncorrelated,
                                                                 as well as
  uncorre].ated with one another. Aggregate
                                                                 employment, aggregate output, and
  the average wage are obtained by
                                               summing the corresponding expressions for the
  firm (5a—5c) over the K firms. Each of the variables is expressed below
                                                                          as a
 percentage change from its stationary level:


                                               =
                                                   (1           —)v ,                               (8a)

                                                    1+n
                                                                                                    (8b)


                                         -    p*   =   v/(1          + On)   ,
                                                                                                   (8c)

                 K.                 K.1                                K.1
 where      1         i.       1                                 1
                .
                1=1
                                    E
                                   1=1
                                               and w                   E W.
                                                                      1=1

      The behavior of the real and nominal
                                                                variables in this economy will be
used as a benchmark for the comparison with
                                                                     the contract economy to be
introduced below. Before turning to the latter, however, we shall illustrate

the adjustment of real wages and employment to a productivity shock in the

benchmark economy. Figure 1 illustrates the case of a positive shock,

   > 0. The labor supply curve is unaffected by this shock, while the labor

demand curve shifts up in proportion to the disturbance (to L). As a

result, the level of employment and the level of the real wage both rise as

follows

                              i*                        i
                             Lt =       L[1    ÷ (nv)/(1 +
                                                                        nO)]                       (9)



                           W/P* = (W1/P)[1 ÷ v/(1 + no)]                             •
                                                                                                  (10)



                                                   —7—
                                                                             i*
        equations are obtained by substituting the values
                                                                   of 1* and w -
These
derived   above-into equations of the form

                                   i* =
                                  Lt      L(   1 +


                             i*                        i*   -
                           W /P = (W/P0)(1
                                                  +
                                                      w
                                             shall specify wage indexation and
For the contract economy described below, we
                                                     employment behavior of this
taxation systems which will replicate the
                                  behave differently in the contract economy under
economy. The wage rate will
                                                          redistribution of the tax
the taxation scheme. However, an appropriate

revenues will ensure that the behavior of total wage income in the two

economies is identical.


3. CONTRACT EXONOMY

        The economy we wish to analyze differs from the benchmark economy
                                                 crucial respect. The wage is set in
described in the previous section in one

a contract at the beginning of the period, before any disturbances are

 known. As     in other   contract models, this contract wage is chosen so as to

 clear    the market at the price expected at the beginning of period t, on the
 basis    of previous information.

         Because of the existence of contract lags, the nominal wage rate is
                                                     currently. To reduce (and perhaps
 assumed to be indexed to variables known

 eliminate) variations in real wages, nominal wages are indexed to the price
                                                       however, they may be indexed to
 level, p.. Since wages are firm—Specific,

 firm—specific variables as well as economy—wide variables. For the wage paid

                                          candidate is the output of firm i or,
 to workers in firm i, the obvious

 equivalentlY1 the productivity disturbance
                                                       of firm i, v, which is observable

 to firm i. So the indexation rule will take the form:



                                               —8—
                                     w=w+b1(p_Ep) +b2v,                                                          (11)


     where
             w       denotes the (economy—wide) contract wage determined at the beginning

     of   period      t and Et_ipt denotes the expected price level based on information

     available        in the previous period, t-1. The parameters b1, b2 describe the
 proportional           degree of indexation.

           As an alternative to this indexation rule, we offer a tax on
                                                                        the firm
 which makes use of firm-specific information.
                                                                           Our choice of such a taxation
 scheme is governed by the need to affect supply behavior directly so as to

 modify the individual firms response to
                                                             productivity disturbances. Each firm
 in the economy is subject to a marginal tax on its gross revenues

 a rate , with a corresponding tax credit for the labor
                                                                   Pt +                                    y,    at

                                                        employed by the
 firm. If T is the total tax collected from firm i, then the deviation in the

 tax      about that in the initial equilibrium can be                      expressed as a percentage of
 the      gross revenue of the firm          in   stationary equilibrium as follows:

                                    t    °   =
                                                  [p + y -        (1   -    e)J .                               (12)


Equation (12) provides the most                  convenient   specification of the tax. Its
statement         in level form is given in the Appendix. With this tax, the change

in the net profit of the firm, R, is given (in deviation form) by


                 t      0 =       1 - 8"Pt        1                    1
                              (              +        + (1    -             -       -       1     1
                 py
                  00
                                                                                1
                                                                                        O)(wt +   £)   .     (13)


If        = 0,    the net profit function is the same as in the                         benchmark economy.
But with             non—zero, the tax provides a lever for modifying the output
behavior         of the firm in response to a current disturbance.6




                                                      —9—
    The tax modifies the response of labor demand to a productivity increase.

As shown in the Appendix, maximizing net profit yields the labor demand

function                                                                                (14)
                      =   (1 -            - w/Q    + (1 -    )v/O   ,




which implies the corresponding aggregate labor demand function


                          (1 -            - w/Q    + (1 -           .                   (15)


A rise in productivity in firm   i    (v > 0) increases the demand for labor, the

magnitude of the response depending upon the marginal tax
                                                                        rate .   When

                                                   the contract economy as in
  = 0, the demand for labor shifts just as much in

the benchmark economy; cf (3) and (14). Employment must rise more in the

contract economy than in the benchmark economy.             This is because wages are

                                                     the increase in labor demand in
fixed in the former, whereas they respond to
                                                                                 > 0 the
the latter (as long as labor supply is positively sloped). When
                                                            increase than in the
demand for labor responds less to a productivity

benchmark economy. With the correct marginal tax rate, in fact, the demand
                                                                          level as in the
for labor shifts just enough to achieve the same employment

benchmark economy.

     To obtain the contract wage, we equate aggregate labor demand (equation

 (15)) with an aggregate version of the labor supply equation (4), to express

w as a function of Pt and vt.        The contract wage is then equal to the

expected value of Wt based on the information available at the beginning of

 the period
                                          B   +                                            (16)
                                 =
                                     (1           0)E p       .




 The conditional expectation of the price level depends upon the nature of the

 underlying stochastic disturbances which current price movements reflect. We

 shall assume that these disturbances are white noise, in which case t—1
                                                                      E pt


                                           —10—
and hence w, are both zero. As a result, the wage indexatiori rule (11) takes

 the simple form,
                                        1                         -1
                                       w     =
                                                 biPt   +
                                                                b2v ,                              (11')

which ties the wage to the price (both expressed as percentage changes) and

the supply disturbance.

       Output    of the i-th firm in the contract economy can be                  obtained by

solving   (2),    (14) and (11') to express output y as a function of                       and the

productivity disturbance:


                                                                I   (            e)
                     —      —                                           b2)(1
                     —(            —
                                        — b)p       +
                                                            [                                      (17)


According to this expression, output is a function of current prices as well

as the productivity disturbance, with the coefficients of t and                            being

functions of the indexation and tax parameters. To determine the                       optimal
indexation   and taxation parameters, we shall compare the output in this

economy with that in the benchmark economy. More specifically, we shall

choose values of those parameters which minimize the value of Z:


                                       Z =          —                                              (18)
                                             E(y            y*)2    •




4. OPTIMAL STABILIZATION

       Substituting       (17) and (5b) into (18), we obtain



                 =                 —B    —
                                             bi)p       +               —(   ÷ b2)]v'] .           (19)


Appropriate choices of the policy parameters b1, b2, and B will ensure that
the coefficients of t and              are equal to zero, so that the output for                each

firm   in the contract economy matches that in the benchmark economy. (As a


                                                  —11—
result, aggregate output must be identical in the two                      economies.)   The

appropriate values satisfy the relationships


                                            b1 +       =1          ,                            (20a)


                                       b2 +=           1+nQ
                                                                       .                        (20b)


It   is an immediate consequence of these equations that there is an extra

degree of freedom with respect to the choice of the optimal policy

parameters. One of them can           be set   arbitrarily; the other two are then

determined    uniquely by these two relationships. The two most natural cases to
consider are where (i) wage indexation alone is available to stabilize the
economy ( = 0)     and    (ii)    taxation   is used to supplement wage indexation to
prices    alone (b2 =    0).     We shall discuss these in turn.

A. Stabilization Through Wage Indexation Alone

       Setting    = 0 in (20a), (20b), we immediately obtain


                                              b1 =     1   ,                                   (20a)

                                       b2 =    1/(1 ÷ n) ,                                     (20b')

                                                           vi
                                        i                      t
so that                                w =         +                                             (21)
                                                           +n          •




That is, the wage rate should be fully indexed to the price level, but only

partially to the productivity disturbance. It is easy to understand why this

rule replicates the behavior of the frictionless economy. It keeps the

indexed wage equal to the wage found in the benchmark economy; c.f. (21) and

(5c)

       By making use of both price and production information, (21) is analogous

to the rule recently proposed by Karni. (1983) for a closed economy. In a



                                                —12—
model with economy—wide disturbances, Karni proposed indexing the (economy-

wide) wage to-the level of aggregate output, which is assumed to be publicly

known, as well as the price level. In his model, such an indexation rule

eliminates all variations of aggregate output relative to that of the

benchmark economy because it duplicates the wage in such an economy. The same

argument applies here, except that we must tie the firm—specific wage to the

firm—specific output, or equivalently, to the firm-specific disturbance as in

(21)

B. Stabilization Through Indexation and Taxation

       The indexation rule (21) gives rise to wage rates which are firm—

specific. Yet in many economies where wage indexation is practiced, the wage

is tied to some common price index, so that the indexation is uniform across

industries. This is the case, for example, in Australia. Thus as an

alternative to indexation based on firm-specific disturbances, in this section

we consider a tax scheme which, when combined with iridexation of wages to

prices alone, induces firms to produce at the same levels as in the benchmark

economy. The tax specified in Section 3 is levied on the individual firm.

Each firm makes its production decision based on the tax rate and the wage

rate which is tied through indexation to the price level alone. The

indexation parameter, b2, is therefore set to zero, so that the wage rate is

identical for all firms.

       The optimal taxation and indexation parameters are obtained from (20a)

and (20b) for the case where b2 = 0:


                           b1 =   1   —     = nO/[1 + nO) ,                 (20a")

                                      =   1/[1   +   n) .                   (20b')

Choosing those values of the parameters, the coefficients of p and         in (19)


                                            —13—
are both equal to zero and so output in the contract economy must replicate
that in    the   benchmark, Pareto optimal economy.
        The expressions for the optimal pair of taxation and indexation

parameters are simple, depending upon only the supply elasticity of labor, n,

and the elasticity of labor in the production function, and being independent

of the stochastic structure of the economy. Notice that the taxation

parameter    ranges from one to zero as the         labor supply elasticity varies from

zero    to infinity. The wage    indexation parameter in turn varies from zero to

one. In general, partial wage indexation is optimal. Full indexation is

optimal only in the limiting case where labor supply is infinitely elastic.

        Given the optimal tax and indexation parameters, the values of the other

endogenous parameters can be derived, Substituting for the optimal              into

(17),    output is given by
                                    i        1+n vi .
                                               no) t
                                   yt =1                                               (22)
                                       i +
Also, with w' = Et ipt = 0, the money wage (identical for all firms)
corresponding to the optimal indexation scheme is

                                    i   =      no                                      (23)
                                   w        (1 +

and substituting this expression into (14), employment is determined by


                                        =                                            (24)
                                            ( +n0)V't    •




Notice that both (22) and (24) are identical to their counterparts in the

benchmark economy (equations (5b) and (5a), respectively). By contrast, the

money wage, being tied directly to the price level, does not replicate that of

the   benchmark   economy.




                                             -14—
        To explain how the combined system of indexation and taxation modifies

behavior in this economy, we focus             on the wage and labor demand equations.
Below we express both equations in terms of the level of the real wage by

substituting the expressions for w -                    found in (11') and (14), respectively
                                                   Pt
 (with b2 =     0),   into


                                              (W1/P)(1 +           -
                                (W/P)                        w
to    yield

                               w/Pt = (w1/P){1 - (1               bi)pt] ,                            (25)
and

                      (W/P) = (W1/P)[1         —        —
                                                            O2.
                                                                  + (1 —
                                                                           )vJ   .                    (26)

It    is evident from the form of these two equations                  that as long as    =   1   -
                                                                                                      b1,
a    rise   in the price level has no effect on employment since the real wage

rises or falls by the same amount in both equations. Thus a monetary

disturbance, which affects the labor market only through prices, leaves

employment, and therefore output, unchanged. Observe that the real wage is

affected, a point to which we shall return below.

       Productivity disturbances have two-fold effects on the labor market

facing individual firms. To the extent that an increase in productivity is

economy-wide (Vt       > 0),   the wage and labor demand equations must both shift in

proportion to the resulting change in the price level. (The price level

falls, although the magnitude of the price adjustment cannot be determined

without introducing a demand side of the economy.) To the extent that the

firm itself experiences an increase in productivity (v =
                                                                             e > 0), in
contrast, the labor demand curve alone is affected, shifting horizontally by

                                i       (1—B) v=
                                              i        n    i
                                t
                                    =
                                          0        t (1+n) vt .                                   (27)



                                               —15—
In Figure 1, we illustrate this adjustment to the firm—specific disturbance

for the case where only this firm experienceSa disturbance. An increase in

productivity confined to firm i leaves the price level constant so the wage is

also constant. The rise in productivity shifts L to L, thus raising
               i' 8
employment to Lt


5. INCENTIVE-COMPATIBLE SCHEMES

     In the previous sections we have assumed that the firm—specific

productivity disturbances are observed by all the agents in the economy.

Under this assumption either of the two schemes we have been discussing will

succeed in replicating output in the benchmark economy perfectly. In this

section we consider what happens when the firm alone observes its productivity

disturbance. We first show that the firm has an incentive to misrepresent

current conditions, in order to reduce its wage bill in the case of the

indexation scheme,9 or to reduce its tax liability in the case of the tax

scheme. We then show how a combination of the two schemes is incentive—

compatible by which we mean that there is no incentive on the part of the firm

to misrepresent the true disturbance.1°

     We begin by illustrating the incentive to misrepresent a firm-specific

rise in productivity in firm i (v =   e).    We do this by comparing the profits

to the firm obtained by revealing the truth (which we call 'full disclosure')

with those obtained by not revealing the disturbance (which we label

'cheating'), Let the firm's net (after—tax) profits be written as a

                                                      =        -   R1)/R1.   Using the
percentage change from their stationary value as          (R
expression (A.6) for    - R1 developed in the appendix and substituting into

that expression the wage indexation rule (11'), we obtain the following

expression for profit in the case of full disclosure




                                      —16—
     1                                                    i
                                                                             e)i.I - (1
                             1

  11t full disclosure
                                        —             +       +         —                 -   )(wi      ÷
                                                                                                            I




                          ={ -                        + v) - (1 -
                                                                        o)(b1p          + b2v)} .               (28)

 If the firm announces its productivity disturbance, then it must pay a higher

 tax,            or pay its workers a higher wage, b2v, depending upon whether the

 tax or the firm—specific wage indexation scheme is in effect.                                    If, on the

other hand, the firm decides not to reveal the disturbance, it can avoid the

higher tax or the higher wage, so that its profits are given by


                                                                                 -
                     fltcheating =          {(i   -           +   v -   (1
                                                                                     e)b1P}   .                 (29)

The gain in profits from cheating is therefore



                 tcheating       lltt   full   disclosure         = {        +
                                                                                        O)b2}v      .           (30)

It   is clear that as long as the productivity disturbance is positive, there is
an incentive not to announce productivity gains, whether the                               tax     (at the rate
   or the firm-specific indexation scheme (with indexatiori parameter b2) is in
effect.11 By the same reasoning, if the rise in productivity is economy-wide
(v =      vt),   then the firm will have an incentive to claim that the resulting

fall in prices is due to disturbances elsewhere in the economy. A firm could

claim, for example, that prices have fallen because of productivity

disturbances confined to other firms.

         Since labor should be aware of these incentives to misrepresent, it will

be reluctant to enter into an indexation scheme of this type unless there is

some provision for monitoring the firm's productivity. Monitoring, in fact,

is sometimes found in profit-sharing schemes in the United States, where labor

is allowed to bring in independent auditors to verify a firm's profit

figures. Similarly, the government is unlikely to establish a tax scheme



                                                      —17—
unless some monitoring of the firm is possible. In either case, even if

monitoring is-feasible, it is likely to be costly to the economy.                    Thus as an

alternative to these schemes which require surveillance, we now propose a

modification of the tax and indexation rules which eliminates the incentive to

cheat on the part of the firm. The necessary modification is suggested by

(30) above. Specifically, we need to combine the tax and indexation schemes

and to convert the tax into a subsidy ( <                            0),   so that


                                      — —(1           —               < 0 ,                 (31)
                                                              )b2
in which case the gain from misrepresenting current conditions is eliminated

entirely.

     Of   course we still require the indexation and taxation parameters to
replicate the benchmark economy. Thus the combination of b1, b2, and , which
satisfy (20a), (20b), as well as (31) will succeed both in achieving the
stabilization objective and in inducing firms to reveal the truth. The unique

set of indexation and tax parameters which satisfies all three conditions

(20a), (20b), and (31) is given by

                                                          1— 0                             (32a)
                             b =          1       +                        >1   ,
                              1                       0(1 + no)

                                  b       =               1
                                                                      >0,                  (32b)
                                      2           0(1 + no)
                                              —               — e)                         (32c)
                                                                      < 0 .
                                                  0(1         + no)

Since (20a) and (20b) are satisfied, all deviations of output from that in the

benchmark economy are eliminated. And since (31) is satisfied, there is no

incentive on the part of firms to misrepresent current conditions.

     There are two features of this combined taxation and indexation scheme

which require further discussion. First, the indexation parameter for prices



                                                        —18—
  (b1) is greater than unity so that wages are indexed more than proportionally

  to prices. Second, the combined scheme does not necessarily duplicate the

  income distribution found in the benchmark economy. However, by the

  appropriate choice of a lump sum tax to finance the subsidy to firms, we can

  ensure that after-tax wage income is proportional to prices, rather than being

 over—indexed,  and that the after-tax income distribution is identical to that
 of   the benchmark economy, at least at the aggregate level. The subsidy to
 firms must be financed by a lump sum tax on labor and firms proportional to
 their   shares in nominal output, (1 - e) and              ,   respectively.
      Consider first the change in after—tax wage income for the workers in
 firm i, The workers in that firm must pay    -     = —(1 -       - T)/K of
                                                             o)(T
 lump sum taxes to finance the revenue subsidy, where       r1 is the tax on the
                                                                            —


 workers of firm i, Tt — T0 is the subsidy (the negative tax on the revenues of
 firms), both expressed as deviations from their levels in a stationary
 equilibrium,   and K is the number of firms.12 So their total after-tax income,

denoted by N1, can be expressed as a deviation from its level in a stationary

economy, as follows

                      N -    N1       (WL -     W'L1)   -
                                                            (     -


                                                                                                (33)
                                  =
                                      (wL   -   w1L1)
                                                        +       (1 —
                                                                       e)(T
                                                                                -   T)
To obtain an expression for total lump sum taxes, we aggregate the expression

for the subsidies paid to firms (12) and simplify13



                       -   T =    E    (T — T') =       PY(p           +
                                                                           v)

Given the Cobb Douglas production technology, the share of labor income in the

stationary economy is given by (1 -         e) =   (WL)/(py).               The tax which the


                                            -19—
labor force in firm i pays is therefore

      .1       1
               0
                          (1 —)(Tt —T)
                                  K
                                    0                =
                                                           -i
                                                           WL
                                                            00                   + Vt) = _W0L0(Pt
                                                                                                 11             +
                                                                                                                     Vt)


Wage income for the workers of firm i,
                                                                    exclusive of the tax, is                    obtained by

substituting the demand for labor (14) and the wage indexation rule (11 )
                                                                                                                                     into

                                        WL
                                            ii  ii ii
                                            tt 00 00 ti
                                                     W L        =   W   L (w +
                                                                                        i

to                                                                                          ) - b 2 (1 -
     yield
                                           )-b           (1 -   e)                   (1 -
 W1L1
     tt
           —
               00 O0
               W1L' = W1L1
                                 (1 -

                                                 0
                                                     1]p -t+ [                                   0                   Jv1}
                                                                                                                             .       (36)


Total      after-tax income is therefore given by



       -   N1 =
                           1 —
                                 (b1
                                        +   )(1) +
                                             —HPt
                                                     —                      1    —     — (1 —
                                                                                                     )b2         + vj
 N                 W1L1[(—
                                       + = 1,            the coefficient of t                    in      (37)   is   equal to
Since at the optimum b1
                                                                 level.14
unity. Thus, after—tax wage income is fully indexed to the price

Wage indexation itself overcompensateS workers for a rise in the price level,

but the tax          levied to pay          for the subsidy to firms reduces net wage income so

that it        rises     in proportion to prices.

           We now show that the tax used to finance the subsidy to firms restores

aggregate wage income and profits to their levels in the benchmark economy.

We demonstrate this result only for wage income, since this together with
                                                                                after-tax wage income is obtained
profits exhausts nominal output. Aggregate

 by aggregating N
                             -   N1   in    (37)     over     K firms. This yields


                     K
  Nt -N0 =                (N1-N1)
                            t 0
                    i=1

                   =W L
                     0OL
                            1 — (b         + )(1 —
                                            B
                                                          )
                                                                t       +
                                                                                (1 —   )-   —

                                                                                            3
                                                                                                (1   —

                                                                                                                +    v 1ti
                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                 .    (38)



                                                                —20—
  At the optimum, given by (32a)—(32c), we find


                           Nt -N 0WLTp +I'—------'lv                                      (38')
                                     Oo& t '1÷nO ti                   .



  Wage income in the frictionless
                                       economy is obtained by substituting (8a) and
  (8c) into the following expression


                        W*L* —    L =
                         tt      00
                                 W        W    L w*
                                              oOlt    +
                                                          t
                                      =   W    L {p*
                                              00     + ( 1 +n
                                                           —Jvt}
                                                   t     1+nO
 Since     =      as long as output is identical in the two
                                                            economies, the after-
 tax wage income in the   contract economy is identical to the tax-free            wage
 income in the benchmark economy.

     Although aggregate after-tax income matches that in the benchmark
 economy, the labor force in each firm does not receive the same income,
 inclusive of taxes, as in the benchmark economy. Likewise, the income of each
 owner of a firm differs in the two economies. So in order to achieve the same
consumption pattern as in the benchmark economy, we must assume that total
consumption    by labor (or owners) is independent            of the distribution of income
within   that class.15 By designing the taxes in this way, the government

avoids affecting the incentives of the individual firms in responding to firm—

specific disturbances.


6. CONCLUSIONS

     In this paper we have analyzed wage contracts in an economy with firm—

specific productivity disturbances. In the case where the disturbance is

known to all relevant agents we have
                                              considered two alternative schemes which
achieve the same equilibri as in the competitive frictionless economy. The

first is a privately negotiated
                                     wage indexation rule which ties wages in each



                                              —21—
firm to the overall price level, as well as the firm-specific productivity

disturbance. -The indexation rule, which is analogous to Karni'S rule for an

aggregate economy, involves full indexation to prices and partial indexation
                                                   have proposed a taxation scheme
to the productivity disturbance. Secondly, we

to accompany a simpler form of wage indexation tying wages to prices alone and

have shown how this too can achieve the same objective.       The tax, levied on a

firm's revenue with a tax credit for labor use, modifies the firm's response

                                               the firm to produce the same output
to the productivity disturbance, inducing
                                               indexatiorl scheme is a partial one
as in the benchmark economy. The optimal
                                         (i) the supply elasticity of labor, and
and depends upon just two parameters:

(ii) the elasticity of labor in the production function. The tax rate depends

upon the same two parameters.
                                                         is known to the firm
     In the case where the productivity disturbance

alone, we have shown that the firm has an incentive to misrepresent current

conditions. When taxes are combined with firm—specific wage indexation,

however, the incentive for the firm to cheat is eliminated. The tax must take

the form of a revenue subsidy to firms financed by a lump sum tax shared by

labor and firms in proportion to their contribution to total output. As

stated at the outset, our analysis does not explain the absence of complete

markets or why the government through this tax scheme has an advantage in
                                                                   It may well be
making privately-negotiated contracts incentive—compatible.
                                                          the same role. We leave
 the case that a purely private contract can fulfill

such an investigation for future research.

      As a final point we may note that the results we have obtained can be

 interpreted as applying either to a closed economy or an open economy under

 purchasing power parity. The results are virtually unchanged in the case of

 an open economy in which domestic and foreign goods are distinct. In the



                                        —22—
latter case the same degree of indexatiori is applied to the CPI, rather than
to the domestic price level.




                                   —23—
                                    FOOTNOTES



*                                                                 Summer
     An earlier version of this paper was presented to the NBER

     Institute,   August 1984. We would like to thank Joshua A.izenman, Matthew

     Canzoneri, Jacob Frenkel, Robert Hodrick, Charles Plosser, Asaf Razin,

     and an anonymous referee for helpful comments and suggestions.

1. Aizenman (1983) and Aizenman and Frenkel (1983) follow a different course

     by analyzing indexation in economies where prices are currently

     observable, but output is not. They show that indexation can eliminate

     all variations in output relative to the full information competitive

     economy except those due to disturbances unforecastable on the basis of

     current information.

2    Several studies have investigated implicit labor contracts for the case

     where firms have an informational advantage. (See, for example,

     Azariadis and Stiglitz, 1983, and the papers cited there).

3. Of course (2) holds exactly, rather than as only a first order

     approximation, if all lower case letters are interpreted as logarithms.

     Working with percentage changes makes aggregation simpler.

4.   It would be even more preferable to model explicitly the costs associated

     with short-run mobility, although this would complicate the analysis

     considerably.

5. A competitive equilibrium would be attainable in a frictionless economy

     without contract lags if the disturbances were common to a subset of

     firms within which labor was mobile even within the period (such as firms

     within a particular geographic area), as long as that subset is large

     enough to ensure competitive labor market behavior.

6. McCallum and Whitaker (1979) analyze the stabilizing effects of an income

     tax   which acts as a built-in stabilizer for aggregate output. Although

                                       —24—
         our tax also acts as a built—in stabilizer, it is levied on the revenue

         of firms-rather than on income, and therefore
                                                             modifies supply rather than
        demand behavior. Because it affects the supply behavior of firms, it is

        able to undo the distorting effects of the labor contracts on the output

        of individual firms.

  7.    Indexatiori to the productivity disturbance can be thought of as a bonus
        scheme.    Bonuses tied to the firm!s performance are quite common practice
        in countries such as Japan as well as in specific industries in the
        United   States, such as investment banking. Bonus schemes, however, are

        typically asymmetric in not penalizing workers in bad years.

  8. The above argument establishes that the taxation—indexation scheme

       succeeds in replicating output in the benchmark economy. Using the same

       argument as that developed in Section 5 below we can show that by an

       appropriate lump sum rebate of the tax we are able to restore
                                                                            aggregate
       wage income and profits to their respective levels in the benchmark

       economy.

 9. Barro (1977) and Fischer (1977) discuss problems of moral hazard arising

       when fir are aware of real disturbances, but labor is not.

10. For a discussion of incentive—compatibility in
                                                             a general context, see
       Myerson (1979).

11. In the case of a negative productivity shock, (30) measures losses. In

       this case to minimize losses the firm will have an incentive to reveal

       the productivity    decrease and to index wages or pay taxes    accordingly.
12. Recall    that since   T represents  a subsidy, Tt < 0.
13. Equation (34) is      derived as follows. Combining equations      (2) and   (12),

                             Ti — TI       (P00
                              t    0
                                       =       i
                                                 t
                                             Y )(p +
                                                        i
                                                       vt)



                                            —25—
      Summing over the K firms, and noting that Y1                   and v =   zv    ,   we


      obtain (34).
                                                                     T1 = 0,
14. The subsidy to firms is equal to zero in stationary equilibrium,
                                                                                  0, where
      so N1 = W1L1.
          0    00         (To show that T1
                                             0                   t
                                                 0, evaluate T1 in (A.1) at t =


      by assumption P0 =        1.)   If the productivity disturbances are equal to

      zero (v =   v   =   0),   equation (37) simplifies to


                                                        =
                                      (N -   N')/N          Pt

15.   If indifference curves are homothetic, the total consumption of labor

      will be independent of the distribution among the labor forces of

      individual firms.




                                                 —26—
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHy


 Aizenman, Joshua, 1983, "Wage Contracts with Incomplete and Costly
      Information," NBER Working Paper Series No. 1150, June 1983.

 Aizenman, Joshua, and Jacob Frenkel, 1983, "Wage Indexation and the Optimal
      Exchange Rate Regime," unpublished paper.

 Azariadis, Costas and Joseph G. Stiglitz, 1983, "Implicit Contracts and Fixed—
      Price Equilibria," 1arterly Journal of Economics, Supplement, pp. 1—22.

Barro, Robert J., 1977, "Long—term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
     Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, July, 305—316.

Fischer, Stanley, 1977, "Long—term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
     Policy': A Comment," Journal of Monetary
                                            - Economics, July, 31723.
                                                   •.•_




Fischer, Stanley, 1977, "Wage Indexatjon and Macroeconomic Stability," in K.
     Brunner and A. H. Meltzer, eds., Stabilization of the Domestic and
     International Economy, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public
     Policy, Vol. 5, a supplementary series to the Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 1977, pp. 107—47.

Gray, Jo Anna, 1976, "Wage Indexatiori: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 2, April, 221-35.

Karni, Edi, 1983, "On Optimal Wage Indexatjon," Journal of Political Economy,
     91, April, 282—92.

McCallum, B. T., and J. K. Whitaker, 1979, "The Effectiveness of Fiscal
     Feedback Rules and Automatic Stabilizers under Rational Expectations,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics, April, 171—86,

Myerson, Roger B., 1979, "Incentive Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem,"
     Ecoriometrjca, 47, January, 61—73.




                                    —27—
                                                            Appendix:
                                                                     (12)—(14) for the contract economy are
       In this appendix, the expressions

derived.
                                                                     for the tax levied on firm i, expressed
       Consider the following expression

in terms of the levels of output and other variableS:a

                      i             i                  i 1— i (1—)                            0   <        < 1   .           (A.1)
                     Tt =                                  (Lt)                           ,




                                                             credit for the
As noted in the text, this is a tax on gross revenue, with a
                                                                 first—order
employment of labor. If we linearize this expression by taking a

(Taylor series) approximation1 we obtain:


                      T
                       i
                            - T
                               i
                                    =       P
                                                     I 1—
                                                    (L )         [p t + y tI
                                                                            i
                                                                                    - (P0 1— (L10 1—0
                                                                                              )

                          t    0                0 0                                                                          (A.2)

                                   [(1 -                     + y) ÷ (1 -


                                          and noting that by (ii)
Assuming that by choice of units, P0 = 1,
   =                we can express taxes as a percentage of gross revenue as

 follows:
               T1-T
                t  o                            1 -              -              +
                                                                                      1
                                                                                    y) + (1 —
                                                                                                                     1
               _____ = Pt               +                  [(1
                                                                                                                             (A.3)
                PoYo
                               =                +   y -      (1 -


 This is equation (12) of the text.
        Given the tax function (A.1), the net profit of the firm is

                                                                                                                              (A.4)
                                   R =              (Py1)1B(L1)(l0)                       —
                                                                                              WL't        .




 The first—order approximation of this expression is

                                                                                                  i                      i
                                   (P) 1— (L)
                                           il—8 [(1
                i          i                                                              +           +          —
               Rt — R          =                                       —
                                                                                                                              (A.5)
                                                       —                   + w)
                                                            W1L1(

                                                                     -28—
   Given the Cobb-Douglas production function, we know that
                  -
                                         WL
                                          00
                                             ii   =   1    -
                                         py
                                          00
                                                               S




  so dividing (A.5) by p y1 we obtain
                            00

              t       0                  1
                                     +        + 8(1 -                   - (1       -          +
              py
               00                                                                      e)(w

  which is equation (13) in the text.

        Finally, writing (A.4) as

                                                                   i
                                         •
                                                      (l—8)v
                            R = pl_8(L1)1_Se                           WL ,                       (A.7)

 and differentiating with respect to L, yields the first-order
                                                               Condition for
 the firm:
                                                          (1- )v1
                            (1 —
                                   e)P 8(L) e                          =       .                  (A.8)

 The first-order approximation for this expression is


                                                  i
                             (                                 i



which by rearrangement is just (14) in the
                                                           text.




       aThe standard wage
analogous   level form:
                            indexatjon scheme which we adopt in this paper has an

                                   w =        ____

with   the indexatjon parameter, b, entering as a geometric weight.




                                             —29—
Real
Wage
         \\ \                                                     Is

           \\ \\
             \\ \\
               \\ \\
W*/P,        ----v-
                                                                       Indexed

                                             \\ \\
W/Po                                                                   Wage



                                               \ \\
                                                \\ \\
                                                  \ \
                                                                  d


                        L0                                Employment


        Current Equilibnum Values in Benchmark Economy:

                     L1* = L(1 + 1nv
                                  +

                     W*W(1       +       v
                        P0           1
