                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ESTIMATION OF A DYNAMIC MODEL OF WEIGHT

                                             Shu Wen Ng
                                           Edward C. Norton
                                           David K. Guilkey
                                           Barry M. Popkin

                                         Working Paper 15864
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15864


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2010




This research uses data from China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS). We thank the Institute of
Nutrition and Food Safety, China Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Carolina Population
Center, at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the NIH (R01-HD30880, DK056350, and
R01-HD38700) and the Fogarty International Center for financial support for the CHNS data collection
and analysis files, and for partial support of Ng and Popkin. We also thank Harsha Thirumurthy, Shoou-Yih
Daniel Lee, Linda Adair, William Greene, Trevor Long, participants of the Annual Health Econometrics
Workshop, seminar participants at the University of Michigan, and three anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments and suggestions for improvements. None of the authors has conflict of interests
of any type with respect to this manuscript. All errors are of the authors’ alone. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Shu Wen Ng, Edward C. Norton, David K. Guilkey, and Barry M. Popkin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimation of a Dynamic Model of Weight
Shu Wen Ng, Edward C. Norton, David K. Guilkey, and Barry M. Popkin
NBER Working Paper No. 15864
April 2010
JEL No. I12

                                                ABSTRACT

The ongoing debate about the economic causes of obesity has focused on the changing relative prices
of diet and exercise. This paper uses a model that explicitly includes time and spatially varying community-level
urbanicity and price measures as instruments to obtain statistically correct measures for the endogenous
effects of diet, physical activity, drinking, and smoking on weight. We apply a dynamic panel system
GMM estimation model to longitudinal (1991–2006) data from China to model weight and find that
among adult men in China, about 6.1% of weight gain was due to declines in physical activity and
2.9-3.8% was due to dietary changes over this period. In the long run, physical activity can account
for around 6.9% of weight gain, while diet can account for 3.2-4.2% of weight gain.


Shu Wen Ng                                              David K. Guilkey
Department of Nutrition                                 Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill             University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                                   Chapel Hill, NC 27599
shuwen@email.unc.edu                                    david_guilkey@unc.edu

Edward C. Norton                                        Barry M. Popkin
Department of Health Management and Policy              Department of Economics
Department of Economics                                 Department of Nutrition
University of Michigan                                  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
School of Public Health                                 Chapel Hill, NC 27599
109 S. Observatory Drive, M3108 SPH II                  popkin@unc.edu
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029
and NBER
ecnorton@umich.edu
                                         I. Introduction


       There is an ongoing debate among economists about the economic causes of obesity, in
particular the relative importance of diet and exercise. Some empirical work focuses on the rise
in the relative price of physical activity (Pratt, Macera et al., 2004; Sturm, 2005) both because
physical activity has become less a part of daily activities and because the value of time has risen
with income. Others point to the drop in the relative price of calories (Chou, Grossman et al.,
2004; Cutler, Glaeser et al., 2003; Drewnowski & Darmon, 2005; Kuchler, Tegene et al., 2004;
Schroeter, Lusk et al., 2008) due to higher supply from agricultural innovations and
improvements in the preserving, packaging, preparation, and transportation of food. Others
model the change in both relative prices of physical activity and caloric intake (Cawley, 2004;
Lakdawalla & Philipson, 2009; Lakdawalla, Philipson et al., 2005; Philipson & Posner, 2003;
Rashad, 2006; Rashad & Grossman, 2004). However, none of these economic studies have come
up with a definitive way to quantify the contribution of diet versus physical activity while
controlling for weight-related health behaviors like smoking and drinking. Part of the difficulty
stems from the lack of longitudinal individual-level data and the difficulty in using cross
sectional data in an empirical examination of the forces contributing to weight over time.
Clinical studies, on the other hand, tend to focus specifically only on one factor at a time (Brien,
Katzmarzyk et al., 2007; Taylor, Jatulis et al., 1994), and so cannot resolve the debate.
       Understanding which affects weight more ― diet or physical activity ― has great
implications for both public policy and for individuals. For policy, it would help us understand
which public policies such as taxing fat, subsidizing vegetables, and promoting green spaces
would be most effective. For those who want to manage or lower their weight, it would help
them understand where to focus their efforts.
       At first glance, modeling an individual’s weight appears straightforward: define the
number of calories consumed and expended, and determine the resulting trends in weight.
However, the complex relationships among physical activity, diet, drinking, smoking, and weight
are lost in a simplistic formulation (Moore, 2000; Prentice & Jebb, 2004) due to the fact that all
of these variables are choice variables to the individual which results in endogeneity problems.
For example, lower physical activity and increased sedentary behaviors among those who are
heavy may be the consequence of being heavy (e.g., social stigma, being shunned from sports, or



                                                                                                       2
being physically unable to partake in activity). Similarly, it is possible that people consume more
(as a coping mechanism) in reaction to being marginalized due to their weight. In addition,
endogeneity bias may arise due to omitted variables (such as genetic endowments) are
determinants of both an included explanatory variables and weight.
       Many previous studies typically only look at the relationships between physical activity
and weight, and diet and weight separately, without considering the endogenous decisions of
contemporaneous and lagged diet, physical activities, smoking and drinking on weight.
Moreover, calories from fat versus calories from carbohydrates or proteins, or calories from
animal source foods versus fruits and vegetables might affect weight differently (Miller,
Lindeman et al., 1990; Tryon, 1987), and diet, physical activity, smoking and drinking combined
can interact to affect weight (Astrup, 1999; Klesges, Meyers et al., 1989). For example, people
with low physical activity levels but high fat intake have slower metabolisms, which results in
greater weight gain (Bray & Popkin, 1998), particularly for people in developing countries who
might have experienced undernutrition during prenatal and postnatal growth (Frisancho, 2003;
James & Ralph, 1999). Smoking has also been found to affect both the metabolic mechanism and
food preferences, and thus affect weight (Klesges, Meyers et al., 1989). If the endogeneity is not
corrected, the results will be inconsistent.
       To account for potential endogeneity, economists often employ instrumental variable
(IV) techniques, longitudinal fixed effects (FE) models or combine both these approaches (IV-
FE). These methods have the potential to generate consistent estimates if reliable instruments are
available in the data. There is also the issue of serially correlated errors due to time invariant
unobserved heterogeneity, which can result in incorrect standard errors.
       Beyond the issues of endogeneity and serially correlated errors however, there is the
added complexity of autocorrelation of diet, physical activities, smoking and drinking decisions,
and because past weight will be associated with current weight. If the correlation of weight over
time is not controlled for (via the inclusion of lagged weight), then the estimated effect of past
weight will tend to be too large as well as inefficient (large standard errors).
       We estimate the relative importance of the diet, physical activity, and the health
behaviors of smoking and drinking on weight among adult men over a period of rapid economic
growth in China by employing two strategies. First, we use a model that explicitly includes time
and spatially varying macro-level factors such as urbanicity and prices to be used as instruments



                                                                                                     3
to correct for the endogenous micro-level choices of diet, physical activity and other health
behaviors that affect weight over time. Second, we apply a dynamic panel system generalized
methods of moments (GMM) model estimation model, which allows current weight to depend on
prior weight and endogenous decisions about physical diet, drinking, smoking and physical
activity. This estimation approach uses statistical methods that control for the endogeneity
problems, the related correlation of errors for the same individual through time, and explicitly
models lagged weight within the model.
       We estimate our dynamic panel model using a GMM estimator developed by Blundell
and Bond (1998) that exploits a large set of moment conditions and combines in a system, the
regression-in-differences with the regression-in-levels models. We provide a comparison of these
results to those derived from models that assume exogeneity to show how the failure to correct
for endogeneity and temporally correlated errors can affect the findings. The coefficients from
the dynamic model will show the relative strength of diet and physical activity on weight, and
these results can be combined with known changes in types of diet and levels of physical activity
to show which factors affected weight gain the most, at least among adult men in China. We use
six waves of the longitudinal China Health and Nutrition Surveys (CHNS) that contain detailed
individual-level data on anthropometrics, dietary consumption, energy expenditure, as well as
time varying community measures of urbanicity and prices that can be used as instrumental
variables for potentially endogenous variables. We found that declines in physical activities,
increases in fat, decreases in carbohydrates, and increases in oils and fats as a proportion of a
person’s dietary intake are positively associated with weight, and the coefficients of these
endogenous variables from the GMM model are larger and more significant compared to models
without corrections for endogeneity. Calculations show that on average, 6.1% of weight gain
among adult men in China from 1991 to 2006 was due to declines in physical activity, while 2.9
to 3.8% was due to dietary changes. In the long run, physical activity can account for around
6.9% of weight gain, while diet can account for around 3.2 to 4.2% of weight gain.
       Globally, the growing epidemic of overweight and obesity, risk markers for a large
number of chronic diseases, will have severe consequences on its economic productivity and will
become a significant health care burden. For China, it is estimated that the total direct (health
care) and indirect (disability, mortality, and morbidity) cost of overweight and related diseases




                                                                                                    4
was 3.5% of China’s gross national product (GNP) in 2000, but will grow to almost 9% by 2025
(Popkin, Kim et al., 2006).


                     II. Modeling the dynamics and determinants of weight


       A theoretical model provides guidance on which variables are endogenous and which
other variables are potential instruments. Our theoretical model is based on work by others
(Cawley, 2004; Chou, Grossman et al., 2004; Drewnowski & Darmon, 2005; Lakdawalla,
Philipson et al., 2005; Philipson & Posner, 2003; Rashad & Grossman, 2004), and stems from a
rational choice model. As these economists have noted, this model is not meant to be an
introspective guide to how people think about their choices, but rather an internally-consistent
methodology to generate hypotheses about their behavior.


A. Dynamics of weight
       An individual’s utility in current period, t, depends on food consumption, F, physical
activity (A), other health behaviors (such as smoking), other consumption, C, and current weight,
W. Utility U increases with consumption of food, physical activity, other health behaviors and
other consumption, but is increasing in weight only if current weight is less than ideal weight, Ẅ.
Otherwise utility declines with weight. The marginal utility of eating decreases as weight
exceeds ideal weight, because eating increases weight. The assumption is that there is an ideal
weight, Ẅ, holding other consumption constant. In other words, Ẅ is the weight that would be
chosen if achieving one’s preferred weight were costless. This subjective ideal weight may or
may not correspond to the weight that maximizes health or longevity, although it is likely to be
influenced by concern with these factors. But the ideal weight in this model is not necessarily the
preferred weight in the economic sense because it does not consider the full range of costs and
benefits of achieving it. In other words, a person’s rationally chosen weight is the one that makes
him the happiest given the existing costs and benefits of food consumption, physical activity and
other consumption.
       Because this model focuses on weight, we conceptualize food consumption simply as
caloric intake, including calories from alcohol. Two other behaviors affect weight  physical
activity, A, and smoking, S. Both affect utility directly and indirectly (as determinants of weight).


                                                                                                   5
An individual’s physical activity level depends on the level of development, D, where she lives,
such that At = A(Dt).
(1)                             Wt  (1   )Wt 1  g ( Ft 1 , S t 1 , A( Dt 1 )) ,

where δ < 1 and g is continuous, concave, increasing in food or alcohol consumption, decreasing
in physical activity level, and decreasing in smoking level (gF ≥ 0, gA ≤ 0 and gS ≤ 0 ).
        Individuals are subject to a budget constraint each period: pFF + pSS + pcC ≤ I, where pF,
pS and pc are the prices of food (including alcohol), cigarettes, and other consumption goods
respectively, and I is income. Consistent with existing literature, this does not account for
borrowings and savings over time.
        When maximizing utility, an individual chooses Ft-1, St-1, and At-1 simultaneously. These
choices are endogenous to each other because of implicit tradeoffs in terms of time and money
spent on each.      In addition, the choice variables are serially correlated because of habit
formation, addiction (especially smoking and alcohol), unobserved preferences, genetics, and
shared environmental factors. This suggests that it is important to control for the endogeneity
bias from diet, smoking, and physical activities choices on weight, and for the serial correlation
of these decisions over time.


B. Steady State Determinants of Weight, Diet, Smoking and Physical Activity
        This dynamic maximization problem yields a unique steady-state in weight, food
consumption, smoking, physical activity and weight (see the Appendix) determined by income, I,
food (and alcohol) prices, pF, cigarette price, pS, and urbanicity, D, such that W*(I, pF, pS, D),
F*(I, pF, pS, D), S*(I, pF, pS, D), A*(I, pF, pS, D). If these factors are exogenous to weight, diet,
smoking, and physical activity, and vary over space and time, then they would make ideal
instruments to correct for bias caused by the inclusion of endogenous explanatory variable.
        Increases in income raise weight at low levels of income, but at high levels of income,
further increases could lower weight (i.e., WI* has an inverted U-shape). An increase in income
lowers the marginal cost of spending on weight gain (food and alcohol consumption), but also
affects the marginal value of weight. Income is also related to one’s physical activity level,
because A is a function of job characteristics. In a country like China, those who are poor
generally have jobs that require greater physical activity, so we assume that AI <0. For people
who are underweight, a rise in income will typically increase weight both through greater food


                                                                                                        6
consumption and less physical activity on the job. For people who are overweight, an increase in
income may eventually lead to enough resources to reduce their weight.
       Increasing the price of food and alcohol, pF, raises the marginal cost of caloric intake, so
food and alcohol consumption decreases, so that FpF*(I, pF, pS, D) < 0. The decrease in food and
alcohol consumption will also lower weight, so that WpF*(I, pF, pS, D) < 0. Increasing the price of
cigarettes, pS, decreases smoking (i.e., SpS*(I, pF, pS, D) < 0), which may alter metabolic
mechanisms that results in weight gain (Klesges, Meyers et al., 1989), so that WpS*(I, pF, pS, D) >
0. Hence, prices are important determinants of weight and are exogenous factors that need to be
included in any model of weight.
       Community-level urbanicity, D is exogenous to individual choice assuming that people
who move do not do so based primarily on these community-level characteristics. Development
affects prices of food, cigarettes, other consumption goods, and income, such that increased
development lower prices and raise incomes. Hence it can be thought of as an argument for pF,
pS and I. Using chain rule, the effect of urbanicity on food consumption, smoking and physical
activity levels are FD*>0, SD*>0 and AD*<0. Urbanicity lowers physical activity at work, access to
technologies that aid work and domestic activities, and the availability of motorized
transportation. Also, one would expect urbanicity at the community-level to reduce food and
cigarette prices through lowering transportation costs, and lessening the time involved in
purchasing these items.
       We expect past caloric intake, dietary fat intake, and alcohol consumption to be
positively related to current weight, and past levels of physical activity and smoking levels to be
negatively related to current weight. Moreover, past clinical studies suggest that physical activity
may be more important than diet in weight control (King, Frey-Hewitt et al., 1989) due to
relative ease of communicating its benefits, and the resultant metabolic effects on lipid
mobilization, oxidation and biochemical changes, which help improved regulation of body
weight (Saris, 1998). Therefore, if past diet measures and physical activity factors are
statistically significant in explaining weight, we can determine the relative contribution of each
of these, and hence inform on public policy and individual choices.




                                                                                                      7
                                             III. Empirical Modeling


         The dynamic empirical model that relates weight to its own lagged value along with
lagged food (and alcohol) consumption, lagged physical activity, and lagged smoking status
takes the following form:
(2)                        Wit  Wi ,t 1   Fi ,t 1  S i ,t 1  Ai ,t 1  X it   i   it ,

where Wit denotes weight in the current wave t for individual i; Wi,t-1 denotes weight in the prior
wave for individual i; Fi,t-1 denote lagged values of two sets of consumption variables, the first
set includes total caloric intake, energy from dietary fat, energy from carbohydrates and drinking
status, while the alternative set includes total caloric intake, energy from animal source foods,
energy from fruits and vegetables, energy from edible oils and fats, energy from whole grain
sources, energy from rice, and drinking status ; S i,t-1 denote lagged smoking status; Ai,t-1 denote
lagged total physical activities; Xit denotes other control variables such as age, marital status,
educational attainment, predicted household income and time dummies; α, β, θ, γ and π denote
the vectors of coefficients for the explanatory variables; ηi denotes unobserved time invariant
individual characteristics, and μit denotes a time varying disturbance term.
         We expect βkcal, βefat , βecarb and βdrink (as well as βkcal, βeanimal , βoilfats and βdrink ) to be
positively related to Wit ; θ (the coefficient for lagged current smoking status) to be negatively
related to Wit; and γ (the coefficient for lagged physical activity) to be negatively related to Wit. If
we find that βkcal , βefat, βecarb, βdrink , θ and γ to be statistically significant, then it we can
determine the contribution of caloric intake, dietary fat intake, carbohydrates, drinking, smoking
and physical activity in determining weight and from that tell which of these are the most
important in affecting weight gain.
         To determine the type of estimation method to use, it is important to discuss the
assumptions made about:
      1) The correlation between explanatory variables and ηi
      2) Autocorrelation: correlation in the time varying error terms over time (e.g., corr(μi,t-1, μit))
      3) The type of correlation between the explanatory variables and μit , μit-1 or μit+1
         It is clear from the dynamic form of the stochastic model that at a minimum lagged
weight will be correlated with ηi, the time invariant error term and it is also highly likely that
there will be overlap in the set of unobserved fixed characteristics of the individuals that affect


                                                                                                                8
weight, diet, physical activity, smoking and drinking that will cause correlation between ηi and
these variables as well. First differencing will drop ηi along with all time invariant observed
variables from the model:
(3)                      Wit  Wi ,t 1   Fi ,t 1  S i ,t 1  Ai ,t 1  X it   it .

        We assume that the time-varying error is not correlated with the explanatory variables,
which means that in differenced form food and alcohol consumption, smoking, and physical
activity, are uncorrelated with the error term in equation (3). Differenced weight may still be
correlated with the differenced error term, implying that OLS estimation will be inconsistent.
However, Wi,t-2 will not be, and can therefore be used as an instrument. Still, this instrumental
variables estimation in differences tends to yield imprecise parameter estimates if α is large
(Alonso-Borrego & Arellano, 1999; Blundell & Bond, 1998).
        An alternative (Blundell & Bond, 1998) is to estimate the model in levels, with ΔWi,t-2
used as an instrument for Wi,t-1 in equation (2). This method, of course, must assume that there is
no correlation between the other explanatory variables and either the time invariant or time
varying error term. A more efficient estimator, (Blundell & Bond, 1998) would jointly estimate
equations (2) and (3) using a system GMM approach. The system GMM estimator uses lagged
first difference as instrument for equations in levels as well as the lag variable instruments for
first difference equations. With a panel, we can derive a set of instruments which are both
correlated with ΔWi,t-1 and orthogonal to Δi,t-1. For instance, in the absence of serial
autocorrelation, the lagged level Wi,t-2 will be correlated with ΔWi,t-1 but uncorrelated with Δi,t-1.
Each additional time period can add additional valid instruments. This can be similarly done for
any endogenous explanatory variables in the model, giving rise to an instrument matrix denoted
Zi =(W,it, , Fit , Sit , Ait and Xit). The moment conditions are thus:
(4)                      E[Z it'  it ]  0 , where Δit= (Δi3 , Δi4,…,ΔiT)’

        As already noted, it is highly likely that there will be correlation between diet, physical
activity, smoking, and drinking and the time invariant error and so instruments are needed for
these variables in addition to lagged weight in equation (2). It is also possible that there will be
correlation between these variables and the time varying error term, meaning that instruments
may be needed for these variables even in differenced form in equation (3). Autocorrelation in
the time varying error could also invalidate Wi,t-2 as an instrument in equation (3). The validity of



                                                                                                         9
the estimation here therefore, rests on the assumption that the (W,it, , Fit , Sit , Ait and Xit) series
each satisfy a mean stationarity assumption, yielding the additional moment conditions:
(5)                              E[Z i ,t 1 ( i   it )]  0

        Separate instrument sets must be specified for equations (2) and (3) in the system GMM
approach, and we discuss these sets further below. Cameron and Trivedi (2005) discuss the large
set of instruments that are potentially available in dynamic panel models and a series of papers
provide information on efficient estimation strategies for these models (Arellano & Bond, 1998;
Blundell & Bond, 2000; Blundell, Bond et al., 2000; Bond, 2002). Fortunately, our data set
includes lagged measures of various dimensions of urbanicity and real price of consumption
items that can be used to help provide identification, which will be discussed later.
        We estimate robust standard errors using the two-step version of the Arellano-Bond
system estimator (the one-step version uses a weighted matrix that does not depend on estimated
parameters, while the two-step estimator may result in efficiency gains although the asymptotic
distribution approximations may be less reliable due to the dependence of the two-step weighted
matrix on estimated parameters) with a finite-sample correction (Windmeijer, 2005) using the
-xtdpd- procedure (previously -xtabond2-) in Stata (Roodman, 2003). The consistency of the
GMM estimator relies on the assumptions that there is no first-order serial autocorrelation in the
errors of the level equation (2), and that the instrument matrix is truly exogenous and therefore
valid to define the moment conditions. We thus perform two specification tests. First, we test for
the presence of second-order autocorrelation in the differenced equation, which reflect whether
the errors from the levels equations are serially uncorrelated (note that first-order autocorrelation
in the differenced equation (3) is expected and does not signify an improper model
specification). Second, we test for the exogeneity of the instruments using Sargan-Hansen’s J-
test, which is robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, and is asymptotically distributed
as χ2 in the number of restrictions.
        This dynamic panel approach has been used in studies where both autocorrelation and
endogeneity are of potential concern, including financial and investment economics (Carstensen
& Toubal, 2004; Horioka & Wan, 2006), environmental economics (Arbués, Barberán et al.,
2004), health care organization (Brown, Coffman et al., 2006; Mark, Harless et al., 2004) and the
health-wealth relationship (Michaud & van Soest, 2008). For the empirical question of weight
over time, the system GMM dynamic panel approach is ideal. This is the first paper to our


                                                                                                           10
knowledge to use it because it requires at least two consecutive waves of panel data (depending
on the exact specification) and a large number of observations in each wave. We have six waves
of over 4,000 unique men, with over 1,300 observations per wave. The results are also
straightforward to interpret (in the same manner as with regression results).
        We compare our two-step system GMM estimator to simple random effects (exogenous
regressor) model that does not control for the correlation between the explanatory variables and
the disturbance terms to see how the results differ. We expect the results of this estimation to be
badly biased for the reasons laid out above1.


                                                    IV. Data


        This paper used comprehensive longitudinal data from the six most recent waves (1991,
1993, 1997, 2000, 2004 and 2006) of the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS) on male
adults (18 to 55 years old) interviewed during any of the survey waves. The CHNS were
conducted in nine diverse provinces (Guangxi, Guizhou, Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Hunan,
Jiangsu, Liaoning, and Shandong) of China, and contains detailed individual-level information
on income, diet, health and demography for all members of sampled households as well as
detailed community level data on infrastructure, public services and facilities. A multistage,
random cluster process was used to draw the sample surveyed in each of the provinces. Counties
in the nine provinces were stratified by income and a weighted sampling scheme was used to
randomly select four counties in each province. Villages and townships within the counties and
urban and suburban neighborhoods within the cities were selected randomly into primary
sampling units (PSUs). The same households were surveyed over time as best possible and
newly formed households began to be surveyed in 1993.
        Our analysis only looks at adult men for a number of reasons. First, while gender
disparities would be interesting to uncover, the CHNS data did not contain unmeasured
predictors such as metabolic rate that are more operative for women. Second, women often have
the triple burden of work, children and domestic chores, which have competing effect on diet and
1
  As checks we also apply an instrumental variables estimator to equation (2) and an instrumental variables
estimator with fixed effects (IV-FE) without Wi,t-1 in the model to control for both endogeniety and individual
unobservable factors. We expect these two IV and IV-FE estimators to provide consistent parameter estimates but
these estimators should be less efficient than the two-step system GMM estimator. We do not report the results but
they are available upon request.


                                                                                                                 11
physical activity choices and limits the variance observed in data. Third, there is better variance
in the data for adult men because men are more likely to experience occupational change, and
have greater access to technologies that affect physical activity levels (Bell, Ge et al., 2002).
After we limited the data to men between 18 and 55 years old and who were not disabled during
a particular wave there were 16,883 person-wave observations made up by 10,935 men.
                                      --- Table 1 about here ---


       Of these, only 4,120 men had at least two consecutive waves of data, making up 8,645
observations (Table 1). Some of the loss of observations was due to the fact that those whose
first survey was conducted in 2006 were not included in the analytic sample (850 observations
made up of 643 men). In addition, Liaoning province was dropped from the survey and replaced
by Heilongjiang province in 1997 (Heilongjiang was kept in henceforth) due to flooding in
Liaoning that year. This meant that observations from adult men in Liaoning who were first
collected in 1993 would not have made it to the analytic sample due to the missing data for 1997.
Also, the 1991 and 1993 Heilongjiang sample did not exist.
       Beyond these factors, there was also loss to follow up. To test whether attrition was
systematic, we ran a Heckman selection model (Heckman, 1979). This two-stage estimation was
based on whether an individual had two or more consecutive waves of data using observed
exogenous characteristics (community urbanicity measures, prices, province, time, age, marital
status, education attainment and predicted household income) in their first wave. The second
stage was only conducted among those with two or more consecutive waves of data, and
modeled the last observed weight of individuals using exogenous characteristics from both the
first and the last observed waves. Results from the first step of the Heckman selection model
suggests that the men who are younger, single, from Guangxi province (in the South), and who
are from communities that generally scored lower on the various urbanicity measures in their
first wave are more likely to be dropped from the analytic sample. However, the Wald test of
independence in the errors between these two stages produced a χ2-statistic of 1.63, meaning that
we cannot reject the null that there is no correlation between the errors of these two equations
(i.e., selection is not a problem). We also ran a Hausman specification test (Hausman, 1978)
between the coefficients from the second equation and from basic OLS and found that we could




                                                                                                    12
not reject the null hypothesis that the difference in coefficients are not systematic (χ2(35) = 1.43).
Therefore, selection does not appear to be a problem empirically.
       Another potential problem with the data is the different interval lengths between each
wave (varies from two to four years). We conducted sensitivity analyses by using interpolating
data for 1994 and 2003 which ensured that the data would have a consistent three-year interval.
A significant number of observations were lost as a result of the interpolation, but a comparison
of the estimates from this partially interpolated data to those from the actual data among those
who remained in the partially interpolated data showed that the results were not statistically
different. Therefore, it appears that the different interval length between the waves is not a major
concern.


A. Dependent Variable
       Anthropometric data was collected by trained health workers during a comprehensive
physical exam at a local clinic or at the respondent’s home. Figure 1 shows that from 1991 to
2006, both weight and body mass index (BMI = weight in kg/(height in m)2) rose significantly
among adult men in China. In this analysis, we used weight as the dependent variable (but
control for height) because biological and epidemiological studies have found that weight gain is
mostly gained in the form of fat (rather than muscle mass or fat-free mass) among adults. This is
particularly the case for populations that were previously undernourished or experienced weight
fluctuations, either in childhood or adulthood (Dulloo, 2008; Dulloo, Jacquet et al., 2006;
Remacle, Bieswal et al., 2004), and that concurrently have lowered their physical activity levels,
as is the case in China. Because fat accumulation is well known to be highly associated with
morbidity and mortality from cardiovascular diseases, type II diabetes, hypertension, and other
nutrition-related non-communicable diseases (Folsom, Li et al., 1994; Matsuzawa, Nakamura et
al., 1995; Nakamura, Tokunaga et al., 1994; Raymond, Leeder et al., 2006), weight and weight
gain are important outcomes. Moreover, it is easier to interpret the results in terms of weight,
because height does not change much within an adult population. As a check, we also ran the
two-step system GMM with height as an endogenous variable.


                                     --- Figure 1 about here ---




                                                                                                   13
B. Key Explanatory Variables
       The key explanatory variables were lagged total physical activities, total caloric intake,
proportion of energy from fat, energy from animal source foods, energy from fruits &
vegetables, energy from edible oils and fats, energy from whole grain sources, energy from rice,
drinking status and smoking status. Total physical activity was based on self- reported
information on activity levels and time spent for up to two occupations, and time spent on four
types of domestic activities (buying food, preparing food, doing laundry and childcare). These
were combined with specific metabolic equivalent (MET) values based on the Compendium of
Physical Activities (Ainsworth, Haskell et al., 2000) to derive MET-hours per week to account
for both intensity of activities and time spent on activities. A unit of MET, is defined as the ratio
of a person's working metabolic rate relative to his/her resting (basal) metabolic rate. There is
additional information about leisure activities and travel activities, which was only available in
the last four waves of the CHNS. However, limiting the analysis to only these last four waves
would have severely compromised sample sizes, so only activities from occupations and
domestic chores were included. Moreover, among men in China, these two domains made up the
bulk of physical activities based on 1997-2006 data. Additional information on the creation of
the physical activity measures are in a recent paper by Ng and colleagues (2009). In our analytic
sample, physical activity levels among Chinese men fell significantly by 37 percentage points in
a span of 15 years (Figure 2a).
       Detailed consumption data at both the household and individual level were collected over
three consecutive days (start day was randomly allocated from Monday to Sunday) in order to
determine average daily dietary intake for each individual. Household food consumption was
determined by examining changes in inventory from the beginning to the end of each day to
account for food purchases, consumption and waste. Individual dietary intake for the same three
consecutive days was surveyed for all individuals from 1991 onwards based on daily self-reported
24-hour recalls on all food consumed away-from-home and at-home. The collection of both
household and individual dietary intake allowed for quality checks. Where significant
discrepancies were found, the household and the individual in question were revisited and asked
about their food consumption to resolve them (Wang, Ge et al., 2000).
       The 1991 Food Composition Table (FCT) for China was utilized to calculate
macronutrient intake values for the dietary data of 2000 and previous years (Institute of Nutrition



                                                                                                     14
and Food Hygiene, 1991). A new 2000 version of the FCT (Institute of Nutrition and Food
Hygiene, 2002) was used for 2004 and 2006 surveys, and updated for new foods each year.
                               --- Figures 2a, 2b and 2c about here ---


       We decided to use measures of total caloric intake (in kcals), proportion of energy from
dietary fat (%) and from carbohydrates (%) as one set of diet variables. Another set of dietary
variables that used food sources were also used, and included: total caloric intake, energy from
animal source foods (%), energy from edible fats (%), energy from fruits and vegetables (%),
energy from whole grain sources (%) and energy from rice (%). Additional dimensions on
dietary intake will allow us to better capture the role of the various macronutrient as well as food
sources in explaining weight. From the consumption data, we were able to get individual level
measures of caloric fat, carbohydrate and protein, as well as calories from animal source foods,
edible fats, fruits and vegetables and rice to allow us to determine these measures. Figure 2b
shows that over the 15-year period, total caloric intake fell by about 17%, but the proportion of
energy from dietary fat rose by six percentage points. Meanwhile, Table 2 and Figure 2c shows
that the proportion of energy from animal source foods and edible oils and fats rose by 3.6 and
6.3 percentage points respectively, while energy from rice and energy from grains fell by 9.5 and
3.2 percentage points respectively.
       The fact that both physical activity levels and total caloric intake have fallen while weight
has increased suggest that declines in physical activity were more important than reductions in
caloric intake. However, given that the proportion of energy from fat and carbohydrates has
increased, as have energy from animal source foods, and oils and fats, it is likely that dietary
composition may have a role in explaining the weight gain.
       Dummy variables for being a drinker or smoker were included in the analyses because
alcohol is calorically dense (7 kcals/gram) and so may result higher weights (Gordon & Doyle,
1986; Wannamethee & Shaper, 2003). Clinical and epidemiological studies have shown that
smoking is consistently negatively related to body weight (Klesges, Meyers et al., 1989),
possibly because nicotine increases energy expenditure and could reduce appetite (Hofstetter,
Schutz et al., 1986; Williamson, Madans et al., 1991). The CHNS has information about whether
respondents drank any beer or other alcohol beverage in the past year; and if they are current
smokers. However, this is the extent of the smoking and drinking data available, which limits the



                                                                                                    15
variation since these are unlikely to change much from year to year. In this sample, the smoking
and drinking prevalence among Chinese men declined with age (Table 2), likely due to the both
the aging effect and mortality effect (smokers and drinkers might have higher mortality rates
than non-smokers and non-drinkers).
                                     --- Table 2 about here ---


        Due to the longitudinal nature of this data, it is also important to account for aging and
time or cohort effects. It is well known that basal metabolism changes with age (Tzankoff &
Norris, 1978), and this change is likely non-linear. Thus, we used age group dummies in our
models. We also consider the possibility that age and physically activity combined, or age and
diet combined might affect weight differently and so we tested for the interaction of age with
these key endogenous dependent variables. The biological literature suggests that the effects of
physical activity and diet on weight for the age range in our empirical work (18 to 55) is unlikely
to vary much by age (Henry, 2005; Keys, Taylor et al., 1973; Webb, 1981), but we felt that it
would be useful to subject this supposition to an empirical test. Note also, that the time trend and
cohort effects are difficult to separate out from the aging effects given the longitudinal nature of
this data. While it is possible in theory to create cohorts for our analyses, the requirement of
having consecutive waves of data severely limits the sample sizes for each cohort and
compromises the system GMM estimation. Therefore, we have chosen to include both time
dummies and age dummies as controls, but caution that we cannot provide an interpretation of
the true age effect.
        Other controls include marital status, living situation, highest education attainment, and
predicted real household income tertile (created by using assets, occupations, education, age and
household size to extrapolate for household with missing income data, and adjusting for
community-specific CPI).


C. Potential Instruments
        Potential instruments are time-varying and arguably exogenous dimensions of urbanicity
and prices of food items for each community. We conducted specification tests on various sets of
these variables to determine the final set of instruments for use in both the instrumental variables
estimation and the dynamic panel estimation.



                                                                                                     16
       We used ten community-level measures of various dimensions of urbanicity: population,
density, market accessibility, economic wellbeing, transportation, communications, education
attainment, health facilities, sanitation and housing infrastructures. These reflect changes in the
various dimensions of urbanicity over time and reflect the environment in which people function.
Each of these dimensions was given a score from zero to ten and was comprised of data collected
from local area administrators or official records. Ng (2009) explains in detail how these scores
were created and how their distributions have changed over time.
       The CHNS community-level measures of urbanicity have also been previously used in
papers by Monda et al. (2007), and Zimmer et al. (2007). Figure 3 shows that over time, the
communities on average had improvements in these dimensions. Urbanicity was not uniform
across communities, with some communities experiencing declines in certain dimensions even
though in general the average community might have seen improvements. China’s household
registration (hukou) system and the longitudinal nature of the CHNS data ensure that selection
into communities and inclusion in the data was as independent of individual or household
choices and behavior as possible.
                                     --- Figure 3 about here ---


       Prices may affect weight via consumption of various types of food items, alcohol and
smoking. We included prices of food items that may be particularly important in the context of
China, such as rice, flour, pork and oil, and prices of local beer and cigarettes. Community price
surveys conducted on a set of sample stores and markets were used to provide price data. There
were three sources of price information for a representative basket of goods. These include state
store prices, free market prices collected from visits to stores in the communities surveyed, and
authority price records published by the State Statistical Bureau (SSB) of China, which provides
the provincial average. The state store prices were no longer used after the 1991–1992 price
reform in China. Therefore, in almost all situations, the free market prices will be used as the
basis, except when the goods studied were not sold in the free market, in which case, prices from
the state stores will be used, followed by SSB recorded prices if the other two sources do not have
the information. Farmers both produce and consume food, which adds complexity to the price
issue. However, we would argue that the free market prices for the food can be seen as the
opportunity cost of consuming instead of selling the produce. Hence, using free market prices



                                                                                                   17
(when available) is appropriate. Moreover, our models account for time-invariant individual
effects, so as long as farming status does not change, we have handled some of the potential
heterogeneity as it relates with individuals that also product their own food.
                                     --- Figure 4 about here ---


       Variations in prices across communities are due to both supply and demand side factors.
On the supply side, agricultural production, transportation, marketing and distribution costs,
imports of specific foods and other items, and availability of substitutes and complements can
affect prices across communities. On the demand side, aggregate preferences or food fads may
vary by communities. Most price changes in China are driven by supply side factors and
exogenous economic decisions made at the provincial level by price commissions and other
macroeconomic government decisions. In addition, while aggregate demand might affect prices,
an individual’s demand does not. Hence, the community prices can be considered exogenous
variables that vary greatly over time and across communities as shown in the lack of a clear
pattern in price changes among the ten most populous communities in the CHNS in Figure 4. In
addition, there are also variations in inflation, measured by the Consumer Price Indices (CPI)
across communities. A community-specific non-food CPI was derived by using a consumer
basket of non-food items and the SSB’s annual province and urban-rural specific consumer price
index ratio because there is no published absolute non-food CPI for China that provides a way to
compare provinces or urban and rural areas. Price and income variables were deflated by this
constructed CPI with urban Liaoning province for 2006 equal to 1.00 with all other prices relative
to this (CPC, 2006).


D. Testing the validity of instruments
       We tested the null hypothesis that there is exogeneity by conducting a Hausman test
between the model assuming the exogeneity of all explanatory variables and the instrumental
variables model. The Hausman test showed that we can reject the null hypothesis that there is
exogeneity (χ2(21) = 52.76). This suggests that we should use instrumental variables in the
estimation (Hausman, 1978).
       We first tested whether the instruments are correlated with the endogenous variables. The
first-stage regression results use lagged values of the instruments and other control variables as



                                                                                                 18
explanatory variables for the endogenous variables of lagged weight, physical activity, dietary
intake, smoking and drinking (see Table 3). We found that all but two of the lagged community
urbanicity measures were statistically predictive of physical activity in the prior wave. In
particular, the scores for educational institutions, sanitation, economic wellbeing and housing
infrastructures were highly associated with declines in physical activity. The community
urbanicity variables were also highly predictive of most of the dietary intake outcomes.
                                      --- Table 3 about here ---


       The lagged community price variables were most predictive of lagged weight, energy
from fat, and energy from oils and fats. There are a few interesting results of note. For example,
two key drivers of diet in China were particularly sensitive to price changes. A one percentage
point increase in the price of pork appears to be related to a 1.83 percentage point decrease in
energy from fat, as well as decreases in energy from animal source foods, and oils and fats. Also,
a one percentage point increase in the price of oil appears to be related to a 1 percentage point
decrease in energy from fat, as well as decreases in energy from grains, but increases in energy
from rice. For the endogenous variables of lagged weight, energy from fat, carbohydrates, animal
source foods, oils and fats, whole grain sources and rice, it appears that the ten community
urbanicity measures and eight price variables satisfied the requirement that these instruments are
correlated with them. For lagged physical activity and total caloric intake, the urbanicity
measures were jointly significant. In general, the models did not perform as well for the health
behaviors, which are not too surprising because we only had dichotomous variables for whether
an individual smoke or drink in the past year or not. Because smoking and drinking can be
addictive, it is unlikely that there is much variation in smoking and drinking status over time.
       We then tested whether the instruments are uncorrelated to the error terms using a
Hansen’s J- tests of over-identification because there are more potential instruments then there
are endogenous variables. The J-statistic follows a χ2 distribution with degrees of freedom equal
to the number of over-identifying restrictions rather than the total number of moment conditions.
A rejection of the null hypothesis can imply that the instruments do not satisfy the orthogonality
conditions (either because they are not truly exogenous, or because they are being incorrectly
excluded from the regression), or that the model specification is incorrect. In standard IV
models, the Sargan statistic is calculated instead. The Sargan statistic is a special case of



                                                                                                    19
Hansen's J-statistic, which uses an estimate of the error variance from the IV regression
estimated with the full set of over-identifying restrictions, and will generate a consistent
estimator of the error variance under the null of instrument validity. We found that the Sargan
test of over-identification cannot be rejected, meaning that the set of instruments appear to
satisfy the requirement that the instruments be independent from unobserved error (Table 4,
columns 3-4).


                                             V. Results


A. Exogenous Regressors
       The results for when we assume that the regressors are exogenous are consistent for
either sets of diet variables (Table 4, columns 1 and 2). These results suggest that height is
positively related to weight (p<0.01), while prior weight is positively related to current weight
(p<0.01). The age and time effects are also statistically significant, with older men being heavier,
as expected. An increase of 10 MET-hours per week of physical activity in the prior wave is
associated with a weight loss of 0.0015 to 0.016kg (p<0.01). However, the results for total
caloric intake, energy from fat and carbohydrates (column 1), and energy from the various food
sources (column 2) were all not statistically significant. Smoking appears to lower weight, but
drinking had no significant effect.
       As mentioned earlier, these results can be biased and inconsistent due to endogeneity.
The coefficients for the endogenous variables of physical activity and diet were all very different
from those in the system GMM model, and in the case of some of the dietary variables had
unexpected signs (but where not statistically significant). Moreover, the coefficient estimate for
lagged weight is higher in this model compared to the GMM system approach, suggesting that
time invariant unobserved heterogeneity is also a problem.
                                      --- Table 4 about here ---


B. Two-step system GMM
       The dynamic panel two-step procedure combines in a system GMM, a regression in
differences over time, and a regression in levels. Recall that the consistency of the GMM
estimation relies on the lack of autocorrelation of the residuals and the validity of the



                                                                                                    20
instrumental variables. The -xtdpd- postestimation procedure in Stata (Roodman, 2003) performs
validation tests for these. In our estimation, the rejection of the presence of a second-order
autocorrelation (i.e., the AR(2) z-statistic is not significant) satisfies the first criterion, and the
rejection of the J-test of over-identification satisfies the second criterion (Table 4, columns 3-4).
        The coefficient estimates from the GMM system dynamic panel estimation are
interpreted as in a standard linear model. We found that, unsurprisingly, height is positively
related to weight (p<0.01), while prior weight is positively related to current weight with a
coefficient of 0.114 to 0.118 (p<0.01), a finding that is a little smaller to that found by Goldman
and colleagues who also used a system GMM model to look at the effects of prices on BMI
(Goldman, Lakdawalla et al., 2009). An increase of 10 MET-hours per week of physical activity
in the prior wave is associated with a weight loss of 0.031kg (p<0.01), a larger coefficient than
what was found in the results with no correction for endogeneity. Also, a one percentage point
increase in energy from dietary fat in the prior wave was associated with a 1.74 kg weight gain,
ceteris paribus, while a one percentage point increase in energy from carbohydrates in the prior
wave was associated with a 1.25 kg weight gain, ceteris paribus (Column 3). As for energy from
various food sources, energy from oils and fats (e.g., lard, butter, margarine, etc.) was the only
dietary intake variable that was significant in affecting weight (Column 4). When height was
considered an endogenous variable in the two-step system GMM model, the results were
virtually the same (results available upon request).
        We can also tell from these coefficients and the noted change in physical activity levels
and dietary intake over the 1991 and 2006 period, how each of the main factors of interest may
have contributed to weight gain. Table 5 provides examples of two hypothetical adult men.
Example 5.1 is for a male who in 1991 was 30 years old with secondary school education, stayed
married, lives with family from a medium income household and who is a persistent smoker and
drinker. This man will naturally age over time and the time variables will change accordingly.
By manipulating the various endogenous variables over time (either by keeping them the same as
baseline throughout) or by allowing them to change based on the average values), we can see
what proportion of weight gain might be due to physical activity, diet or aging and time changes.
Example 5.2 is a male who entered the analysis in 1991 at age 40 with a primary school
education, stayed married, lives with family from a low income household and who is a
persistent smoker, but does not drink. For both of these examples, about 6.6 percent of weight



                                                                                                          21
change over the 15 year period was due to physical activity declines, while 3.3 to 3.5 percent was
due to changes in diet.
                                      --- Table 5 about here ---


       Another way to interpret the results is by thinking about the short-run and long-run
effects of a one time change in either physical activity or diet. Table 6 shows that for the average
Chinese adult male, physical activity declines explain 6.1% of the weight gain over this 15 years
period, while diet changes explain 2.9% to 3.8% (table 6, column 3). Column 6 of Table 6 show
these effects based on the average change in physical activity and dietary intake per year.
We found at a one-time 9.5 MET-hour/week decrease in physical activity in a year would have a
short-run (by next year) effect of a 0.029 kg weight gain but a long-run effect of 0.033 kg weight
gain (or 6.9%). Meanwhile, a one-time 0.4 percentage point increase in energy from fat would
have a short-run effect of a 0.06 kg weight gain and a long-run effect of a 0.08 kg weight gain.
Moreover, a one-time 0.45 percentage point decrease in energy from carbohydrates would have a
short-run effect of a 0.056 kg weight gain and a long-run effect of a 0.064 kg weight gain. These
together can result in a long-run or persistent effect of 3.2% weight gain.
       These may seem to be low values and rather discouraging findings for those trying to
maintain or lose weight. However, a recent paper in the Journal of the American Medical
Association (JAMA) by Katan and Ludwig (2010) that discusses the physiology of weight gain
and loss lends some support to our finding. The authors surmise that “small changes in lifestyle
would have a minor effect on obesity prevention”. They explain that this is because any single
change in diet or physical activity, even if permanent will elicit compensatory mechanisms that
limit long-term effects on body weight. We find here in our estimation, that the modest
coefficient for lagged weight () is in a sense limiting that the long-term effect.


                                        VI.     Conclusions


       To our knowledge, this is one of the first papers that uses dynamic panel system GMM
estimation to model the relationships between macro-level factors and micro-level behavior and
their influence on weight. It is critical to analyze longitudinal data on dietary intake, physical
activity, and other health behaviors over time to understand the dynamics of weight. Hence, the


                                                                                                     22
GMM system dynamic panel approach is ideal for this research; it is preferred over typical
reduced-form and IV models. We found that declines in physical activity and changes in the
composition of people’s diet are significantly related to weight among adult men in China. Of
these two factors, the declines in physical activity seem to be a larger contributor to weight gain,
although dietary intake (particularly dietary fat, carbohydrates and oils and fats) are also
important.
        Our findings are consistent with a review of studies by Schrawen and Westerterp (2007)
that concluded that increased intake of dietary fat and a decreasing physical activity level are the
most important environmental factors explaining the increased prevalence of obesity in
westernized societies. Physical activity has been found to be a critical factor in body weight
regulation in lean and obese individuals due to its protective role over time through both direct
energy expenditure, improved physical fitness and resultant metabolic effects on lipid
mobilization and oxidation and biochemical changes in the muscle fiber that contribute to
improved regulation of body weight (Saris, 1998). Previous work has also hinted that physical
activity may be a more successful strategy than dietary approaches to weight loss and
maintenance among men (King, Frey-Hewitt et al., 1989).
        Given the limited long-term effects of one-time physical activity or dietary changes to
control weight, effective public health approaches to prevent overweight and obesity will require
more fundamental changes in the food supply and the socio-economic and built environment.
Strategies to increase physical activity levels at the workplace (Bell, Ge et al., 2001) and
designing built environments that are safe and conducive for such transit or exercise modes
(Bell, Ge et al., 2002; Forsyth, Hearst et al., 2008; Nagel, Carlson et al., 2008) can help prevent
weight gain, as can policies in the form of higher taxes on automobiles, lower entry fees to parks
and government run health facilities. Additionally, disincentives for automobile ownership can
discourage motorized transportation and help reduce air pollution and provide more pleasant
environments for outdoor exercise. We do not, however, know if these are cost-effective
programmatic and policy options in China for increasing physical activity that will work to
reduce the prevalence of overweight and obesity. As for dietary intake, there is some controversy
regarding whether it is fat itself that increases weight or, that it is the fact that fat per gram is
more energy dense (Bray, Paeratakul et al., 2004; Willett, 1998). Our findings that the proportion




                                                                                                        23
of energy from fat and carbohydates were important, but total caloric intake was not, seems to
suggest that the former may be the case in this particular population.
       Our estimated effects were modest, and we were only able to account for around 10% of
the weight gain observed in the 15 year period. Much of the rest of the weight gain is probably
due to aging and time effects. Unfortunately, we are unable to separate out the aging and the time
and or cohort effects. In theory this is possible if we were to create separate cohorts of adult men,
but given the reduced sample sizes due to the requirement of consecutive waves, this was not
feasible. It is also possible that even with detailed data at the level in which exists in the CHNS,
measurement error still exists and makes empirical analysis very challenging.
       Moreover, due to the data requirements, we were only able to apply this modeling
strategy on a specific population—adult (18-55 year old) men in China, which limits its
applicability to the general population. While this analysis did not directly estimate the interacted
effect of physical activity and dietary intake, it does so implicitly in the dynamic panel system
GMM estimation approach by including lagged weight with controls for endogeneity in the
physical activity and diet variables that affect weight. Certainly, there are also additional
endogenous determinants of both diet and physical activity, such as technological changes
related to home assets like refrigerators, rice cookers, microwaves, vacuum cleaners and washing
machines that can be examined in the future. Future work should also consider regarding joint
decisions about time and energy allocation among household members, instead of just
considering individuals alone.




                                                                                                    24
                                                     APPENDIX

        An individual’s utility in current period, t, depends on food consumption, F, physical
activity (A), other health behaviors (such as smoking), other consumption, C, and current weight,
W. Utility U increases with consumption of food and other things, but is increasing in weight
only if current weight is less than ideal weight, Ẅ. Otherwise, utility declines with weight. The
marginal utility of eating decreases as weight exceeds ideal weight, because eating increases
weight. The assumption is that there is an ideal weight, Ẅ, holding other consumption constant.
In other words, Ẅ is the weight that would be chosen if achieving one’s preferred weight were
costless. This subjective ideal weight may or may not correspond to the weight that maximizes
health or longevity, although it is likely to be influenced by concern with these factors. But the
ideal weight is not necessarily the preferred weight in the economic sense because it does not
consider the full range of costs and benefits of achieving it. In other words, a person’s rationally
chosen weight is the one that makes him the happiest given the existing costs and benefits of
food consumption, physical activity and other consumption.
        Because this model focuses on weight, we conceptualize food consumption simply as
caloric intake, including calories from alcohol. Two other behaviors affect weight  physical
activity, A, and smoking, S. Both affects utility directly and indirectly (as determinants of
weight). An individual’s physical activity level depends on the level of development, D, where
she lives, such that At = A(Dt).
        In this dynamic problem, weight, W, is the state variable. Weight is a capital stock that
depreciates at rate 1δ (where δ can be thought of as basal metabolism). Weight increases
through consumption of food and alcohol, and decreases with physical activity and smoking.
Thus, an individual’s weight at time t, depends on prior weight, food and alcohol consumption F,
smoking S, and physical activity level A:
(A1)                               Wt  (1   )Wt 1  g ( Ft 1 , S t 1 , A( Dt 1 )) ,
where δ < 1 and g is continuous, concave, increasing in food or alcohol consumption, decreasing
in physical activity level, and decreasing in smoking level2 (gF ≥ 0, gS ≤ 0, and gA ≤ 0).
        Over multiple time periods, an individual’s value function (or lifetime indirect utility)
depends on the current period’s utility and the value function from future time periods:

2
  Systematic reviews of clinical and epidemiological studies have shown that smoking is consistently negatively
related to body weight (Klesges, Meyers et al., 1989)


                                                                                                                  25
(A2)                          v(Wt )  max F ,C ,W {U t ( Ft , At , S t , C t , Wt )   v(Wt 1 )} ,

where β is the discount factor.
          Individuals are subject to a budget constraint each period: pFF + pSS + pcC ≤ I, where pF,
pS and pc are the prices of food (including alcohol), cigarettes, and other consumption goods
respectively, and I is income. Consistent with existing literature, this does not account for
borrowings and savings over time. Standardizing by pc, the budget constraint as:
(A3)                                               C  I  p F F  pS S .
          Combining Eq (A2) and Eq (A3), and taking the first order conditions with respect to Ft
and Ct, and setting them to zero so that one is maximizing their utility, gives:
(A4)
U F ( Ft , At , S t , ( I t  p F Ft  p S S ), Wt )  v (Wt 1 ) g F  p F U C [ Ft , At , S t , ( I t  p F Ft  p s S ), Wt ]


That is: Marginal utility of eating and drinking plus discounted marginal utility of weight in
future period due to eating equals the marginal utility of consuming other goods. Similarly,
(A5) U A ( Ft , At , S t , ( I t  p F Ft  p S S ), Wt )  v (Wt 1 ) g A  0
(A6)
U S ( Ft , At , S t , ( I t  p F Ft  p S S ), Wt )   v (Wt 1 ) g S  p S U C [ Ft , At , S t , ( I t  p F Ft  p s S ), Wt ]

Taking first order conditions of Eq (A2) with respect to W, we can get the envelope theorem:
(A7)                v (Wt )  U W [ Ft , At , S t , ( I t  p F F  p S S ), Wt ]   (1   )v (Wt 1 ) ,
which shows that the long run marginal value of weight is equal to the marginal utility of weight
in the current period plus the discounted marginal utility of weight.
          These will yield a steady-state in food and alcohol consumption, smoking, physical
activity and weight as long as the marginal utility of food and alcohol consumption is falling in
weight. Rewriting the optimality condition,
(A8)      v {Wt  g[ Ft , S t , A( Dt )]}  ( p F U C  U F ) g F   ( p S U C  U S ) g S   U A g A  ,
which is the marginal benefit of weight in the future equaling the marginal cost of spending on
weight change via food, smoking or physical activity.




                                                                                                                                 26
                                         REFERENCES

Ainsworth, B. E., Haskell, W. L., Whitt, M. C., Irwin, M. L., Swartz, A. M., Strath, S. J., et al.
      (2000). Compendium of physical activities: an update of activity codes and MET
      intensities. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 32(9 Suppl), S498-504.

Alonso-Borrego, C., & Arellano, M. (1999). Symmetrically Normalized Instrumental-Variable
      Estimation Using Panel Data. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 17(1), 36-49.

Arbués, F., Barberán, R., & Villanúa, I. (2004). Price impact on urban residential water demand:
      A dynamic panel data approach. Water Resrouce Research, 40(W11402).

Arellano, M., & Bond, S. (1998). Dynamic Panel Data Estimation Using DPD98 for Gauss: A
       Guide for Users.Unpublished manuscript, London.

Astrup, A. (1999). Macronutrient balances and obesity: the role of diet and physical activity.
       Public Health Nutr, 2, 341-347.

Bell, A. C., Ge, K., & Popkin, B. M. (2001). Weight gain and its predictors in Chinese adults. Int
       J Obes Relat Metab Disord, 25(7), 1079-1086.

Bell, A. C., Ge, K., & Popkin, B. M. (2002). The road to obesity or the path to prevention:
       motorized transportation and obesity in China. Obes Res, 10(4), 277-283.

Blundell, R., & Bond, S. (1998). Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel
      data models. Journal of Econometrics, 87(1), 115-143.

Blundell, R., & Bond, S. (2000). GMM Estimation with persistent panel data: an application to
      production functions. Econometric Reviews, 19(3), 321 - 340.

Blundell, R., Bond, S., & Windmeijer, F. (2000). Estimation in dynamic panel data models:
      improving on the performance of the standard GMM estimator: Institute for Fiscal
      Studies.

Bond, S. R. (2002). Dynamic panel data models: a guide to micro data methods and practice.
       Portuguese Economic Journal, 1(2), 141.

Bray, G. A., Paeratakul, S., & Popkin, B. M. (2004). Dietary fat and obesity: a review of animal,
       clinical and epidemiological studies. Physiol Behav, 83(4), 549-555.

Bray, G. A., & Popkin, B. M. (1998). Dietary fat intake does affect obesity! Am. J. Clinical
       Nutrition, 68(6), 1157-1173.



                                                                                                     27
Brien, S. E., Katzmarzyk, P. T., Craig, C. L., & Gauvin, L. (2007). Physical activity,
       cardiorespiratory fitness and body mass index as predictors of substantial weight gain and
       obesity: the Canadian physical activity longitudinal study. Can J Public Health, 98(2),
       121-124.

Brown, T. T., Coffman, J. M., Quinn, B. C., Scheffler, R. M., & Schwalm, D. D. (2006). Do
      Physicians Always Flee from HMOs? New Results Using Dynamic Panel Estimation
      Methods. Health Services Research, 41(2), 357-373.

Cameron, A. C., & Trivedi, P., K. (2005). Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications. New
      York: Cambridge University Press.

Carstensen, K., & Toubal, F. (2004). Foreign direct investment in Central and Eastern European
       countries: a dynamic panel analysis. Journal of Comparative Economics, 32(1), 3-22.

Cawley, J. (2004). An economic framework for understanding physical activity and eating
      behaviors. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 27(3), 117-125.

Chou, S. Y., Grossman, M., & Saffer, H. (2004). An economic analysis of adult obesity: results
       from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. Journal of Health Economics,
       23(3), 565-587.

Cutler, D. M., Glaeser, E. L., & Shapiro, J. M. (2003). Why have Americans become more
        obese? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(3), 93-118.

Drewnowski, A., & Darmon, N. (2005). The economics of obesity: dietary energy density and
      energy cost. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 82(1), 265s-273s.

Dulloo, A. G. (2008). Thrifty energy metabolism in catch-up growth trajectories to insulin and
       leptin resistance. Best Practice & Research Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 22(1),
       155-171.

Dulloo, A. G., Jacquet, J., Seydoux, J., & Montani, J. P. (2006). The thrifty `catch-up fat'
       phenotype: its impact on insulin sensitivity during growth trajectories to obesity and
       metabolic syndrome. Int J Obes, 30(S4), S23-S35.

Folsom, A. R., Li, Y., Rao, X., Cen, R., Zhang, K., Liu, X., et al. (1994). Body mass, fat
      distribution and cardiovascular risk factors in a lean population of South China. Journal
      of Clinical Epidemiology, 47(2), 173-181.

Forsyth, A., Hearst, M., Oakes, J. M., & Schmitz, K. H. (2008). Design and Destinations: Factors
       Influencing Walking and Total Physical Activity. Urban Stud, 45(9), 1973-1996.



                                                                                                28
Frisancho, A. R. (2003). Reduced rate of fat oxidation: A metabolic pathway to obesity in the
       developing nations. American Journal of Human Biology, 15(4), 522-532.

Goldman, D., Lakdawalla, D., & Zheng, Y. (2009). Food Prices and the Dynamics of Body
      Weight.Unpublished manuscript.

Gordon, T., & Doyle, J. T. (1986). Alcohol Consumption and Its Relationship to Smoking,
      Weight, Blood Pressure, and Blood Lipids: The Albany Study. Arch Intern Med, 146(2),
      262-265.

Hausman, J. A. (1978). Specification Tests in Econometrics. Econometrica, 46(6), 1251-1271.

Heckman, J. J. (1979). Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica, 47(1),
     153-161.

Henry, C. J. K. (2005). Basal metabolic rate studies in humans: measurement and development
       of new equations. Public Health Nutrition, 8(7a), 1133-1152.

Hofstetter, A., Schutz, Y., Jequier, E., & Wahren, J. (1986). Increased 24-hour energy
       expenditure in cigarette smokers. N Engl J Med, 314(2), 79-82.

Horioka, C. Y.-J., & Wan, J.-M. (2006). The Determinants of Household Saving in China: A
      Dynamic Panel Analysis of Provincial Data: National Bureau of Economic Research,
      Inc.

Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene. (1991). Chinese Food Composition Tables 1991
        Beijing, PRC: People’s Health Publishing House

Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene. (2002). China Food Composition Table 2002. Beijing,
        PRC: Beijing Medical University Publishing House.

James, W. P., & Ralph, A. (1999). New understanding in obesity research. Proc Nutr Soc, 58(2),
       385-393.

Katan, M. B., & Ludwig, D. S. (2010). Extra Calories Cause Weight Gain--But How Much?
       JAMA, 303(1), 65-66.

Keys, A., Taylor, H. L., & Grande, F. (1973). Basal metabolism and age of adult man.
       Metabolism, 22(4), 579-587.

King, A. C., Frey-Hewitt, B., Dreon, D. M., & Wood, P. D. (1989). Diet vs exercise in weight
       maintenance. The effects of minimal intervention strategies on long-term outcomes in
       men. Arch Intern Med, 149(12), 2741-2746.


                                                                                                29
Klesges, R. C., Meyers, A. W., Klesges, L. M., & LaVasque, M. E. (1989). Smoking, body
       weight, and their effects on smoking behavior: A comprehensive review of the literature.
       Psychological Bulletin, 106(2), 204-230.

Kuchler, F., Tegene, A., Harris, J. M., & United States. Dept. of Agriculture. Economic Research
      Service. (2004). Taxing snack foods what to expect for diet and tax revenues.
      Washington, D.C.: Economic Research Serivce U.S. Dept. of Agriculture.

Lakdawalla, D., & Philipson, T. (2009). The growth of obesity and technological change.
      Economics & Human Biology, 7(3), 283-293.

Lakdawalla, D., Philipson, T. J., & Bhattacharya, J. (2005). Welfare-enhancing technological
      change and the growth of obesity. American Economic Review, 95(2), 253-257.

Mark, B. A., Harless, D. W., McCue, M., & Xu, Y. (2004). A Longitudinal Examination of
      Hospital Registered Nurse Staffing and Quality of Care. Health Services Research, 39(2),
      279-300.

Matsuzawa, Y., Nakamura, T., Shimomura, I., & Kotani, K. (1995). Visceral fat accumulation
      and cardiovascular disease. Obes Res, 3 Suppl 5, 645S-647S.

Michaud, P.-C., & van Soest, A. (2008). Health and wealth of elderly couples: Causality tests
      using dynamic panel data models. Journal of Health Economics, 27(5), 1312-1325.

Miller, W. C., Lindeman, A. K., Wallace, J., & Niederpruem, M. (1990). Diet composition,
        energy intake, and exercise in relation to body fat in men and women. Am. J. Clinical
        Nutrition, 52(3), 426-430.

Monda, K. L., Gordon-Larsen, P., Stevens, J., & Popkin, B. M. (2007). China's transition: The
      effect of rapid urbanization on adult occupational physical activity. Soc Sci Med, 64(4),
      858-870.

Moore, M. S. (2000). Interactions between physical activity and diet in the regulation of body
      weight. Proc Nutr Soc, 59(2), 193-198.

Nagel, C. L., Carlson, N. E., Bosworth, M., & Michael, Y. L. (2008). The Relation between
       Neighborhood Built Environment and Walking Activity among Older Adults. Am. J.
       Epidemiol., 168(4), 461-468.

Nakamura, T., Tokunaga, K., Shimomura, I., Nishida, M., Yoshida, S., Kotani, K., et al. (1994).
     Contribution of visceral fat accumulation to the development of coronary artery disease
     in non-obese men. Atherosclerosis, 107(2), 239-246.



                                                                                                  30
Ng, S. W., Norton, E. C., & Popkin, B. M. (2009). Why have physical activity levels declined
       among Chinese adults? Findings from the 1991-2006 China health and nutrition surveys.
       Soc Sci Med, 68(7), 1305-1314.

Philipson, T. J., & Posner, R. A. (2003). The long-run growth in obesity as a function of
       technological change. Perspect Biol Med, 46(3 Suppl), S87-107.

Popkin, B. M., Kim, S., Rusev, E. R., Du, S., & Zizza, C. (2006). Measuring the full economic
       costs of diet, physical activity and obesity-related chronic diseases. Obesity Reviews,
       7(3), 271-293.

Pratt, M., Macera, C. A., Sallis, J. F., O'Donnell, M., & Frank, L. D. (2004). Economic
        interventions to promote physical activity: Application of the SLOTH model. American
        Journal of Preventive Medicine, 27(3, Supplement 1), 136-145.

Prentice, A. M., & Jebb, S. A. (2004). Energy Intake/Physical Activity Interactions in the
       Homeostasis of Body Weight Regulation. Nutrition Reviews, 62(s2), S98-S104.

Rashad, I. (2006). Structural estimation of caloric intake, exercise, smoking, and obesity. The
      Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 46(2), 268-283.

Rashad, I., & Grossman, M. (2004). The economics of obesity. Public Interest(156), 104-112.

Raymond, S. U., Leeder, S., & Greenberg, H. M. (2006). Obesity and cardiovascular disease in
     developing countries: a growing problem and an economic threat. Current Opinion in
     Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care, 9(2), 111-116.

Remacle, C., Bieswal, F., & Reusens, B. (2004). Programming of obesity and cardiovascular
      disease.(International Symposium "Childhood Obesity: From basic knowledge to
      effective prevention" and the 14th Workshop "European Childhood Obesity
      Group".)(Paper). International Journal of Obesity, 28(S3), S46.

Roodman, D. (2003). XTABOND2: Stata module to extend xtabond dynamic panel data
     estimator (Version S435901): Boston College Department of Economics.

Saris, W. H. (1998). Fit, fat and fat free: the metabolic aspects of weight control. Int J Obes Relat
        Metab Disord, 22 Suppl 2, S15-21.

Schrauwen, P., & Westerterp, K. R. (2007). The role of high-fat diets and physical activity in the
      regulation of body weight. British Journal of Nutrition, 84(04), 417-427.

Schroeter, C., Lusk, J., & Tyner, W. (2008). Determining the impact of food price and income
       changes on body weight. Journal of Health Economics, 27(1), 45-68.


                                                                                                  31
Sturm, R. (2005). Economics and physical activity - A research agenda. American Journal of
       Preventive Medicine, 28(2), 141-149.

Taylor, C. B., Jatulis, D. E., Winkleby, M. A., Rockhill, B. J., & Kraemer, H. C. (1994). Effects
       of Life-Style on Body Mass Index Change. Epidemiology, 5(6), 599-603.

Tryon, W. W. (1987). Activity as a function of body weight. Am. J. Clinical Nutrition, 46(3),
       451-455.

Tzankoff, S. P., & Norris, A. H. (1978). Longitudinal changes in basal metabolism in man. J
      Appl Physiol, 45(4), 536-539.

Wang, Y., Ge, K., & Popkin, B. M. (2000). Tracking of body mass index from childhood to
      adolescence: a 6-y follow-up study in China. Am J Clin Nutr, 72(4), 1018-1024.

Wannamethee, S. G., & Shaper, A. G. (2003). Alcohol, body weight, and weight gain in middle-
     aged men. Am. J. Clinical Nutrition, 77(5), 1312-1317.

Webb, P. (1981). Energy expenditure and fat-free mass in men and women. Am J Clin Nutr,
      34(9), 1816-1826.

Willett, W. C. (1998). Is dietary fat a major determinant of body fat? Am J Clin Nutr, 67(3),
        556S-562.

Williamson, D. F., Madans, J., Anda, R. F., Kleinman, J. C., Giovino, G. A., & Byers, T. (1991).
       Smoking cessation and severity of weight gain in a national cohort. N Engl J Med,
       324(11), 739-745.

Windmeijer, F. (2005). A finite sample correction for the variance of linear efficient two-step
     GMM estimators. Journal of Econometrics, 126(1), 25-51.

Zimmer, Z., Kaneda, T., & Spess, L. (2007). An examination of urban versus rural mortality in
     China using community and individual data. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci, 62(5),
     S349-357.




                                                                                                  32
               TABLE 1 ― SAMPLE SIZE OF MEN FROM THE CHNS 1991-2006

Consecutive      Unit of                         Wave
                                                                           Total
  waves       observation    1991    1993    1997   2000   2004    2006
               Individuals           1,138    542    779    728     993    4,120
   T≥2
              Person-wave            2,014   1,381 1,756   1,743   1,751    8,645
               Individuals   2,398    558    1,280   984    892     643     6,755
   T =1
              Person-wave    2,873    654    1,487 1,314   1,060    850     8,238
               Individuals   2,398   1,696   1,822 1,763   1,620   1,636   10,935
   Total
              Person-wave    2,873   2,668   2,868 3,070   2,803   2,601   16,883




                                                                                33
 TABLE 2―WEIGHT, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY LEVELS, DIETARY INTAKE, AND OTHER DEMOGRAPHIC
          CHARACTERISTICS AMONG ADULT MEN IN CHINA (CHNS 1991-2006)

                                                         Year                                  Change
                                                                                               (1991-
                           1991       1993       1997           2000     2004       2006
                                                                                                2006)
                           59.25      59.71      61.65       63.70       65.93      66.43      7.18 **
Weight (kg)
                          (8.46)     (8.49)     (9.56)      (10.28)     (13.72)    (12.22)
                           166.1     165.95     166.60      167.31      167.66     167.88      1.78 **
Height (cm)
                          (6.26)     (6.17)     (6.36)       (6.38)      (6.65)     (6.88)
                           21.43      21.65      22.15       22.71       23.40      23.54      2.11 **
BMI (kg/m2)
                          (2.50)     (2.55)     (2.82)       (3.07)      (4.35)     (4.01)
Work & Domestic           389.84     356.92     346.40      305.97      246.00     247.09     -142.75 **
physical activity level
                          (220.37)   (217.01)   (215.97)    (202.97)    (180.18)   (177.90)
(MET-hrs/week)
Total caloric Intake      2972.73    2872.65    2612.81     2618.09     2530.91    2458.11    -514.62 **
(kcal)                    (826.07)   (922.26)   (717.89)    (807.06)    (804.02)   (774.49)
Energy from dietary
                           21.72      23.06      25.50          28.22    28.03      27.79      6.07 **
fat (%)
Energy from
                           66.69      65.06      62.71          60.05    60.09      59.9       -6.79 **
carbohydrates (%)
Energy from Animal
                           8.96       9.74       9.64           11.03    10.53      12.56      3.60 **
Source Foods (%)
Energy from Oils and
                           8.18       9.24       12.02          13.43    14.54      14.52      6.34 **
Fats (%)
Energy from Fruits
                           2.22       2.42       1.82           1.85     2.15       1.99        -0.23
and Vegetables (%)
Energy from Rice (%)       50.03      50.22      44.36          43.61    42.51      40.56      -9.48 **
Energy from Grains
                           26.62      24.21      26.83          24.44    24.16      23.46      -3.15 **
(%)
Smoker (%)                 68.57      65.99      63.11       61.28       60.07      57.52     -11.05 **
Drinker (%)                67.77      64.14      67.12       65.27       64.15      63.32      -4.45 *
                           35.18      35.83      36.73       38.08       39.72      40.41      5.23 **
Age (year)
                           (9.93)    (10.08)    (10.19)     (10.10)      (9.95)     (9.78)
Married (%)                79.69      78.60      78.70        80.0       82.08      83.93     4.24 *
Live alone (%)              0.21       0.19       0.21        0.23        0.32       0.31    0.10 **
No education (%)           15.12      11.12       9.75        6.44        4.37       6.50   -8.62 **
Highest education is
                          62.68       65.61        64.66       62.79        61.75   54.94   -7.74 **
primary school (%)
Highest education is
                          15.26       16.50        17.46       18.49        19.75   20.57    5.31 **
secondary school (%)
Highest education is
                          3.19        3.98         4.12        5.77         7.62    9.00     5.81 **
technical school (%)
Has university degree
                          3.75        2.79         4.01        6.51         6.51    8.99     5.24 **
or higher (%)
Predicted household      2228.2       2261       2545.71      3573.33      4431.98 5243.65 3015.45 **
income (2006 yuan)     (1443.17) (3746.15) (2362.72) (3432.76) (4419.80) (8047.30)
Number of
                          2851        2649         2841        2980         2795    2601
observations
Notes: Standard Deviations in parentheses.
* difference between 1991 and 2006 is significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


                                                                                                  34
 TABLE 3―URBANICITY AND PRICES ON WEIGHT, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, DIETARY INTAKE, SMOKING AND DRINKING
                                      AMONG CHINESE MEN


                                                     Activity (MET- Total caloric
Community Factors                      Weight (kg)                                       P(Smoke)        P(Drink)
                                                         hrs/wk)    intake (kcal)
                                           -0.0282          0.229            6.806          0.00246       -0.00189
Population score (0-10)
                                          (0.0550)         (1.509)          (7.746)       (0.00276)      (0.00294)
                                          0.00872         -3.083 +           -6.583        -0.00116     0.00907 **
Density score (0-10)
                                          (0.0576)         (1.628)          (7.963)       (0.00330)      (0.00311)
                                        -0.000103        -2.974 **        -11.612 *      -0.00390 *    -0.00600 **
Market Accessibility score (0-10)
                                          (0.0332)         (1.147)          (5.321)       (0.00196)      (0.00209)
                                           0.0261         -3.387 *        -16.446 *       0.000022          0.002
Transportation score (0-10)
                                          (0.0465)         (1.499)          (8.120)       (0.00237)      (0.00253)
                                           0.0802           -2.450           -5.658        -0.00176       0.00131
Communications score (0-10)
                                          (0.0549)         (1.960)         (9.0835)       (0.00283)      (0.00367)
                                           0.0733        -7.564 **           11.401         0.00106        0.00115
Economy score (0-10)
                                          (0.0612)         (1.883)          (8.440)       (0.00331)      (0.00352)
                                          0.171 **      -10.645 **       -35.515 **      -0.0000166       0.00275
Educational Institution score (0-10)
                                          (0.0583)         (2.271)         (10.454)       (0.00346)      (0.00410)
                                           0.0692         -3.975 *          -5.0896         0.00462        0.00242
Health Facilities score (0-10)
                                          (0.0547)         (1.928)          (8.601)       (0.00315)      (0.00311)
Sanitation infrastructure score (0-        0.0483        -8.997 **           1.344          0.00273       -0.00111
10)                                       (0.0409)         (1.434)          (8.523)       (0.00216)      (0.00271)
                                           0.116 +       -6.654 **           -5.956        -0.00126       -0.00422
Housing infrastructure score (0-10)
                                          (0.0678)         (2.279)         (11.940)       (0.00229)      (0.00398)
                                            0.700           -0.294          -14.630        0.0439 +        -0.0111
Log real price of Rice (yuan/kg)
                                           (0.448)       (14.0969)         (89.795)        (0.0253)       (0.0344)
                                         -1.596 **          -3.147          -12.161        -0.00195        -0.0370
Log real price of Flour (yuan/kg)
                                           (0.384)        (15.673)         (74.461)        (0.0264)       (0.0313)
                                         -2.538 **         -10.207       162.713 **       0.0683 **       -0.00110
Log real price of Pork (yuan/ kg)
                                           (0.477)        (11.495)         (75.777)        (0.0258)       (0.0261)
                                         -1.344 **        17.0144            1.604           0.0137       -0.00445
Log real price of Chicken (yuan/kg)
                                           (0.399)        (11.179)         (65.275)        (0.0262)       (0.0227)
                                          -0.485 *          3.336            59.329         0.00118        -0.0148
Log real price of Oil (yuan/liter)
                                           (0.252)         (8.225)         (41.066)        (0.0142)       (0.0149)
                                            -0.420          -6.605          -14.732        -0.00622        -0.0330
Log real price of Beer (yuan/bottle)
                                           (0.460)        (11.775)         (69.814)        (0.0265)       (0.0288)
Log real price of Cigarettes                0.073          -12.904          -33.568       -0.0195 +       -0.00706
(yuan/box)                                 (0.211)        (8.0373)        (37.0418)        (0.0119)       (0.0137)
Non-Food Consumer Price Index            -8.258 **         22.376            63.164         0.207 *         0.0494
(100=urban Liaoning)                       (2.209)        (62.613)        (260.242)        (0.0979)        (0.117)
Observations                                 8645            8645             8645            8645           8645
Number of Individuals                        4120            4120             4120            4120           4120
Overall Statistic χ2(32)                1580.76 **      2264.12 **       173.17 **        309.91 **     337.66 **
Joint test of significance: all
                                         174.86 **         666.81 **         53.49 **        35.87 **      33.44 *
community variables χ2(18)
Joint test of significance: urbanicity
                                          51.60 **         445.39 **         37.95 **         11.25        21.68 *
measures χ2(10)
Joint test of significance: price
                                         107.21 **            6.15             9.06          20.65 **        7.11
variables χ2(8)
Notes: Controlling for height, time, age, marital status, living situation, education, and predicted household
income. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%;* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


                                                                                                                     35
TABLE 3, CONTINUED―URBANICITY AND PRICES ON WEIGHT, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, DIETARY INTAKE, SMOKING AND DRINKING AMONG
                                                 CHINESE MEN

                                                                          % energy from
   Community Factors                                         Animal                 Fruits and Whole grain
                                     Fat       Carbohy.               Oils and fats                                         Rice
                                                         Source foods               vegetables      sources
                                    -0.0603     0.0589 *   0.000539     -0.000959    0.000534 +  -0.00560 +                0.00533
  Population score (0-10)
                                   (0.0807)     (0.0257)  (0.000628)   (0.000935)   (0.000320)    (0.00343)               (0.00344)
                                    0.132 +    -0.307 **  0.00215 **    -0.000291    0.0000969     0.00290               -0.00657 +
  Density score (0-10)
                                   (0.0785)     (0.0891)  (0.000581)    (0.00108)   (0.000195)    (0.00368)               (0.00382)
  Market Accessibility score        -0.0362       0.107   0.0000891     -0.000161   -0.0000549    -0.00009              -0.0000449
  (0-10)                           (0.0670)     (0.0721)  (0.000462)   (0.000639)   (0.000162)    (0.00143)               (0.00170)
                                    0.142 +     -0.204 *   0.00143 *    0.000707      0.000129   -0.00423 *                0.00249
  Transportation score (0-10)
                                   (0.0858)     (0.0961)  (0.000658)   (0.000932)   (0.000175)    (0.00199)               (0.00204)
  Communications score (0-          0.269 *    -0.282 **   0.000218       0.00187     0.000124     0.00259               -0.00489 *
  10)                               (0.115)      (0.110)  (0.000858)    (0.00119)   (0.000377)    (0.00248)               (0.00257)
                                    0.188 +       -0.222   0.00173 *      0.00162    -0.000457   0.00653 **             -0.00994 **
  Economy score (0-10)
                                    (0.113)      (0.121)  (0.000859)    (0.00121)   (0.000432)    (0.00216)               (0.00252)
  Educational Institution score    0.333 **    -0.332 **    0.00122     0.000964     -0..000454    -0.00396              -0.000268
  (0-10)                            (0.112)      (0.127)  (0.000801)    (0.00126)   (0.000450)    (0.00412)               (0.00415)
  Health Facilities score (0-       0.203 *     0.293 **   0.00181 *    0.000260    -0.0000448     -0.00300              -0.000788
  10)                               (0.088)     (0.0851)  (0.000788)   (0.000996)   (0.000213)    (0.00216)               (0.00246)
  Sanitation infrastructure        0.198 **       -0.159    0.00113      -0.00101   -0.000593 +  -0.000477                0.000761
  score (0-10)                     (0.0769)      (0.088)  (0.000706)   (0.000866)   (0.000358)    (0.00224)               (0.00225)
  Housing infrastructure score     0.526 **    -0.600 **  0.00470 **      0.00168    -0.000174   -0.0146 **              0.00858 *
  (0-10)                            (0.123)      (0.133)  (0.000981)    (0.00127)   (0.000358)    (0.00319)               (0.00370)
  Log real price of Rice             -0.901       1.104   -0.0186 **     0.0207 *      -0.00329    0.153 **               -0.165 **
  (yuan/kg)                         (0.938)      (0.955)   (0.00760)     (0.0100)     (0.00487)    (0.0299)                (0.0287)
  Log real price of Flour           1.672 +       -0.237     0.0110     0.000746     0.00681 *    -0.125 **                0.127 **
  (yuan/kg)                         (0.878)      (0.908)   (0.00764)    (0.00814)     (0.00327)    (0.0209)                (0.0243)
  Log real price of Pork          -1.832 **       -1.520  -0.0229 **   -0.0274 **     0.000430   -0.0872 **              0.0910 **
  (yuan/ kg)                        (0.724)      (0.806)   (0.00683)    (0.00888)     (0.00176)    (0.0169)                (0.0185)
  Log real price of Chicken        -1.376 *      1.396 *    -0.00174   -0.0229 **      -0.00227   -0.0319 +              0.0729 **
  (yuan/kg)                         (0.650)      (0.695)   (0.00549)    (0.00837)     (0.00331)    (0.0179)                (0.0189)
  Log real price of Oil            -0.987 *       -0.745    0.00147    -0.00986 +      -0.00116  -0.0383 **              0.0499 **
  (yuan/liter)                      (0.465)      (0.487)   (0.00335)    (0.00551)     (0.00206)    (0.0111)                (0.0125)
  Log real price of Beer             0.203        -1.203   0.0255 **   -0.0319 **       0.00173   -0.0417 +                0.0594 *
  (yuan/bottle)                     (0.836)      (0.971)   (0.00729)    (0.00870)     (0.00226)    (0.0233)                (0.0249)
  Log real price of Cigarettes       0.497        -0.635    0.00456     0.00833 +      0.00148    -0.0188 *                0.00904
  (yuan/box)                        (0.394)      (0.404)   (0.00292)    (0.00469)     (0.00118)    (0.0096)                (0.0112)
                                                                                               +
  Non-Food Consumer Price         14.412 **    -18.103**    0.162 **      -0.0399      0.0133     -0.367 **                 0.226 *
  Index (100=urban Liaoning)        (2.997)      (3.646)    (0.0264)     (0.0344)     (0.00781)    (0.0892)                (0.0954)
  Observations                        8645         8645        8642         8642          8642        8642                   8642
  Number of Individuals               4120         4120        4120         4120          4120        4120                   4120
  Overall Statistic χ2(32)        965.25 **    958.79**    829.50 **    416.32 **      80.85 **  220.20 **               487.89 **
  Joint test of significance: all
                                   454.40 ** 465.39 **           584.25 **       93.72 **       34.04 **      152.78 **    190.30 **
  community variables χ2(18)
  Joint test of significance:
                                   209.81 ** 237.09 **           198.52 **       16.27 +          15.54       49.47 **     31.09 **
  urbanicity measures χ2(10)
  Joint test of significance:
                                    51.82 **     58.15 **         89.67 **       55.39 **        16.82 *      115.26 **    149.51 **
  price variables χ2(8)
  Notes: Controlling for height, time, age, marital status, living situation, education, and predicted household income. Robust
  standard errors in parentheses.
  + significant at 10%;* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                                                                                         36
     TABLE 4―RESULTS FROM ESTIMATING DETERMINANTS OF WEIGHT AMONG CHINESE MEN
                                                   Exogenous regressors               Two-step system GMM
Key Explanatory Variables                          (1)               (2)                 (3)              (4)
                                               0.395 **           0.393 **           1.643 **        1.592 **
Current Height (cm)
                                                (0.0317)          (0.0314)            (0.295)          (0.190)
                                               -0.941 **         -0.920 **             -3.468        -4.308 **
Age: 18-30
                                                 (0.307)           (0.306)            (2.217)          (1.724)
                                                  0.321            0.341 *             -1.194           -0.106
Age: 30-45
                                                 (0.169)           (0.169)            (1.366)         (1.0816)
                                                 1.300 *           1.0748             0.597 *          0.478 *
Last wave was in 2000
                                                 (0.592)           (0.606)            (0.271)          (0.232)
                                                1.664 **          1.513 **             0.265           0.0693
Last wave was in 2004
                                                 (0.604)           (0.610)            (0.477)          (0.398)
                                                  0.923             0.718              -0.132           -0.309
Last wave was in 2006
                                                 (0.681)           (0.693)            (0.613)          (0.516)
Lagged (t-1)
                                                 0.501 **          0.499 **            0.114 **         0.118 **
   Weight (kg)
                                                  (0.041)          (0.0408)            (0.0425)         (0.0329)
   Work & Domestic Physical activity          -0.00158 **        -0.00154 **        -0.00307 **       -0.00307 **
   level (METs-hours/week)                     (0.000495)         (0.000493)          (0.00125)        (0.000983)
                                                0.000170           0.000163           0.000146         0.0000762
   Total Caloric Intake (kcal)
                                                (0.00095)        (0.0000928)         (0.000157)        (0.000123)
                                                -0.00445                               0.174 **
   Energy from Fat (%)
                                                 (0.0166)                              (0.0426)
                                                 -0.0169                               0.125 **
   Energy from Carbohydrates (%)
                                                 (0.0159)                              (0.0428)
   Energy from Animal Source Foods                                   -0.0230                                  0.0630
   (%)                                                              (0.0221)                                 (0.0437)
                                                                    0.00125                                  0.0890 *
   Energy from Edible Oils & Fats (%)
                                                                    (0.0196)                                 (0.0411)
   Energy from Fruits and Vegetables                                 -0.0395                                  0.0178
   (%)                                                              (0.0251)                                 (0.0711)
                                                                     -0.0103                                  0.0429
   Energy from Whole grains (%)
                                                                    (0.0187)                                 (0.0419)
                                                                     -0.0195                                  0.0400
   Energy from Rice (%)
                                                                    (0.0177)                                 (0.0408)
                                                  -0.524 **        -0.524 **              0.559               0.903 *
   Smoker
                                                   (0.188)           (0.188)             (0.521)              (0.431)
                                                    0.262             0.294               0.713                0.457
   Drinker
                                                   (0.215)           (0.214)             (0.394)              (0.353)
                                                                                      Differenced Eq: Lagged Ziand Δ
                                                              None
                                                                                            community variables
Instruments                                   18 Community variables included as
                                                                                     Levels Eq: Lagged difference for
                                                        controls in model
                                                                                            Zi for (t-1) and prior
Number of Instruments used                                    None                          75                   99
Overall Statistic                            χ2(38)= 6510.32** χ2(41)= 6793.06** χ2(20)= 247.93** χ2(23)= 376.41**
Sargan/Hansen test of over-identification                                            χ2(54)= 79.62** χ2(75)= 132.09**
Test for Autocorrelation
   AR(1) in first differences (z-statistic)                                             -3.595 **           -3.934 **
   AR(2) in first differences (z-statistic)                                               -0.838               -0.422
N                                                   8,645               8,642             8,645                8,642
Unique individuals                                  4,120               4,120             4,120                4,120
Notes: Controlling for marital status, living situation, education, and predicted household income. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                                                                                37
                          TABLE 5―CONTRIBUTION OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND DIET ON WEIGHT GAIN: TWO EXAMPLES

 Example 5.1: Male who entered analysis in 1991 at 30 years old                   Explained by model (3)                       Explained by model (4)
 with secondary school education, stayed married, lives with              In kg       As % of          As % of         In kg        As % of         As % of
 family from a medium income household and who is a persistent                     actual weight      explained                  actual weight     explained
 smoker and drinker                                                                  change *          change                      change *         change
     If only age and time changed                                          5.77        80.31            89.03           5.02         69.92           87.37
     If age, time and average PA changed                                   6.24        86.91            96.34           5.49         76.53           95.63
     If age, time and average diet changed                                 6.00        83.62            92.69           5.27         73.42           91.74
     If age, time and average PA and diet changed                          6.48        90.21             100            5.75         80.03            100
     Contribution of change in PA on weight change                         0.47         6.60             7.31           0.47          6.6             8.26
     Contribution of changes in Diet on weight change                      0.23         3.31             3.66           0.25          3.5             4.37
 Example 5.2: Male who entered analysis in 1991 at 40 years old                   Explained by model (3)                       Explained by model (4)
 with primary school education, stayed married, lives with family         In kg       As % of          As % of         In kg        As % of         As % of
 from a low income household and who is a persistent smoker,                       actual weight      explained                  actual weight     explained
 but does not drink                                                                  change *          change                      change *         change
     If only age and time changed                                          3.94        54.91            84.72           2.34         32.53           76.31
     If age, time and average PA changed                                   4.42        61.51            94.91           2.81         39.14           91.81
     If age, time and average diet changed                                 4.18        58.22            89.83           2.59         36.02           84.49
     If age, time and average PA and diet changed                          4.65         64.81            100            3.06         42.63            100
     Contribution of change in PA in on weight change                      0.48         6.60            10.19           0.47          6.61           15.50
     Contribution of changes in Diet in on weight change                   0.24         3.31             5.11           0.25          3.49            8.18
 Notes: Derived by using observed average covariate values for at the baseline wave and their estimated coefficients, and putting them through Eq (2) from 1991
 to 2006. For covariates that changed, these were based off average values.
* Actual weight change between 1991 and 2006 was 7.18 kg




                                                                                                                                                             38
       TABLE 6―CONTRIBUTION OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND ENERGY FROM DIETARY FAT ON WEIGHT GAIN AMONG CHINESE MEN

                                       Observed 15 year change (1991-2006)              One-time change
                                       (1)            (2)               (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)
                                    Change    Coefficient from Contribution Average change Short run     Long run
                                  (1991-2006)      Table 4,           (1)x(2)  per year      (4)X(2)        (4)X(2)
                                               Column 3 or 4                                                  1-
Work & Domestic Physical                                            0.438 kg                             0.0330 kg
                                    -142.75       -0.00307                        -9.5      0.0292 kg
activity level (METs-hours/week)                                     (6.1 %)                                (6.9%)
                                                                   0.2072 kg                             0.0151 kg
Diet: Macronutrients
                                                                     (2.9 %)                                (3.2%)
                                                                   1.0562 kg                              0.0786 kg
    Energy from Fat (%)               6.07           0.174                         0.4      0.0696 kg
                                                                     (14.8 %)                              (16.4%)
                                                                    -0.849 kg                            -0.0635 kg
    Energy from Carbohydrates (%)    -6.79           0.125                      -0.45      -0.0563 kg
                                                                    (-11.8 %)                             (-13.2%)
                                                                   0.2727 kg                             0.0203 kg
Diet: Food sources
                                                                     (3.8 %)                               (4.2 %)
   Energy from Animal Source                                       0.2268 kg                              0.0171 kg
                                      3.60           0.063                        0.24     0.01512 kg
   Foods (%)                                                         (3.16 %)                             (3.56 %)
   Energy from Edible Oils & Fats                                    0.564 kg                            0.04224 kg
                                      6.34           0.089                        0.42     0.03738 kg
   (%)                                                               (7.86 %)                               (8.8 %)
   Energy from Fruits and                                         -0.0041 kg                             -0.0004 kg
                                     -0.23          0.0178                      -0.02     -0.000356 kg
   Vegetables (%)                                                  (-0.006 %)                             (-0.08 %)
                                                                    -0.135 kg                            -0.0102 kg
   Energy from Whole grains (%)      -3.15          0.0429                       -0.21    -0.009009 kg
                                                                    (-1.88 %)                              (2.12 %)
                                                                    -0.379 kg                           -0.00285 kg
   Energy from Rice (%)              -9.48           0.040                       -0.63     -0.0252 kg
                                                                    (-5.28 %)                             (-5.94 %)
Weight                                  7.18                                     0.48

Notes: Where  is the coefficient of lagged weight (0.114 to 0.118)




                                                                                                                  39
                68                                                                  24
                             Weight          Body Mass Index

                66

                                                                                    23
  Weight (kg)




                64




                                                                                         BMI
                62
                                                                                    22

                60


                58                                                                  21
                     1990   1994          1998           2002           2006
                                           Year

        FIGURE 1. WEIGHT AND BODY MASS INDEX OF ADULT MEN IN CHINA FROM 1991 TO 2006

Source: China Health and Nutrition Surveys 1991, 1993, 1997, 2000, 2004 and 2006.




                                                                                               40
                                                    400
                                                                          Domestic physical activity




               Physical Activity (MET-hours/week)
                                                                          Work physical activity

                                                    350




                                                    300




                                                    250




                                                    200
                                                    1990      1994       1998        2002          2006

                                                                          Year

                                FIGURE 2A. CHANGE IN WORK AND DOMESTIC ACTIVITY

                                                    3200
                                                               Total daily caloric intake (kcals) 30%
                                                               Energy from Fat (%)
    Total caloric intake (kcals/day)




                                                                                                   28%

                                                                                                          Energy from dietary fat (%)
                                                    3000


                                                                                                   26%

                                                    2800

                                                                                                   24%


                                                    2600
                                                                                                   22%



                                                    2400                                           20%
                                                       1990   1994      1998     2002       2006

                                                                        Year

FIGURE 2B. CHANGE IN TOTAL CALORIC INTAKE AND ENERGY FROM FAT




                                                                                                                                        41
                      100%
                                                                                 Other
                      90%

                      80%                                                      Grains

                      70%                                                 Fruits and vegetables
  % of total energy




                      60%                                                   Oils and Fats

                      50%                                                  Animal Source
                                                                               Foods
                      40%

                      30%

                      20%                                                         Rice

                      10%

                       0%
                         1991         1994        1997          2000      2003              2006
                                                         Year

                             FIGURE 2C. CHANGE ENERGY FROM VARIOUS FOOD SOURCES

Notes: Only among adult (18-55 year old) men.
Source: China Health and Nutrition Surveys 1991, 1993, 1997, 2000, 2004 and 2006.




                                                                                                   42
                                Market accessibility       Communication
                     9
                                Education facilities       Economic
                                Housing                    Sanitation
                     8


                     7
      Score (0-10)




                     6


                     5


                     4


                     3
                         1990   1994           1998        2002             2006
                                                 Year

 FIGURE 3. AVERAGE CHANGE IN SELECT URBANICITY DOMAINS AMONG COMMUNITIES IN CHINA
                                 FROM 1991 TO 2006

Source: China Health and Nutrition Surveys 1991, 1993, 1997, 2000, 2004 and 2006.




                                                                                    43
                                                                         14




                                                                         12




                                     Real price of oil (2006 yuan/kg)    10




                                                                          8




                                                                          6




                                                                          4
                                                                              1990   1994   1998   2002   2006
                                                                                            Year
    FIGURE 4A. CHANGE IN REAL PRICE OF OIL ACROSS THE 10 MOST POPULOUS COMMUNITIES

                                                                        5.5
                   Real price of flour (2006 yuan/kg)




                                                                        4.5




                                                                        3.5




                                                                        2.5




                                                                        1.5
                                                                              1990   1994   1998   2002   2006
                                                                                            Year
  FIGURE 4B. CHANGE IN REAL PRICE OF FLOUR ACROSS THE 10 MOST POPULOUS COMMUNITIES

Source: China Health and Nutrition Surveys 1991, 1993, 1997, 2000, 2004 and 2006.



                                                                                                                 44
