                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ONE FOR THE ROAD:
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION, ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION, AND INTOXICATED DRIVING

                                         C. Kirabo Jackson
                                        Emily Greene Owens

                                        Working Paper 15872
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w15872


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




The authors wish to thank Sarah Bohn, Christopher Carpenter, Stephanie Cellini, Matthew Freedman,
Donald Kenkel, Jordan Matsudaira, Timothy Moore, Jonah Rockoff, Alex Tabarrok, and seminar participants
at George Washington University, UC - Berkeley, PPIC, the 2009 ASSA meetings, and the 2009 IZA
conference on the Economics of Risky Behavior for helpful comments, as well as Charlea Jackson
of the Washington Metropolitan Police Department for providing us with access to arrest data. Michael
Shores provided valuable research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by C. Kirabo Jackson and Emily Greene Owens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
One for the Road: Public Transportation, Alcohol Consumption, and Intoxicated Driving
C. Kirabo Jackson and Emily Greene Owens
NBER Working Paper No. 15872
April 2010
JEL No. I18,R49

                                             ABSTRACT

We exploit arguably exogenous train schedule changes in Washington DC to investigate the relationship
between public transportation provision, the risky decision to consume alcohol, and the criminal decision
to engage in alcohol–impaired driving. Using a triple differences strategy, we provide evidence that
overall there was little effect on DUI arrests, alcohol related fatal traffic and alcohol related arrests.
However, we find that these overall effects mask considerable heterogeneity across geographic areas
and spatial shifting. Specifically, we find that areas close to bars that are within walking distance to
Metro stations experience increases in alcohol related arrests and decreases in DUI arrests.


C. Kirabo Jackson
Cornell University, ILR School
Department of Labor Economics
Ives Hall East
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
and NBER
ckj5@cornell.edu

Emily Greene Owens
Cornell University
ego5@cornell.edu
I       Introduction

        In 2007, over 1 million drivers were arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol1

while there are 159 million self-reported episodes of alcohol–impaired driving among U.S. adults

each year [Quinlan et al. (2005)]. During 2005, 17,602 people in the U.S. died in alcohol-related

motor vehicle crashes, representing 41% of all traffic-related deaths2 and it is estimated that

alcohol-related crashes in the U.S. cost about $51 billion each year [Blincoe et al. (2002)].3 The

Center for Disease Control at the Department of Health and Human Services provides a variety

of policy recommendations to reduce the incidence of alcohol-impaired driving.4 Virtually all

these policies involve stricter laws, harsher penalties, and more aggressive enforcement intended

to either increase the penalties associated with drinking while driving or to decrease general

alcohol consumption among youth. In this paper, we evaluate the impact of public policy aimed

at reducing the probability that a drinker gets behind the wheel of a car.

        It is a commonly held belief that the provision of accessible public transportation could

reduce the incidence of DUIs. For example, the popular press regularly prints articles blaming

high DUI incidence on the lack of public transportation.5 Both public and private organizations

provide transportation to drinkers in order to reduce DUIs – for example both the MillerCoors

and Anheuser-Busch Brewing Companies provide free transportation on popular holidays to and

from “member” bars. The slogan of a current Illinois campaign to reduce DUI incidence is

"designate a driver - stay overnight - use public transportation."6 However, there is virtually no

evidence on the relationship between the provision of public transportation and drunk driving,


1
  Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics Online: http://www.albany.edu/sourcebook/pdf/t4272007.pdf
2
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/810821.PDF
3
  http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/factsheets/drving.htm
4
  The complete list is available on their website. See appendix for webpage.
5
  Marsha Dorgan (Oct 22, 2008) "CHP DUI checkpoint results" Napa Valley Register , Alan K. Category (Oct 2
2008) The Drunk Driving Situation in Los Angeles , Mutineer Magazine
6
  http://www.cyberdriveillinois.com/publications/pdf_publications/dsd_a1495.pdf


                                                      2
and no empirical quantitative evidence that providing public transportation would actually

reduce the incidence of drunk driving. This lack of credible evidence is due, in large part, to the

fact that alteration of public transportation, particularly fixed rail service, requires a huge

investment in infrastructure and thus rarely changes.

        Between November 5th, 1999 and July 4th 2003, Washington DC’s Metro system

gradually extended its weekend operating hours. We exploit the sequential expansion of

Washington DC Metro’s late night service to identify how risky behavior changes in response to

public transit. 7 Because the changes in schedule allow us to observe the same geographic area

on the same day of the week during the same time of day, both with and without public

transportation availability, one can use the changes in hours of operation of fixed rail

transportation in D.C. to conduct a credible investigation into the relationship between public

transportation provision and the incidence of alcohol–impaired driving.

        Public transportation may have had a perverse effect on alcohol consumption outside of

the home, what we refer to as “risky” alcohol consumption. As such, we also investigate the

relationship between public transportation provision and alcohol-related crimes. We also test for

evidence of an overall spillover effects in Metro accessible areas on days when late night Metro

service was not provided.

         Using a difference in difference in difference identification strategy, where Thursday

serves as our comparison day of the week, we find that the aggregate impact of public

transportation on risky behavior on Friday and Saturday evenings is small. However, in

neighborhoods where bars are located within walking distance of a Metro station there were

sizable reductions in alcohol-impaired driving arrests for each additional hour of Metro


7
 In addition to Washington, DC, Boston’s Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority and Austin’s Capital Metro
Authority introduced late night service with the last ten years.


                                                      3
availability after midnight. We also find evidence of moral hazard in the form of increased

alcohol related arrests (our proxy for excessive alcohol consumption outside of the home) in

these neighborhoods. When this increase in potential drunk drivers is taken into account, the

localized reduction in DUIs per drinker becomes quite large. The fact that alcohol related arrests

and DUI arrests move in the opposite direction is compelling evidence that our effects are not

driven by secular changes in overall crime8 and we conduct a variety of tests to support the

validity of our identification strategy. We also find evidence consistent with a spillover effect on

Thursday nights in areas where bars are located near Metro stations, implying that our main

estimates of outcomes on Friday and Saturday evenings should be interpreted as lower bounds of

the true behavioral change.

         This paper presents the first credible evidence on the relationship between public

transportation on drunk driving and alcohol consumption (both in areas directly served by public

transportation and for the Metropolitan area as a whole). The behavioral effects estimated imply

that even intoxicated individuals respond to incentives in a rational way, a point of contention in

the research literature on criminal behavior. While we examine different populations, our spatial

pattern of results is also consistent research in urban economics on the localized effects of public

transit on worker mobility.9

         The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II outlines the extant literature on

alcohol consumption, crime and public transportation, and provides institutional detail of the

Washington DC Metro expansion. Section III presents the analytical framework describing how

public transportation may affect drunk driving and drinking behaviors, section VI presents the

8
  We cannot exclude reallocation of police resources away from drunk driving to what are by and large nuisance
crimes, although given the high social cost, and high profile, of drunk driving this seems an unlikely policy decision.
9
  The localized effects of public transportation on crime are consistent with research documenting that public
transportation only affects worker commuting patterns of residents within 2 km of businesses within 6 miles of fixed
rail transportation [Baum-Snow and Kahn 2000; Holzer et al 2003]


                                                          4
empirical strategy, section V presents the results and section VII concludes.

II          Alcohol Consumption, Crime, and Public Transportation

i. Alcohol consumption and crime

            The decision to drive while intoxicated is twofold: the risky decision to drink excessively

outside of the home and the criminal decision to drive home once inebriated. There is a large

literature in economics on the first component of this decision. Economists have found that

alcohol consumption can be reduced by increasing alcohol prices or taxes [Kenkel (1996);

Chaloupka et al. (1993); Cook and Moore (1993a),(2002); Kenkel and Manning (1996); and

Leung and Phelps (1993)] enforcing minimum drinking age laws [O’Malley and Wagenaar

(1991)] and imposing harsher legal penalties on the frequency of alcohol consumption [Kenkel

(1993)]. However, the extant literature has not evaluated policies aimed at reducing the social

harm associated with risky alcohol use. We aim to fill this gap in the literature by investigating

how the provision of public transportation reduces the rate at which alcohol consumption

translates into socially costly DUI incidents.

            Conditional on alcohol consumption, individuals must then evaluate the criminal decision

to drive home once inebriated. As stated in Becker (1968) “a person commits a crime if the

expected utility to him exceeds the utility he could get by using his time and other resources at

other activities”.10 Researchers have primarily focused on one side of this equation – reducing

the prevalence of crime through policies intended to increase the expected private costs of illicit

behavior. However, since decisions to commit crime are also a function of the opportunity cost

of illicit behavior, crime could theoretically be reduced by increasing the private benefit of not

offending. We will refer to this mechanism as the “safer option”.

            Policies of this nature have been criticized on the grounds that providing less risky
10
     See Doob and Webster (2003) and Levitt (2002) for reviews of the literature on risky behavior and deterrence.


                                                            5
alternatives to certain externally costly actions (e.g. drunk driving) could hurt society overall by

increasing the likelihood that persons engage in other undesirable behaviors (e.g. excessive

drinking in bars) [Boyum and Reuter (1996)]. These policies may introduce a moral hazard – by

providing a safer way to engage in socially undesirable behaviors, one makes socially

undesirable behavior more attractive to individuals who do not internalize the full social costs of

their actions [Pauly (1974); Holmstrom (1979)]. In fact, in severe cases such well-intentioned

solutions could cause more harm than good [Hansen and Imrohoroglu (1992)].11 While public

transportation may lower the probability that a risky drinker drives home, it may also increase

the amount of alcohol consumed outside of the home which has a potentially large social cost. In

addition, since drinking is a social activity [Boisjoly et al. 2003, Norton et al.(1998)], the reduced

costs of alcohol consumption for a few individuals could result in an increase in the total

number of DUIs, even if the policy reduces the propensity of a given drinker to drive drunk.

        With these moral hazards in mind, we look not only at how the availability of late

transportation affects DUI arrests, but also its potentially deleterious effects on risky alcohol

consumption. As this policy change reduces the private cost of drinking in bars, a-priori, we

would expect public alcohol consumption to increase as Metro service expands, as alcohol

consumption is quite responsive to price changes [Chaloupka et al. 2002]. However, it is unclear

how total alcohol consumption changes as the cost of public alcohol consumption falls. To the

extent that individuals respond to the increase in public transportation by shifting their drinking

behavior from the home to a bar, total alcohol consumption could go do down as the marginal

cost of alcohol is higher at a bar (where you pay per drink) than an at home (where you pay per

bottle). However, for policy purposes, alcohol consumed outside of the home is decidedly more


11
  Researchers have linked abortion access to increased sexual activity [Klick and Stratmann (2003)] and
improvements in the treatment of AIDS/HIV to risky sexual behavior [Sood and Goldman (2006)].


                                                        6
“risky” from a social perspective since the external costs of someone drinking in their own home

are likely low (if that the individual has internalized the risk to their future health) while

excessive drinking outside the home can impose substantial costs on others.12

        An increase in risky drinking could potentially have large negative social consequences.

Approximately 40% of individuals under criminal justice supervision report being under the

influence of alcohol at the time of offense [Greenfeld (1998)], and alcohol is the only mood

altering substance shown to increase violent behavior in a laboratory setting [Miczek et al.

(1994)]. In addition, there is a large and growing literature demonstrating a positive correlation

between alcohol consumption and crime [Markowitz and Grossman (2000); Joksch and Jones

(1993); Carpenter (2008); Dobkin and Carpenter (2008); Cook and Moore (1993b)].

ii. Public transportation in Washington, D.C.

        The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) officially received a

charter from the Maryland, Virginia, Washington DC, and federal governments in 1966. The

WMATA operates a bus service, MetroBus, and a fixed rail transit service, MetroRail, hereafter

the “Metro.”13 The Metro was originally intended to service commuters from the Maryland and

Virginia suburbs, not DC residents or individuals engaging in leisure activity; there are 106 miles

of Metro track on five lines, with 86 Metro stations, but Metro does not provide equal service to

all parts of the city.14 In Figure 1 we show the location of each Metro station entry point,

obtained from the DC government’s GIS database,15 as well as each bar in Washington DC.16



12
   Indeed, actions that might impose essentially no cost of society at home may be considered socially harmful if
done in public. For example, urinating in your own back yard does not impose much cost of society, while urinating
in public is indecent exposure.
13
   MetroBus has always operated for 24 hours a day along routes designed to service DC resident. For more
information on the difference between MetroBus and Metro see www.wmata.com/about_Metro/docs/Metrofacts. pdf
14
   For example, the Georgetown neighborhood has no Metro stations, as Georgetown University faculty has
traditionally lived in that neighborhood.
15
   http://dcatlas.dcgis.dc.gov/catalog/results.asp?pretype=All&pretype_info=All&alpha=M


                                                        7
Note that the highest concentration of Metro stations is in the central city, and then radiating

outwards. Bars, on the other hand, are distributed more evenly across the city, with the

exception of Southwest DC.

         In 1999, Metro made two significant expansions in its service. First, on September 18th,

the two “Green” lines, which extended from the outskirts of DC into northern or central Prince

George’s County and service both the University of Maryland and Howard University, were

connected through downtown. The second Metro change is the focus of our analysis. Prior to

November of 1999, the last Metro trains left the center of Washington, DC at midnight, seven

days a week.17 With an eye on serving a “younger rider, who is out on the town, [and] probably

could be drinking,”18 beginning on November 5th, 1999, the Metro system remained open for

one additional hour on Friday and Saturday nights (technically Saturday and Sunday early

mornings). This first expansion was considered a success, and Friday and Saturday evening

service hours were extended to 2 am on July 1st 2000. A final schedule change occurred on July

4th 2003, in which late night service was extended until 3 am. This last schedule change also

extended morning service on the weekends, moving opening hours from 8 am to 7 am on

Saturdays and Sundays. It is clear from Figure 2 that while there is a fair amount of noise in the

month to month variation in ridership, the relationship between Metro ridership after 7 pm and

before 7 pm was similar across days of the week during the first Metro schedule, with clear

seasonal cyclicality and an upward trend that is evidence on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday.19

         To show that the schedule changes lead to the expected "treatment", (i.e. a



16
   During rush hour the expected wait time is 2 to 3 minutes, and after the evening rush hour that expected wait time
is between 7 and 10 minutes. Roughly half of Metro stations (47) are underground, and all of the stations are
controlled access, are well lit, and are monitored by both cameras and security guards during operating hours.
17
   For additional detail on Metro and MetroBus service, see www.wmata.com/about_Metro/docs/Metrofacts.pdf
18
   Jim Graham, The Washington Post, 9/17/1999
19
   This pattern is evident on all days of the week, but for purposes of clarity, we show only these three days.


                                                          8
disproportionate increase in evening ridership on the weekend) in Figure 3 we present the

natural log of ridership on Friday late night (one of the days for which the schedule changed)

minus the natural log of ridership on Thursday late night (during which there was no schedule

change). For comparison we also show the natural log of ridership on Friday early evening minus

the natural log of ridership on Thursday during early evening, (during which there are no

schedule changes for either Thursday or Friday). Thursday is a uniquely appealing counterfactual

to the weekend in Washington DC; roughly 12% of all working adults in the DC Metro area are

federal government employees [Perrins and Nilsen (2006)],20 and in1999 the Office of Personnel

Management estimated that half of government workers use an alternative work schedule (AWS

in which they do not work every other Friday, substantially higher than the private sector.21

Combined with the large population of college students (who tend to go out drinking on

Thursday evenings) enrolled in seven major universities, Thursday night is arguably closer to a

weekend night in Washington DC than in any other city in the United States. We present further

evidence of the suitability of Thursday night as a comparison for Friday and Saturday evenings

in Section IV. Using Thursday ridership as our baseline for comparison, the schedule changes

affect ridership exactly as one would expect ─ (a) late evening ridership increased on Fridays

relative to Thursday late evening ridership with each successive change and (b) there was no

discernable change in the relationship between early evening ridership on Fridays relative to

early evening on Thursdays.

          We also present Wednesday ridership relative to Thursday ridership on the left panel. As

one might expect, the schedule changes do not change the relationship between ridership on

Wednesdays and Thursdays during any time of day — suggesting that the schedule changes


20
     http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2006/12/art1full.pdf
21
     www.mith2.umd.edu/WomensStudies/GenderIssues/WomenInWorkforce/Work+FamilyNeeds/01introduction


                                                   9
affected late night ridership on the weekend, but not other days of the week.22

         It is clear that there is a large amount of cyclical variation in late evening and early

evening ridership that is common to Friday and Thursdays. Using a difference in difference in

difference strategy that subtracts the increase in late night ridership on Thursdays (relative to the

PM ridership) from the change on Fridays and Saturdays, we estimate that approximately 7%

more one-way trips were taken on weekend nights for each additional hour of Metro service.23

There were an average of 137,150 one way trips made each night on Fridays and Saturdays prior

to the first schedule change so that our estimates suggest that more than 1,065 additional people

may have been added to the DC nightlife as Metro service increased.24

III      Analytic Framework

         In this section we present a simple model that links alcohol consumption and intoxicated

driving to public transportation, provide some intuition for the possible moral hazard created by

Metro’s expanded late night service, and present a framework that would explain both temporal

and geographic shifting of drinking activities toward areas and times when the private costs are

lowest and the private benefits are highest.

         A simple coordination game, combined with basic consumer demand and production

theory can be used to analyze the potential effects of the expanded Metro hours of operation on

DUI behaviors and on drinking behaviors.

         The consumer problem: Individuals demand a night out N, with price CN, and a numerair

good Y with price 1. Individual i’s utility from going out is an increasing function of aggregate


22
   A similar graph using Saturday and Thursday is available on request.
23
   Specifically, we estimate the parameters of the following model: Ln(Ridershipdtym)=βHoursdtym + µdt+Tym + εdtym
where Ridershipdtym is the number of one way trips taken on day of the week d at time of day t during year y and
month m, Hoursdtym is the number of hours that Metro is open during that period, µdt is a vector of day of the week
by time of day fixed effects, and a T is a set of year and month fixed effects,
24
   In appendix Table A1, we present full regression results, showing that this estimate is robust to a relaxation of
parametric assumptions


                                                         10
going out for others in the population i ' , so such that individual i’s maximizes utility

         U i  fi ( g ( N ,i ' ), Y ) s.t. the budget constraint   Ei  Yi  N i  CN                     [1].

Aggregate going out for others in the population is i '   i 'i N i ' and g / i '  0 . The
                                                                          I




parameter i ' , captures the fact that a night out drinking is a social activity.25 The utility

maximizing levels of the numereair good Y and night out are given by

(fi / Y ) / (fi / N i )  CN for individual i, so that individuals chose their desired level of nights

out based on the shape of their individual utility functions.

        The production of nights out: A night out is produced by combining two inputs, drinking

D and transportation T. There are two modes of transportation, driving a car T1 and taking the

train T2. The price of driving a car is p1, the price of taking the train is p2 and the price of

drinking is pd. The total price of a night out for individual i is

                                    CN  D  PDi  T1  P1  T2  P2i .                                   [2].

Where PDi is the individual i’s price of driving (determined by car ownership, the price of gas

etc.) and P2i is individual i’s price of public transportation (determined by Metro ticket prices,

taxi rates, Metro availability, and Metro accessibility). When there is no public transportation

available P2i   i . The provision of transportation constitutes a reduction in the price of

taking the train from infinity to P2i such that 0  P2i   .

        Prediction 1: As the price of taking the train falls, the demand for driving falls as long as

25
  Consistent with this notion, the amount of alcohol one consumes is believed to be a positive function of the
amount of alcohol others around you are drinking [Cook and Moore (2000)] and Metro’s publicity campaign
highlighted late night activities downtown using the phrase “Metro Opens Doors to Late Night Fun”. Promotion of
Metro’s expanded hours enhanced public awareness of downtown alcohol venders. The Washington Post
characterized the service change as targeted at bar patrons, and Metro’s publicity campaign highlighted late night
activities downtown. The opening scene of the televised ad campaign showed a pair of Metro doors opening onto a
crowded bar, and the words ‘Metro Opens Doors to Late Night Fun” The commercial can be viewed at
http://www.lmo.com/case_studies-change_behavior.html


                                                          11
modes of transportation are gross substitutes and they are both normal inputs.

       Prediction 2: As the price of taking the train falls, the cost of a night out decreases so that

demand for a night out goes up, as long as a night out is a normal good.

       Prediction 3: As the price of taking the train falls, the cost of a night out decreases and

the demand for drinking goes up as long as a night out is a normal input.

       Prediction 4: Since going out for person i and going out for person i' are strategic

complements, as the price of taking the train falls, individual demand for a night out goes up, so

that aggregate demand for a night out goes up, which in turn, increases demand for a night out.

In equilibrium, there is an increase in aggregate going out and an increase in aggregate drinking.

       Prediction 5: In equilibrium, the effect on aggregate intoxicated driving is ambiguous.

Because the number of individuals who go out drinking will increase, if the fraction of drinkers

who drive home falls is not large enough, there may be a net increase in total intoxicated driving.

Alternatively, as more bar patrons use the Metro, the amount of alcohol consumed by any given

bar patron’s peers, including drivers, will rise.

       Prediction 6: If going out on the weekend and going out during the week are substitutes,

on the margin, some individuals who would have gone out on Thursdays will go out during the

weekend. Also, if a night out in one area is substitutable for going out in another, as the price of

going out declines in areas close to Metro stations, individuals will substitute going out in areas

far away from Metro stations to areas with Metro stations.

IV     Data

       The effect of extended Metro service on the price of taking the train will be directly

proportional to how close Metro stations are to bars. The spatial pattern of expected effects (i.e.

larger effect in areas with bars serviced by Metro stations) will be critical to our identification




                                                    12
strategy. To exploit geospatial variation in Metro access and access to alcohol, we divide DC

into neighborhoods based on Police Service Areas (PSAs). PSAs are relatively large making the

assumption that someone arrested for a DUI was drinking within the PSA somewhat tenable.26

The PSA boundaries are shown in Figure 1. We identify the number of bars within each PSA

using address information on establishments licensed to serve alcohol for on-premises

consumption provided by the DC Alcoholic Beverage Regulation Administration.27 While these

data are the stock of all existing bars in 2008, most neighborhoods known for late night

carousing, such as Adams Morgan (PSA 303) and Georgetown (PSA 206), have been under

liquor license moratoriums since the late 1990s (District of Columbia Municipal Regulations

Title 23 Chapter 3).28

         We present some basic summary statistics describing the PSAs in Table 1. The PSAs in

our sample have on average 19 alcohol venders in their borders (sd= 39.4), and just under one

half (47.8%) have a Metro station within their borders. For Metro service to affect drinking

behaviors, it should be the case that transportation from bars within the PSAs to a Metro station

is sufficiently small, what we call “Metro accessible.” We measure the spatial pattern of bars

and Metro stations by constructing circles with radii of 100 meters, 400 meters or 800 meters

around each Metro station. We then calculate, by PSA, the number of bars that are within each of

these areas.29 Increasing the size of the circle we draw around Metro stations increases the

number of Metro accessible bars, but we predict that one additional bar within 100 meters of a

Metro will induce a larger change in drinking behavior relative to one additional bar a half a mile


26
   See FAQs about PSA boundaries: http://mpdc.dc.gov/mpdc/cwp/view,a,1239,q,543455.asp
27
   Note that this includes restaurants.
28
   Two neighborhoods, U Street (PSA 305) and H Street (PSA 102), have large numbers of bars in our database due
to highly visible neighborhood revitalization efforts in the early 2000s. As information on alcohol venders in these
two neighborhoods is functionally missing, we exclude these two PSAs from our analysis, although our empirical
results are qualitatively identical if we include information from these two PSAs.
29
   Note that the Metro station and bar do not have to be in the same PSA.


                                                         13
away. Because residential neighborhoods may have different types of nightlife than commercial

districts, we also obtained the DC Police department’s estimate of the number of children

(people under 18 years old) living in each PSA.

     Our measures of intoxicated driving and alcohol consumption are based on intoxicated

driving and alcohol related arrest data from Washington DC’s Metropolitan Police Department

(MPD), respectively. The data set contains information on all arrests made between 1998 and

2007, and includes information on the primary charge, date and time of the arrest, as well as the

location of arrest.30 We code as DUI arrests (driving under the influence arrests) all arrests listed

as DUIs, DWIs (driving while intoxicated), and refusing to submit to a breathalyzer. While all

crimes are more likely to occur if the victim or offender has been drinking, we argue that certain

types of offenses are more likely to be associated with excessive drinking in bars than others. As

such, we code as alcohol related arrests, crimes that we consider most likely to be committed by

individuals with an otherwise low criminal propensity, but have engaged in excessive drinking.

These offenses include urinating in public, obscene gestures, drinking in public, possession of

open alcohol containers, or defacing a building, as well as crimes for which victims may have

been at higher risk due to their own excessive drinking (e.g. simple assault, unarmed robbery,

attempted sexual assault without a weapon, indecent exposure, indecent sexual proposal).31

While alcohol related arrests will not be a perfect proxy for total alcohol consumption, they are

good proxies for alcohol consumption in commercial establishments such as bars or restaurants,




30
   We exclude all arrests occurring on New Year’s Eve, during which there is unusual drinking behavior and DC
bars are allowed to operate until 4 am. Our results are robust to the inclusion of these observations.
31
   Simple assault constitutes 22 % of alcohol related arrests, open container violations 19%, “Other” misdemeanor
arrests 18%, and disorderly conduct arrests 11%. Note that serious crime, such as aggravated assaults and forcible
rape are excluded from “alcohol related” crimes. While these offenses may be positively correlated with alcohol
consumption, variation in these crimes will likely also be driven by other individual factors, making them unsuitable
proxies for alcohol consumption outside of the home.


                                                         14
which is the primary concern in this paper.32

         Because forward looking individuals decide on their drinking driving and going out

actions based on the anticipated availability of the Metro service at the end of the evening,

changes in behavior caused by Metro changes between 2 am and 3 am may manifest themselves

in changes in arrests hours before, and would typically not occur only between 2 am and 3 am.

In addition, Metro “closing hours” correspond to when trains leave stations in the center of DC

in all directions (roughly 30 minutes from the end of each line) so that depending on whether an

individual is traveling inbound or outbound, the last train going “home” from any given station

could be up to 30 minutes before 30 minutes after official closing hours.33 We address both these

issues by parsing each day into three time “blocks” – 5 am to 6 pm (day time), 6 pm to 10 pm

(evening) and 10 pm to 5 am the next morning (late night). Since we have data on the exact time

of the arrest (unlike the Metro ridership data) we can differentiate between the evening and the

late night – a central distinction for our identification strategy. Since the fourth Metro schedule

change affected the day time hours as well as the late night hours, we limit our analysis to

evening and late night hours only.

         To construct out final dataset, we link each arrest to its PSA (with the associated Metro

proximity and bar data) and aggregate our merged data into PSA × Month × Day of the Week ×

Time of Day cells. To avoid any classification error, we exclude observations that correspond

with the exact dates of schedule changes (that is, weekend late night observations during the


32
   As there are roughly one half as many arrests for “drunk and disorderly” behavior, in our primary analysis we will
use our broad measure of alcohol related arrests, as it is continuously defined. However, our results are robust to
using this other measure of public alcohol consumption.
33
   Specifically, if 75% of individuals drinking around a Metro station, in the center of the city, were headed
westbound, the last train would leave at 12:10. For the 25% of drinkers eastbound, the last train would leave at 12
am. On the perimeter of the city, the last train westbound would leave at 11:49 pm and at 12:21am eastbound.
Individuals wishing to transfer Metro lines are bound by the last train line at their transfer point (not all of which are
close to the city center) Without knowing where the drinkers around any given station are headed, this essentially
creates a window of unknown size around each station when the technically “last train” leaves an given station.


                                                           15
months of September 1999 and July of 2003).34 The final dataset has 73,218 observations, for all

7 days of the week, 2 times of day (late evening and early evening) across 44 PSAs. These data

are summarized in Table 2, where we report means for our entire sample, Fridays and Saturdays

only, and Thursday through Saturday.

        One econometric issue is immediately apparent. Even aggregating across an entire

month, only 12% of PSA × Month × Day of the Week × Time of Day cells have any DUI arrests.

While DUIs are relatively more common when we restrict our attention to weekends, DUI arrests

occur less than 18% of the time. Arrests that we define as “Alcohol-Related” are more common,

with arrests occurring in roughly half of our observations, and also occur more frequently on the

weekend.35 Table 3 confirms that most cells with any arrests have only one arrest. Our

dependant variable is an integer which takes on only positive values. However, in situations

where most of the variation in the dependant variable is binary in nature, count models can yield

misleading conclusions, as count models estimate partial elasticities that are undefined over most

of the distribution of the dependant variable. This issue will motivate and inform our

econometric specification.

V       Empirical Strategy

        There are two sources of variation in public transportation that can be exploited: (1) the

temporal difference in provision by comparing outcomes when public transportation is provided

to times when it is not; (2) the spatial variation by comparing outcomes in areas where there are

many bars close to Metro stations to those of areas where Metro stations are not located near any

bars. In our first pass, we estimate the effect of Metro service on intoxicated driving and risky


34
  We also exclude December 31st in all years from our analysis prior to aggregation.
35
  Notably, arrests for behavior that we designate as non-alcohol related, which includes more serious felonies and
weapons violations, are actually slightly more common on Thursdays than Fridays and Saturdays, which is
consistent with our assertion that they are less reliable proxies for drinking outside of the home.


                                                        16
alcohol consumption using only the temporal variation. This is a good starting point because it

identifies the effect overall for all geographic areas. Exploiting both sources of variation, we then

expand our model to see if the time effects we observe are stronger in areas with bars close to

Metro stations.

i. Temporal variation

       When there is a set public transportation schedule (e.g., trains always run at 10 pm and

never run at 5am), it is impossible to separate a time of day effect from a public transportation

effect. To identify Metro availability effects, one needs to compare outcomes during the same

time of day (and day of the week) when Metro is available to when Metro is not available. In

principle, a simple first difference strategy would only use data from Friday and Saturday late

nights and compare outcomes before and after schedule changes. However, since the schedule

changes may have coincided with other potentially confounding changes over time, like the

Green line connection, this is unlikely to isolate the effect of Metro access on the outcomes.

       To account for possible confounding time effects, one could use one of two difference in

difference (DID) strategies: (1) one that compares the difference between outcomes before and

after the schedule changes on Friday and Saturday late evenings to the difference between

outcomes before and after the schedule changes on Friday and Saturday afternoons, or (2) one

that compares the difference between outcomes before and after the schedule changes on Friday

and Saturday late evenings to the difference between outcomes before and after the schedule

changes on Thursday late evenings. The first DID approach relies of the assumption that any

changes over time, such as variation in BAC laws, affect both late night and evening outcomes

the same. While this is a reasonable assumption, since we might expect certain changes to

differentially affect risky alcohol consumption at night this assumption may not be desirable. The




                                                 17
second DID approach relies of the assumption that any changes over time affect late night

outcomes during the weekends and on Thursdays the same. While this assumption is also

reasonable, there may be changes over time that affect outcomes on the weekends, but not on

Thursdays that could confound the results.

       To address both these concerns with the two DID models, we propose another round of

differencing, using the difference between outcomes in the late night to those in the early

evening before and after the schedule changes on Thursday (when there were no changes in

Metro hours of operation over time) as the counterfactual change in outcomes for Friday and

Saturday (when there were changes in the Metro’s hours of operation over time). As we point out

in the theoretical section, there may be shifting of drinking from Thursday night toward Friday

and Saturday nights. Since, the DIDID strategy described above relies on the assumption that the

schedule change did not lead to shifting of activity from Thursday to Friday and Saturday, we

present empirical support for this assumption in section IViii. We also show that the results

obtained using the DIDID models are similar to those from both the DID models — indicating

that our findings are robust to different identifying assumptions.

       To justify our use of Thursday as our comparison day, Appendix Figures A1 and A2

show the incidence of DUI arrests and alcohol related arrests by hour between 8pm and 5am. A

few key patterns are apparent; (1) most DUI arrests take place between 10 pm and 3 am on

Thursday through Saturday evenings, (2) alcohol related arrests peek at 8 pm and again around

2am, and (3) the time profile of DUI and alcohol related arrests on Friday and Saturdays are

much better tracked by movements on Thursdays that any other day of the week. These patterns

suggest that focusing on the late evening period is most appropriate for analyzing the effects of

policy on DUI and alcohol related arrests and that Thursday is a good (and clearly the best)




                                                18
comparison day of the week for Fridays and Saturday evenings.

       To implement this Difference-in-Difference-in-Difference (DIDID) model we estimate (1)

below by OLS using late evening and PM outcomes data from Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays.

(1)                    Yismdt    Hourssdt  i  isd  ist  idt  m   isdt

In equation (1) Yismdt is the outcome in PSA i during schedule s on month m on day d for time of

day t. Hourssdt is the number of hours the Metro is in operation during time of day t during

schedule s on day d. Since the number of hours of late night service varies at the schedule by day

of the week by time of day level, we include all the two way interactions effects for each PSA

(PSA by schedule by time of day effect μisd, PSA by schedule by day of the week effects μist, and

PSA by time of day by day of the week effects μidt). The matrix T includes year fixed effects and

month fixed effects. In (3), β identifies the change in the difference between late night outcomes

and early evening outcomes during the weekend and late night outcomes and early evening

outcomes on Thursdays associated with a one hour increase in late night Metro access.

       Our dependant variable is the number of arrests that occur in a given neighborhood i in a

given month m on day of the week d at time of day t. Following Cameron and Trivedi (1998)

since our arrests data are count data we present both (a) a linear probability model where the

outcome is equal to 1 if there were any arrests in a given month in a given PSA on a given day of

the week during a given time of day and (b) a log linear model, functionally equivalent to a

negative binomial count model, where the dependent variable is the natural log of the number of

arrests in a given month in a given PSA on a given day of the week during a given time of day

plus 1. Where there are very few arrests, as is the case with DUI arrests, the linear probability

model may be the most appropriate, while where the number of arrests is high as is the case for




                                                     19
alcohol related arrests, the log linear model will be most appropriate.36

ii. Spatial variation

         The second potential source of variation is spatial in nature. One expects that

neighborhoods with Metro stations will be more greatly affected by the availability of Metro

service than areas that are farther away from Metro stations. It is also reasonable to expect a

larger effect on alcohol related outcomes in neighborhoods with several drinking establishments

particularly if those drinking establishment are close to Metro stations. We test these hypotheses

by seeing if the marginal effects of Metro availability vary by geography, interacting Hourssdt

with measures of the number and location of bars within that PSA. Specifically we test if there

are larger effects in areas that have any Metro stations, areas than have a lot of drinking

establishments and areas where those drinking establishments are located near Metro.37 It is also

possible that there was shifting away from neighborhoods where bars were located far from

Metro stations to neighborhoods where bars were close to Metro. We will explore this

possibility by estimating equation (1) for each neighborhood, and directly examine the spatial

pattern of Metro effects.

VI       Results

i. Temporal variation

         Before turning to the regression results, we present visual evidence of our estimated
36
   While survey data suggest that intoxicated driving may be a common event, arrests for intoxicated driving are
rare. In fact, the average number of DUI and DWI arrests occurring in each PSA between 10pm and 5 am on Friday
and Saturday nights is 0.596. In fact, 87% of the time, there are no DUI arrests between 6 pm and 5 am in a PSA
during an entire month, and in only 5.6% of our primary sample (Thursdays through Saturdays, 6 pm to 5 am) are
there more than 2 DUI arrests.
37
   As in a count model, the estimated value of β is a partial elasticity. However, because of the expected spatial
heterogeneity in the effect of Metro service, we are primarily interested in the cross partial elasticities- ∂
Arrests/∂Hours∂Bars. In a log linear model, these effects are identical to the coefficients on the interactions terms.
In a non linear model, however, this is not the case. In fact, given that we are not able to credibly estimate the first
order effect of having a neighborhood bar on arrests (as the only variation is cross sectional) we are limited in our
ability to interpret a true count model. Technically, in a negative binomial model, the estimate of interest would be
(βB+HoursβHB)βH+BarsβHB(βB+(Hours x Bars)βHB)+βHB, and note that we are unable to estimate βB, the first order
effect of the number of bars. For further discussion of this issue, see Owens (2009).


                                                          20
effects. Specifically, we plot the data used to construct the DID estimates that compare late

evening outcomes on the weekends to the late evening outcomes on Thursdays. Figure 4 shows

the monthly alcohol related arrests for each month on Thursday late evenings and Friday late

evenings during each schedule. Vertical lines indicate the date of the schedule changes and the

horizontal lines indicate the mean for each schedule. During the first schedule, the number of

alcohol related arrests during Thursdays and those during the weekend move very closely

together – confirming our assumption that the movements in Thursday evenings are a good

counterfactual for what the changes in the weekend evenings would have been in the absence of

any schedule changes. Between schedules 1 and 2, alcohol-related arrests increase on both

Thursdays and Fridays, but the increase is larger on Fridays then for Thursdays. Between

schedules 2 and 3, both days experience a decline, however, the decline is larger for Thursdays

than for Fridays - again suggesting that increased Metro access lead to an increase in alcohol-

related crimes. The changes between schedule 3 and 4 however, does appear to show a larger

increase in Thursday arrests that Friday arrests.

       The right panel shows similar figures for DUI arrests. Much like alcohol related arrests,

the number of DUI arrests during Thursdays and those during the weekend move closely

together. The first two schedule changes show a decline in DUI arrests on Friday relative to

Thursday, while the last change shows a slight increase in DUI arrests on Fridays relative to

Thursdays. Taken in sum the visual evidence suggests that Metro access may have affected

drinking behavior in our predicted way, but is not particularly striking.

       The regression results in Table 4 are consistent with this graphical analysis. While the

naïve first difference results (column 1) indicate that alcohol related arrests increased by 5.7

percent and the likelihood of a DUI arrest increased by 7 percentage points with each additional




                                                    21
hour of late Metro service all subsequent specification tell a different story. Both DID

approaches (comparing late nights and evenings on weekends or comparing late nights from

Thursday through Saturday) yield estimated increases in alcohol related arrests and decreases in

DUI arrests, although these estimates are measured with inconsistent precision. In column 4, the

DIDID results suggest that each additional hour of late evening Metro service leads to a

statistically insignificant 0.1 percent decrease in alcohol related arrests and a statistically

insignificant 0.4 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of a DUI arrest. No obvious

conclusions about Metro service and intoxicated driving can be drawn from our temporal results.

The upper and lower bound of the 95 percent confidence intervals of all of the estimates is

0.00987 and -0.0442 (obviously centered below zero). Furthermore, the standard errors of the

estimated parameters also indicate that we do not have sufficient power to detect effects smaller

that about a 2 percent change.

ii. Spatial variation

        A pure temporal analysis ignores the spatial distribution of Metro stations and bars. If

our proposed mechanisms are correct, one would expect that the marginal effects of greater

Metro availability would be greatest in areas with a large number of drinking establishments, and

in particular areas where those establishments are closer to Metro stations. We test for this type

of response heterogeneity by including interactions of the main three-way effect with measures

of geographic distance to a Metro station and the prevalence of alcohol venders. Before turning

to the regression estimates, we present some visual evidence of heterogeneity by geography. In

the left panel of Figure 5, we plot the natural log of alcohol related and arrests on Fridays minus

the log of alcohol related arrests on Thursdays over time for PSAs that have more than 20 bars

and those with fewer than 20 bars (this is equivalent to splitting the sample at the 75th percentile




                                                  22
of the distribution of bars). It appears that as the Metro expanded its hours of operation, there

was an increase in alcohol related arrests in areas with more than 20 bars relative to areas that do

not have more than 20 bars. The right panel of Figure 5 presents the same analysis for DUI

arrests. Unlike the strong patterns for alcohol related arrests, there is little visually apparent

effect on DUI arrests. However, if public alcohol consumption has increased in these areas, as

the arrests suggest, we would expect, ceteris paribus, to observe an increase in intoxicated

driving in these neighborhoods.

        The regression estimates are consistent with the visual analysis. We test for whether

additional hours of Metro access has a differential effect in areas based on the number of bars in

the PSA, whether the PSA actually has a Metro station within its borders, and the number of bars

in the PSA that are close to a Metro station (even if the Metro station does not lie within the

borders of the PSA). We do this by interacting these PSA specific characteristics with the Metro

Hours variable in the preferred DIDID model. The results are presented in Table 5. In column 1,

we present the linear probability model for the DUI arrests. The interaction between the number

of hours of Metro access and the total number of on-site licenses within the PSA is negative and

the coefficients on the interactions with the number of licenses within 100m, and 400m of a

Metro station are also negative, and the marginal effects are diminishing as we relax our

definition of “near” a Metro station. While only one of these estimates is statistically significant

at the 10 percent level, the number of bars within 100 meters of the Metro, they all move in the

hypothesized direction; Areas with more bars and where those bars are close to Metro stations

experienced a decrease in DUI arrests relative to areas that were farther away from Metro

stations or where, due the location of bars, the “price” of a night out did not fall as much as

Metro expanded. In addition, it is worth noting that the magnitude of the relationship between




                                                  23
bars within 100 meters of a Metro and DUIs is large. Alcohol venders tend to be located

together; while there are on average 2.45 “Metro accessible” bars in a neighborhood, if there is at

least one on-premises vender, there is an average of 8 others. A 2 percentage point reduction in

the probability of there being a DUI arrest corresponds with almost a 5% reduction per hour of

Metro service relative the average DUI probability in those areas.

        In column 4, we present the log linear model for the alcohol related arrests. Consistent

with the visual evidence in Figure 5, there is a clear indication that areas with more on-site

alcohol licenses station experienced a greater increase in alcohol related crimes as the Metro

expanded the hours of late night service. The coefficient on the interaction between the number

of licenses and Metro hours is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Each additional bar

increases the effect of Metro service on alcohol related arrests by 0.16 percentage points.

Neighborhoods in the 75th percentile of number of bars have more risky drinking when Metro is

open later. There is also a substantively important 0.4 percentage point increase in the “Metro

effect” for each bar located with 100 meters of a Metro station, although this result is statistically

imprecise (p=0.16). The coefficients on the other interactions do not tell any consistent story and

are not statistically significant.

        One striking pattern in Table 5 is that those areas that are associated with statistically

significant increases in alcohol related crimes are the same areas that experience the largest

reductions in DUI arrests, and vice versa. This suggests a strong behavioral response on the part

of drinkers. Under the assumption that the marginal drinker consumes the same amount of

alcohol as the average drinker, the elasticity of drunk driving with respect to risky drinking

should be close to one. In order to isolate the change in the probability that an intoxicated person

drives home due to Metro service, we subtract the natural log of alcohol related arrests from the




                                                  24
natural log of DUIs to estimate the number of “DUIs per drinker” in DC. We present estimates

of the relationship between DUIs per drinker and the spatial distribution of bars and Metro

stations in column 5. As one can see, both the number of bars in a PSA and the number of bars

in a PSA that are located within 100 meters of a Metro station are associated with reductions in

“DUIs per drinker” and both are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. As Metro

expanded its late night service, the fraction of heavy drinkers that drove home fell by 0.23

percentage points for each bar in a neighborhood. If that additional bar is located within 100

meters of a Metro station, the probability that a heavy drinker drove home fell by 0.82

percentage points, a reduction of roughly 2% per additional hour of late night public

transportation. The results presented in columns 6 through 8 use all working days of the week as

a comparison instead of only Thursday ─ results are very similar.

       As Figures 6 and 7 show, there is a very suggestive pattern in the magnitude and

direction of the “Metro effect” across neighborhoods. In Figure 6, we report the number of bars

within each neighborhood, as well as the location of Metro entrances. The reduction in DUIs per

drinker appears to be concentrated in central DC. This is where most bars are located, but there

are seven PSAs with more than 10 bars in which there is an observed increase in DUIs per

drinker as Metro expands. While it is possible (and common) to take taxis from Metro stations

to bars, expanded Metro service should have the largest effect on the behavior of heavy drinkers

in neighborhood where bars are located within walking distance to Metro stations. In Figure 7,

we limit our attention to only the number of bars within 100 meters of a Metro. When we focus

on these areas, it is clear that in those neighborhoods with many bars but an apparent increase in

DUIs per drinker, those bars are located far from Metro stations. It is therefore unlikely that

expanded Metro service would substantially reduce the private cost of the safer option for




                                                25
drinkers. Two of neighborhoods with no “Metro accessible” bars that are positively affected by

Metro have over 70 on-premises alcohol venders- Georgetown (81 bars) and Adams Morgan (74

bars). As noted previously, these neighborhoods are historic destinations for DC nightlife, and it

seems reasonable that drinkers might use taxi service from Metro stations to these neighborhoods.

           The pattern of marginal effects is striking. With the exception of one neighborhood on

the northwest DC border, every PSA with more than 2 bars located within 100 meters of a Metro

state has a reduction in DUIs per drink of at least 10% per hour of Metro service. Incorporating

the number of bars within 100 meters of a Metro station using a linear probability model where

the outcome is a reduction in DUIs per drinker, we estimate that there is only a 2% chance we

would observe this pattern of results at random.38

iii. Specification tests

           There are three specific endogeneity concerns that may generate downward bias in our

estimate of Metro service of DUIs and upward bias of the effect of Metro on risky drinking.

Specifically, one might worry that (1) our temporal results are confounded by any independent

effect the schedule change may have on Thursday outcomes, (2) the geographic patterns we

estimate reflect factors that affect all crimes, and (3) our measures of intoxicated driving does not

reflect real DUI behaviors because people may not be caught driving drunk where they drink.

We address these remaining concerns below in turn.

iii. a) Is there an effect of the schedule change on Thursday’s outcomes?

           It is important to point out that our estimates of the effect of increased Metro access on

arrests, using Thursday as a comparison day, will be biased if the Metro expansions had an

independent effect on outcomes on Thursdays. There are two primary reasons why one might

worry that our DIDID estimates may not reflect the true overall policy effect: (1) the schedule
38
     Using a logit or probit model yields substantively the same result.


                                                            26
changes led to an increase in the attractiveness of taking the Metro or going out on all nights in

our sample, in which case our results understate the total effect of Metro service or (2) the

schedule changes may have caused people to shift their risky public drinking from Thursday late

night to Friday late night, in which case our results overstate the total effect of Metro service.39

         In Table 6, we explore possible spillover effects in detail. In columns 1a – 4a we impose

the weekend schedule on Thursdays, and comparing changes in Thursdays arrests relative to

Wednesday arrests.40 The geographic patterns are similar in the Wednesday to Thursdays (i.e.

reductions in DUIs in areas with more bars within 100 meters of a Metro and increases in

alcohol-related arrests is areas with more bars within 400 meters of a Metro station). Instead of

people shifting behavior from Thursday to the weekend, if anything, alcohol related behaviors on

Thursday are trending in the same direction as drinking behaviors on Friday and Saturday. This

could be a real spillover effect of Metro service, for example, if the DC bar and restaurant market

changed in response to Metro operation.41 Alternately, this effect on Thursday could reflect

unrelated changes in drinking or police behavior over time. Regardless, this apparent change on

Thursday highlights the importance of our DIDID approach; if this model is incorrectly specified,

we are being conservative in our estimates of the policy effect while if this is the correct

specification, not including Thursday as a comparison day of the week would lead us to overstate

the spatial distribution of the Metro effect on Fridays and Saturdays arrests.

         We further test for whether our estimates are affected by any shift in behaviors from

39
   Specifically, if Metro caused people to go out on Fridays or Saturdays en lieu of Thursdays, it would lead to a
reduction in Thursday ridership, alcohol arrests, and DUI arrests and an increase in Friday ridership, alcohol arrests,
and DUI arrests. Under such a scenario, any increase in alcohol related arrests will be overstated, and any decrease
in DUI arrests will be understated.
40
   This approach allows us to include PSA x Time of Day x Schedule fixed effects, meaning that the identification of
the Metro effect is the same as our main specification. A DID model with Friday and Saturday does not allow for
any temporal variation in the relationship between late night and evening arrests, making it unclear how to map
observed spatial heterogeneity in the effect of Metro service to the DIDID results.
41
   Title 23-402.7 of the DC code suggests this is unlikely; since 1986 bars have been prohibited from being open
after 3 am on weekends.


                                                          27
Thursdays (or any other day of the week) by imposing the weekend Metro schedule on all days

of the week (in essence, aggregating across all days of the week). If our results were driven by

shifting of activity from Thursdays (or other days of the week) to Fridays and Saturdays any

increase on Fridays and Saturdays will be undone by a reduction on Thursdays so that there

would be an net zero effect overall. These results in columns 1b – 4b of Table 6 are in the same

direction as the main DIDID results using Thursday as the comparison day, so that it is clear that

the main findings are not driven by any shifting of behaviors across days of the week

iii. b) The geographic patterns we estimate reflect factors that affect all crimes.

           While the geographic patterns in the marginal effect of Metro service follow a priori

expectations, one may worry that the patterns we estimate reflects changing unobserved factors

that affect all crimes. To test this possibility, in the last two columns of Table 5, we allow for

spatial heterogeneity in the Metro effect with respect to our less alcohol related, or “Other”

arrests. If changes in the size or behavior of police officers were driving our results in columns 1

though 7, we would expect to see no difference in the relationship between our alcohol related

arrests and other arrests. While we pick up two statistically precise estimates, there is no clear

spatial pattern in the magnitude or sign of the coefficients.42

iii. c) Using DUI arrests in D.C. only might not be picking up all the DUIs because a drinker
may drive outside of DC.

           In Figure 7 there appears to be an increase in DUIs relative to drinking on the

northwestern and northeastern DC borders. This is driven primarily by a reduction in alcohol

related arrests in those areas, but may also indicate some negative spatial spillovers. Since drunk

drivers are mobile it is possible that DUI arrests outside of DC increased, which DUI arrests in

DC remained constant. To address this concern, we examine fatal alcohol-related car crashes,


42
     We also present results for Drunk and Disorderly arrests only in Appendix Table A2.


                                                          28
using data for the entire DC Metro area.43 First, we identify the effect of the Metro extension on

fatal traffic accidents by estimating the full Thursday through Saturday DIDID model using

crash data for DC, Maryland, and Virginia. En lieu of aggregating the data at the PSA-month

level data are aggregated at the state-MSA-month level.44 If the schedule changes led to an

increase in intoxicated driving one might expect a larger increase in alcohol related fatal crashes

than those not involving alcohol. We show the effects separately for crashes where alcohol was

deemed to be involved and accidents where alcohol is not reported to be a factor.

         These results, using accidents in the DC-Metro area, are resented in the top panel of

Table 7. The DIDID estimate indicates that each additional hour of Metro service is associated

with a statistically insignificant 2.3 percent increase in alcohol related accidents (column 1) and a

0.7 percent increase in non-alcohol related accidents (column 7). The interaction between the

Metro hour and indicator variables for Virginia and Maryland are small and statistically

significant for both alcohol related accidents (column 2) and non-alcohol related accidents

(column 6). The evidence suggests that the schedule changes had no effect on fatal car crashes in

DC, Maryland and Virginia (so that the lack of any effect on DUI arrests did not reflect

geographic shifting).

         As another test for an effect on fatal crashes, we look at crashes in Maryland and Virginia

separately by whether the area is serviced or not serviced by Metro. Specifically, we interact

Metro hours with an indicator variable that is equal to 1 if the area is serviced by Metro and 0 if

it is not. Since one would expect the schedule changes to have an effect on covered areas, and no

effect on non-covered areas, the DIDID effect in non-covered areas provides a credible control

for underlying changes in fatal accidents over time for the covered areas. These results are

43
   As there are (at least) six police jurisdictions in the DC suburbs, obtaining arrest data for the DC metropolitan area
would be involve prohibitively high costs.
44
   In other words, we divide MD and VA into DC area and non-DC area observations.


                                                           29
presented in the lower panel of Table 7. All of the point estimates are imprecise, and the sign

follow no systematic patterns - suggesting that there is no effect of the Metro schedule changes

on fatal crashes overall (either in the DC area or in the outer lying parts of Maryland and

Virginia).

VII    Conclusion

       Using a triple differences strategy, we find that as the DC Metro expanded its late night

hours of operation there was very little effect on DUI arrests, fatal alcohol related automobile

accidents or total non-alcohol related arrests in the aggregate. This null aggregate effect masks

striking spatial variation. Looking at particular neighborhoods within DC, we find that in

neighborhoods with at least one bar within 100 meters of a Metro station, expanding Metro

service by 3 hours reduced the probability of a DUI arrest occurring by approximately 14%. At

the same time, the number of arrests for alcohol-related crimes increased by at least 5.4% in the

same neighborhoods. Using arrests for these crimes as a proxy for changes in the size of risky

drinkers, a typically non-measurable population, we estimate that expanding Metro’s hours of

operation from midnight to 3 am reduced the number of drinkers who drove home by 2.46% per

“Metro accessible” bar in these neighborhoods on average, or 19.7%. The magnitude of the

effect warrants attention. At the same time, the benefit of reduced DUIs per drinker dissipates

rapidly as alcohol venders become more remote to Metro stations. Given that the literature in

urban economics finds similar spatial effects when examining commuting patterns, this

dissipation of effects actually lends confidence in our results. While the social benefit of

providing a “safer option” for drinkers appear to be localized to areas directly served by the

Metro, it does appear that even excessive drinkers respond to changes in costs in a rational way.




                                                 30
References:

Baum-Snow, N. and Kahn, M. (2000) “The effects of new public projects to expand urban rail
       transit” Journal of Public Economics 77: 241-263.
Becker, G. (1968). “Crime and punishment: an economic approach.” The Journal of Political
       Economy, 76(2):169-217.
Blincoe L. J., Seay A. G., Zaloshnja E., Miller T. R., Romano E. O., Luchter S. and Spicer, R.S.
       (2002) “The Economic Impact of Motor Vehicle Crashes, 2000.” Washington (DC):
       Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Boisjoly, J., Duncan, G. J., Kremer, M., Levy, D. M., and Eccles, J. (2003) “Peer effects in binge
       drinking among college students.” mimeo.
Boyum, D. and Reuter, P. (1996) An Analytic Assessment of US Drug Policy Washington, DC:
       American Enterprise Institute Press.
Carpenter, C. (2008) “Heavy Alcohol Use and Crime: Evidence from Underage Drunk Drving
       Laws.” Journal of Law and Economics 50(3): 539-557.
Chaloupka, F. J., Saffer H., and Grossman M. (1993) “Alcohol-Control Policies and Motor-
       Vehicle Fatalities," Journal of Legal Studies. 22:161-186.
Chaloupka, F. J., Grossman, M., and Saffer, H. (2002) “The Effects of Price on Alcohol
       Consumption and Alcohol-related Problems.” Alcohol Research & Health 26:22-34.
Cook, P. and Moore, M. (1993a). "Taxation of Alcoholic-Beverages." In: Hilton, M.E., and
       Bloss, G., [eds.] Economics and the Prevention of Alcohol-Related Problems. NIAAA
       Research Monograph No. 25. Rockville MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
       Alcoholism. 33-58.
Cook, P., and Moore, M. (1993b) "Violence Reduction through Restrictions on Alcohol
       Availability." Alcohol Health & Research World 17(2): 151-156.
Cook, P. and Moore, M. (2000) “Alcohol” in AJ Culyer and JP Newhouse [eds.]
       Handbook of Health Economics New York: North-Holland 1629-1673.
Cook, P. and Moore, M. J. (2002). "The Economics of Alcohol Abuse and Alcohol-Control
       Policies." Health Affairs 21(2): 120 - 133.
Corman H., and Mocan, N. (2000) “A time series analysis of crime, deterrence, and drug abuse
       in New York City.” American Economic Review 90: 584–604.
Di Tella, R., and Schargrodsky, E. (2004) “Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using the
       Allocation of Police Forces after a Terrorist Attack.” American Economic Review 94:
       115–33.
Dobkin, C. and Carpenter, C. (2008) “The Drinking Age, Alcohol Consumption, and Crime.”
       mimeo.
Doob, A. N. and Webster, C. M. (2003) “Sentence Severity and Crime: Accepting the Null
       Hypothesis” in Michael Tonry (Ed) Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, 30:143-
       195. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Evans, W. and E.G. Owens (2007) “COPS and Crime” Journal of Public Economics 91:181-201.
Greenfeld, L. A. (1998) Alcohol and Crime: An Analysis of National Data on the Prevalence of
       Alcohol Involvement in Crime. National Institute of Justice Research Report #
       NCJ168632
Hansen, G. D. and Imrohoroglu, A. (1992) “The Role of Unemployment Insurance in and
       Economy with Liquidity Constraints and Moral Hazard” The Journal of Political
       Economy 100(1): 118-142.



                                               31
Holmstrom, B. (1979) “Moral Hazard and Observability” The Bell Journal of Economics 10(1):
        74-91.
Holzer, H., Quigley, J. and Raphael, S. (2003) “Public transit and the spatial distribution of
        minority employment: Evidence from a natural experiment” Journal of Policy Analysis
        and Management 22(3): 415-441.
Joksch, H. C., and Jones, R. K. (1993). “Changes in the Drinking Age and Crime.” Journal of
        Criminal Justice 21: 209-221.
Kenkel, D. (1996). "New Estimates of the Optimal Tax on Alcohol," Economic Inquiry
        34: 296-319.
Kenkel, D. (1993) “Drinking, driving and deterrence: The effectiveness and social costs of
        alternative policies.” Journal of Law and Economics 36(2):877–914.
Kenkel, D. and Manning, W. (1996). “Perspectives on Alcohol Taxation.” Alcohol Health &
        Research World 20(4): 230-238.
Klick, J. and Stratmann, T. (2003) “The Effect of Abortion Legalization on Sexual Behavior:
        Evidence from Sexually Transmitted Diseases.” The Journal of Legal Studies, 32(2):
        407-434.
Klick, J. and Tabarrok, A. (2005) "Using Terror Alert Levels to Estimate the Effect of Police on
        Crime," Journal of Law & Economics 48(1): 267-279
Lee, D., and McCrary, J., (2007) “Crime, Punishment, and Myopia” NBER working paper
        11491.
Levitt, S. (2002) "Deterrence” In James Q. Wilson and Joan Petersillia [Eds.] Crime: Public
        Policies for Crime Control Oakland: ICS Press.
Levitt, S. (2002) "Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effects of Police on
        Crime: Reply." American Economic Review, 92(4): 1244-1250.
Leung, S. F., and Phelps, C.E. (1993) “My kingdom for a drink . . .? A review of estimates of the
        price sensitivity of demand for alcoholic beverages.” In: Hilton, M.E., and Bloss, G.,
        [eds.] Economics and the Prevention of Alcohol-Related Problems. NIAAA Research
        Monograph No. 25. Rockville MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
        pp. 1–32.
Manning, W., Keeler, E., Newhouse, J., Sloss, E., and Wasserman J. (1991) The Costs of Poor
        Health Habits Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Markowitz, S., and Grossman, M. (2000) “The effects of beer taxes on physical child abuse.”
        Journal of Health Economics. 19(2) 271-282.
Miczek, K. A., DeBold, J. F., Haney, M., Tidey, J., Vivian, J. and Weerts, E. (1994) “Alcohol,
        Drugs of Abuse, Aggression, and Violence” in A. Reiss, Jr. and J. Roth [Eds.]
        Understanding and Preventing Violence Volume 3: Social Issues. Washington, DC:
        National Academy Press. 377-570.
Norton, E., Lindroth, R., and Ennett, S. (1998). “Controlling for the endogeneity of peer
        substance use on adolescent alcohol and tobacco use.” Health Economics. 7:439–453.
O’Malley, P. M., and Wagenaar, A. C. (1991) “Effects of minimum drinking are laws on alcohol
        use, related behaviors and traffic crash involvement among American youth: 1976-1987.”
        Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 52(5):478-491
Owens, E. G. (2009) “More Time, Less Crime? Estimating the Incapacitative Effect of Sentence
        Enhancements” Journal of Law and Economics 52(3)
Pauly, M. V. (1974) “Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of Moral
        Hazard and Adverse Selection” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 88(1):44-62.



                                               32
Perrins, G. and Nilsen, D. (2006) “Industry dynamics in the Washington, DC, area: has a second
        job core emerged?” Monthly Labor Review Online 129(12): 3-20.
Quinlan K.P., Brewer R.D., Siegel P., Sleet D.A., Mokdad A.H., Shults R.A., and Flowers N.
        (2005) “Alcohol-impaired driving among U.S. adults, 1993-2002.” American Journal of
        Preventive Medicine. 28(4):345-350.
Raphael, S. and Ludwig, J. (2003) "Prison Sentence Enhancements: The Case of Project Exile."
        In Jens Ludwig and Philip J. Cook [Eds.] Evaluating Gun Policy, Washington, DC:
        Brookings Institution Press. pp. 251-286.
Saffer, H., and Grossman, M. (1987) "Drinking Age Laws and Highway Mortality Rates: Cause
        and Effect." Economic Inquiry 25(3): 403-417.
Sood, N., and Goldman, D. (2006) "HIV Breakthroughs and Risky Sexual Behavior," The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3):1063-1102.




                                              33
Figures:


Figure 1: Alcohol Venders and Metro Stations in Washington, DC




                                            34
Figure 2: Ridership on Thursdays, Fridays, and Saturdays.

              Log Evening Metro Ridership 1998-2007                                            Log Late Night Metro Ridership 1998-2007
                                     3:30 pm to 7pm                                                                    7 pm to Closing
       12.5
                                                                                            Schedule 1
                                                                                         11.5                  ScheduleSchedule
                                                                                                                        2       3 Schedule 4




       12                                                                                11


            Schedule 1       ScheduleSchedule
                                      2       3            Schedule 4
                                                                                         10.5
       11.5




                                                                                         10
       11
                                                                                              New line opens
            New line opens
                                                                                         9.5
       10.5

 Jan 1998                      Jan 2002                Jan 2006      Jan 2008     Jan 1998                        Jan 2002                 Jan 2006    Jan 2008
                                          Month                                                                                Month

                         Sat                       Thurs                Friday                              Sat                        Thurs                Friday




Figure 3: Ridership on Wednesdays and Fridays Relative to Thursday Levels.

                                                Log Metro Ridership 1998-2007
               Log(Wednesday) - Log(Thursday), evening and pm                                    Log(Friday) - Log(Thursday), evening and pm
       .4                                                                           .4


                Schedule 1            Schedule 3           Schedule 4

                                                                                    .2
       .2
   )

                                                                                    0


       0

                                                                                    -.2


                                                                                               Schedule 1             Schedule 3          Schedule 4
       -.2
                                                                                    -.4

  July 1997                         July 2002                    July 2007       July 1997                         July 2002                    July 2007
                                          Month                                                                          Month
                                                               Late Evening in Black, Early Evening in Grey




                                                                             35
Figure 4: Mean Monthly Arrests by Day of the Week and Time of Day, Washington DC 1998-
2007

  Log Monthly Alcohol-related Arrests 1998-2007                                         Log Monthly DUI Arrests 1998-2007
                                 10 pm to 5 am                                                             10 pm to 5 am
     .5
                                                                               .2
                           Schedule 2

              Schedule 1          Schedule 3
     .4
                                                                               .15


     .3

                                                                               .1

     .2


                                                                               .05
                                                     Schedule 4
     .1

                                                                                                     Schedule 2

     0                                                                         0        Schedule 1          Schedule 3         Schedule 4
  July 1997                     July 2002                   July 2007       July 1997                     July 2002                 July 2007
                                        Month                                                                     Month

                               Fridays in Black, Thursdays in Grey; (Note: horizontal lines show mean levels by schedule )




Figure 5: The difference between outcomes on Fridays relative to Thursdays in areas with more
than and fewer than 20 bars.

  Log Monthly Alcohol Related Arrests 1998-2007                                         Log Monthly DUI Arrests 1998-2007
                        Ln(Fri)- Ln(Thurs), 10pm - 5 am                                           Ln(Fri)- Ln(Thurs), 10pm - 5 am
     1.5
                                                                               1
           Schedule 1          Schedule 3           Schedule 4
                        Schedule 2



     1
                                                                               .5



     .5


                                                                               0

     0


                                                                                     Schedule 1            Schedule 3         Schedule 4
                                                                               -.5
     -.5                                                                                          Schedule 2

  Jan 1998                 Jan 2002                           Jan 2008      Jan 1998                 Jan 2002                          Jen 2008
                                        Month                                                                     Month

                           Neighborhoods with more than 20 bars in black, fewer than 20 bars in gray




                                                                         36
Figure 6: Distribution of Marginal Effects Across PSAs, by Number of Alcohol Venders within
the PSA.




Note: U street and H street corridors, excluded from analysis, are marked with an “X”




                                              37
Figure 7: Distribution of Marginal Effects Across PSAs, by Number of Alcohol Venders within
100m of Metro Station




Note: U street and H street corridors, excluded from analysis, are marked with an “X”




                                              38
Tables:

Table 1 PSA Characteristics (n=44)
                                                     Mean    Std Dev
On site Licenses                                     18.98    39.44
On site Licenses within 100m of Metro station        2.45     7.23
On site Licenses within 400m of Metro station        10.54   30.99
On site Licenses within 800m of Metro station        14.23   35.80
Metro Station in PSA                                 0.478   0.505
Population under 18                                  2,509   1,444




                                                39
Table 2: Arrests by Neighborhood
                                                 Thurs-Sat, Evening &   Fri-Sat, Evening & Late
                         Week, Evening & Late
                                                      Late Night                  Night
                          Night (n=73,218)
                                                      (n=31,420)              (n=20,968)
                          Mean       Std Dev      Mean        Std Dev     Mean          Std Dev
Any DUI arrests           0.123       0.328       0.161        0.367      0.176          0.381
Ln(DUI arrests + 1)       0.107       0.308      0.148        0.371      0.165         0.396
Any Alcohol
related arrests
                          0.469       0.499      0.512        0.500      0.524         0.499
Ln (Alcohol
related arrests +1)
                          0.503       0.618      0.575        0.661      0.593         0.669
Ln(DUI arrests + 1) -
Ln(Alcohol related       -0.397       0.634      -0.428       0.674      -0.428        0.679
arrests +1)
Any Drunk &
Disorderly arrests
                          0.269       0.444      0.322        0.467      0.336         0.472
Ln (Drunk &
Disorderly arrests +1)
                          0.270       0.499      0.338        0.556      0.354         0.567
Any Non-Alcohol
Related arrests
                          0.604       0.489      0.631        0. 482     0.625         0.484
Ln(Non-Alcohol
Related arrests+1)
                          0.753       0.754      0.806        0.772      0.785         0.757




                                                40
Table 3: Frequency of Monthly Arrests per PSA, Friday and Saturday Late Nights, 1999-2007
                                                        Arrest Type
 Number of Arrests                DUI              Drunk and Disorderly         Alcohol Related
           0                     7,553                     6,850                     4,708
           1                     1,727                     1,825                     2,387
           2                      550                       719                      1,298
           3                      247                       437                       725
           4                      155                       224                       429
           5                      100                       144                       274
           6                       51                        94                       195
           7                       37                        56                       151
           8                       18                        43                        91
           9                       15                        17                        73
          10                        9                        20                        32
          11                        4                        16                        38
          12                        4                        12                        17
          13                        5                         6                        14
          14                        1                         3                         9
          15                        2                         6                        14
          16                        0                         4                         9
          17                        1                         0                         4
          18                        0                         2                         4
          19                        2                         0                         2
          20                        0                         1                         2
          21                        0                         0                         0
          22                        1                         0                         0
          23                        0                         0                         0
          24                        0                         1                         3
          25                        0                         0                         0
          26                        1                         1                         2
          27                        1                         0                         0
          >27                       0                         3                         5




                                                41
Table 4: Effect of Metro Access on DUI Arrests and Alcohol Related arrests.
                                              Independent Variable is Number of Hours of Metro Access.
                                                1               2                3                 4
Any Alcohol related arrests                   0.021          -0.003            0.001            -0.004
                                             [0.021]        [0.008]           [0.007]          [0.008]
log (Alcohol related arrests +1)             0.057*               0.004               0.002       -0.010
                                             [0.027]             [0.015]             [0.010]     [0.011]
Any DUI arrests                              0.070**            -0.0121+              -0.009      -0.004
                                             [0.017]             [0.006]             [0.006]     [0.006]
log (DUI arrests + 1)                        0.080**              -0.010             -0.007       -0.004
                                             [0.017]             [0.008]             [0.007]     [0.007]
Days included                               Fri & Sat          Fri & Sat           Thurs -Sat   Thurs -Sat
Times of Day included                         Late            Late & PM              Late       Late & PM
PSA*Sched*TOD                                                                         X             X
PSA*Sched*DOW                                                      X                                X
PSA*TOD*DOW                                     X                  X                   X            X
N                                             10,484             20,968              15,718       31,420
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the PSA level in brackets.
All models include PSA fixed effects, year fixed effects and month of the year fixed effects.




                                                        42
Table 5: Geographic Variation in the Effect of Metro Access on Metro Ridership, DUI Arrests, and Alcohol Related arrests.
                                                                                                  log (DUI arrests                                  log (DUI arrests
                                                                  Any Alcohol    log (Alcohol                                      log (Alcohol                                        log (Other
                                 Any DUI         log (DUI                                            + 1) - log      Any DUI                           + 1) - log      any Other
                                                                    related     related arrests                                   related arrests                                    related arrests
                                  arrests       arrests + 1)                                      (Alcohol related    arrests                       (Alcohol related    arrests
                                                                    arrests           +1)                                               +1)                                                +1)
Dependent Variable                                                                                   arrests +1)                                       arrests +1)
                                     1               2                3               4                   5              6              7                  8               9               10

Hours                             0.00456        -0.00697          -0.0125        -0.0337+              0.0267        0.0014        -0.0463**          0.0375+         -0.0380+        -0.0444
                                  [0.0180]       [0.0155]          [0.0186]       [0.0198]             [0.0227]      [0.00990]      [0.0164]           [0.0206]        [0.0201]        [0.0345]
Hours*On site Licenses           -0.000511       -0.00067         0.000587+      0.00162**          -0.00229**       0.000178      0.00264**          -0.0026**        0.000808         0.0014
                                [0.000636]      [0.000509]        [0.000340]     [0.000362]         [0.000620]       [0.000268]    [0.000868]          [0.0004]        [0.000912]      [0.00154]
Hours*# within 100 meters        -0.00316+       -0.00238           0.00232       0.00351              -0.00589*     -0.00322**     0.000563          -0.00318+         0.00282         0.00157
                                 [0.00174]       [0.00272]         [0.00426]      [0.00285]            [0.00264]     [0.000875]     [0.00238]          [0.00161]       [0.00549]       [0.00647]
Hours*# within 400 meters        -0.000705       -0.00222          -0.000313      -0.00264             0.000423       0.000964      -0.00164            0.00298         0.00307         0.00648
                                 [0.00137]       [0.00232]         [0.00199]      [0.00168]            [0.00240]     [0.000828]     [0.00179]          [0.00189]       [0.00299]       [0.00522]
Hours*# within 800 meters         0.00155         0.00302          -0.000504       0.00113              0.00189      -0.000545      -0.000947          0.000258        -0.00431+        -0.00736
                                 [0.00140]       [0.00211]         [0.00144]      [0.00146]            [0.00222]     [0.000787]     [0.00188]          [0.00196]       [0.00256]       [0.00488]
Hours*Metro within borders       -0.000607       0.00419           -0.00672        -0.0234              0.0276         0.00476       -0.0088            -0.0044         0.0172          0.0282
                                  [0.0131]       [0.0132]          [0.0178]       [0.0179]             [0.0200]      [0.00756]      [0.0171]           [0.0135]         [0.0183]       [0.0322]
Days included                   Thurs - Sat     Thurs - Sat       Thurs - Sat    Thurs - Sat        Thurs - Sat          All           All                All          Thurs - Sat    Thurs - Sat
Times of day included           Late & PM       Late & PM         Late & PM      Late & PM          Late & PM        Late & PM     Late & PM          Late & PM        Late & PM      Late & PM
R2                                  0.301           0.432            0.289         0.411                 0.281         0.268          0.375              0.274            0.336         0.518
N                                31,420            31,420           31,420         31,420               31,420        73,218         73,218             73,218           31,420         31,420
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the PSA level in brackets.
All models include PSA*Schedule fixed Effects, PSA*TOD Effects, PSA*DOW Effects, PSA*Sched*TOD, PSA*Sched*DOW, PSA*TOD*DOW , PSA fixed effects, year fixed effects and month
of the year fixed effects.




                                                                                                  43
Table 6: Geographic Variation in the Effect of Metro Access on Metro Ridership, DUI Arrests, and Alcohol Related arrests.
                                                                                 log (Alcohol                                                        log (Alcohol
                              Any DUI          log (DUI        Any Alcohol                        Any DUI          log (DUI        Any Alcohol
                                                                                related arrests                                                     related arrests
                               arrests        arrests + 1)    related arrests                      arrests        arrests + 1)    related arrests
                                                                                      +1)                                                                 +1)
Dependent Variable
                                  1a                2a              3a                4a               1b              2b               3b                4b
Hours                          -0.00552          -0.0078         -0.00066          -0.0038        -0.0009031        -0.00699       -0.0256927          -0.0383*
                               [0.0141]         [0.0135]         [0.0179]          [0.0220]         0.011113        [0.0133]        0.0139938          [0.0159]
Hours*On site Licenses        0.000667         0.000637        0.000723**          0.00049          0.000519       0.000447         0.00186**         0.00236*
                             [0.000684]       [0.000912]       [0.000232]        [0.000776]       [0.000625]       [0.00105]       [0.000302]        [0.000992]
Hours*# within 100           -0.00301+          -0.00238         -0.00529           -0.004         -0.00219+        -0.00188       -0.00312**          -0.00134
                              [0.00167]        [0.00192]        [0.00383]         [0.00389]        [0.00116]       [0.00136]        [0.00103]         [0.00195]
Hours*# within 400            0.000238           0.00153        0.00324+           0.00379         0.00162+        0.00297*         0.00220+          -0.000486
                              [0.00113]        [0.00160]        [0.00185]         [0.00240]       [0.000945]       [0.00121]        [0.00111]         [0.00156]
Hours*# within 800             -0.00032         -0.00145        -0.00283*        -0.00396+          -0.00159        -0.00262       -0.00321**          -0.00187
                              [0.00125]        [0.00178]        [0.00120]         [0.00208]        [0.00110]       [0.00161]        [0.00105]         [0.00178]
Hours*Metro within              0.0118           0.00771          0.0188            0.0285          0.00627         0.00686           0.0154           0.00268
                               [0.0143]         [0.0126]         [0.0188]          [0.0217]        [0.00914]       [0.00988]         [0.0142]          [0.0183]

Days included                  Wed-Thurs        Wed-Thurs        Wed-Thurs        Wed-Thurs           All             All              All               All
Times of day included          Late & PM        Late & PM        Late & PM        Late & PM       Late & PM       Late & PM        Late & PM         Late & PM
  2
R                                 0.27              0.36            0.27             0.38            0.27            0.38             0.27              0.38
PSA*Sched*TOD                       X                X                X               X
PSA*Sched*DOW                       X                X                X               X               X               X                X                 X
PSA*TOD*DOW                         X                X                X               X               X               X                X                 X
N                                20,885           20,885           20,885           20,885          73,218          73,218           73,218            73,218
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the PSA level in brackets.
a. The weekend schedule is imposed on Thursday as a "placebo" treatment.
b. The weekend schedule is imposed on all days of the week during the same schedule. This indicates that the data are aggregated across all days of the week.
(this does not compare weekend days to other days of the week)




                                                                                44
Table 7: Fatal Crashes in Maryland, Virginia, and Washington, DC.
                           Alcohol related Accidents                       Non-alcohol related accidents
                     Ln(Accidents+1)        Any accidents              Ln(Accidents+1)        Any accidents
                       1         2          3            4               5         6          7           8
Hours              0.0231    0.0181      0.0222      0.0262          0.00788 -0.0135      -0.00693 -0.0177
                   [0.0192] [0.0236] [0.0188] [0.0209]               [0.0306] [0.0238] [0.0221] [0.0217]
Hours * MD                   0.00615                 -0.00593                  -0.0144                -0.0181
                             [0.0453]               [0.0432]                   [0.0742]               [0.0524]
Hours * VA                   0.00883                 -0.00609                  0.0785                 0.0504
                             [0.0428]               [0.0420]                   [0.0591]               [0.0460]



R2                 0.136       0.136      0.144       0.144          0.127       0.127    0.13       0.13
N                  2970        2970       2970        2970           2970        2970     2970       2970



                           Alcohol related Accidents                       Non-alcohol related accidents
                     Ln(Accidents+1)        Any accidents              Ln(Accidents+1)        Any accidents
                      VA        MD          VA        MD                VA       MD          VA          MD
                       9        10          11         12               13        14          15         16
Hours              0.0669    -0.00592 0.0606        0.00881          0.0906    -0.119     0.0936*     -0.0456
                   [0.0577] [0.0503] [0.0447] [0.0427]               [0.0811] [0.0806] [0.0455] [0.0462]
Hours * DCMSA      -0.0349   0.0368      -0.0329    0.0166           -0.0345   0.0998     -0.0688     0.0115
                   [0.0674] [0.0623] [0.0568] [0.0555]               [0.0959] [0.104]     [0.0591] [0.0643]

R2                 0.356       0.264      0.317       0.255          0.278       0.176    0.287      0.166
N                  2136        2136       2136        2136           2136        2136     2136       2136

All models are based on the DIDID that use Thursday as the counterfactual day.




                                                      45
Appendix:

Appendix Table A1: Effect of Metro Access on Metro Ridership: DV=Log(One Way Trips)
                                                       Ln(Metro Hours)                                          Ln(Metro Hours)
Hours                  0.081         0.112            0.460         0.503           0.074     -0.046           0.46           .
                      [0.017]       [0.023]          [0.083]       [0.097]         [0.018]   [0.092]          [0.111]         .
Hours * Sched 2                      -0.017                         -0.016                    0.088                        0.042
                                    [0.045]                        [0.044]                   [0.018]                      [0.081]
Hours * Sched 3                      -0.033                         -0.022                    0.102                        0.056
                                    [0.023]                        [0.021]                   [0.089]                       [0.02]
Hours * Sched 4                      -0.032                        0.0017                      0.12                        0.076
                                    [0.022]                        [0.018]                   [0.090]                      [0.019]
R2                      0.83         0.83             0.83           0.83           0.82      0.82             0.82       0.82
N                      7,620        7,620            7,620          7,620          5,715     5,715            5,715       5,715
                                                                                     No        No               No          No
TOD                     All         All    All      All       Morning       Morning                           Morning     Morning
Robust standard errors in brackets.
All models include Sched*DOW, Sched*TOD, TOD*DOW, year, and month fixed effects.

Appendix Table A2: The Effect of Metro Access Drunk and Disorderly Conduct Arrests.
                    Any Drunk and
                                        ln(Disorder            Any Drunk and Disorderly
Dependent             Disorderly                                                              ln (Disorder arrests + 1)
                                        arrests + 1)                   arrests
Variable               arrests
                          1                   2                             3                             4
Hours                  -0.0101           -0.0276*                      -0.0286                         -0.0457*
                       [0.00927]         [0.0128]                      [0.0170]                        [0.0196]
Hours*On site
Licenses                                                              0.00111**                      0.000912+
                                                                      [0.000388]                     [0.000463]
Hours*# within
100 meters                                                             0.00371                         0.00460+
                                                                      [0.00353]                        [0.00256]
Hours*# within
400 meters                                                            -0.00271+                      -0.00489**
                                                                      [0.00161]                        [0.00150]
Hours*# within
800 meters                                                             0.00117                         0.00364*
                                                                      [0.00114]                        [0.00135]
Hours*Metro
within borders                                                         0.00667                         -0.0023
                                                                       [0.0177]                        [0.0220]
R2                      0.262               0.344                       0.263                           0.344
N                       31,420              31,420                     31,420                           31,420
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered at the PSA level in brackets.
All models include PSA*Schedule fixed Effects, PSA*TOD Effects, PSA*DOW Effects, PSA*Sched*TOD,
PSA*Sched*DOW, PSA*TOD*DOW , PSA fixed effects, year fixed effects and month of the year fixed effects.




                                                             46
Appendix Table A3: Fatal Traffic Accidents

                        Whole Week, Evening & PM (n=2,884)
                        Washington, DC               Maryland              Virginia
                        Mean           Std Dev       Mean        Std Dev   Mean       Std Dev
Any Fatal Accident      0.130          0.337         .302        .459      .237       .426
log (Fatal Accident +
                        0.209          0.598         .495        .861      .351       .705
1)
Any Alcohol Related
                        0.026          0.160         .113        .317      .119       0.324
Accident
log (Alcohol Related
                        0.028          177           .108        .322      .109       .316
Accident + 1)
Any Non-Alcohol
                        035            0.184         .246        .431      .152        .359
Related Accident
log (Non-Alcohol
Related Accident +      0.041          0.242         0.334       .671      .194       .507
1)
                        Thurs-Sat, Evening & PM (n=1,236)
                        Washington, DC               Maryland              Virginia
                        Mean            Std Dev      Mean        Std Dev   Mean       Std Dev
Any Fatal Accident      0.171          0.376         0.487       0.500     0.502      0.500
log (Fatal Accident +
                        0.292          0.712         0.896       10.06     0.967      10.12
1)
Any Alcohol Related
                        0.037          0.189         0.266       0.442     0.339      0.473
Accident
log (Alcohol Related
                        0.041          0.218         0.280       0.507     0.386      0.602
Accident + 1)
Any Non-Alcohol
                        0.042          0.203         393         0.489     0.363      0.481
Related Accident
log (Non-Alcohol
Related Accident +      0.050          0.266         0.567       0.806     0.533      0.802
1)
                        Fri-Sat, Evening & PM (n=824)
                        Washington, DC                Maryland             Virginia
                        Mean             Std Dev      Mean       Std Dev   Mean       Std Dev
Any Fatal Accident      0.198          0.398         0.525       0.500     0.534      0.499
log (Fatal Accident +
                        0.345          0.770         1.00        1.10      1.06       1.16
1)
Any Alcohol Related
                        0.0390         0.193         0.305       0.461     0.382      0.486
Accident
log (Alcohol Related
                        0.044          0.231         0.329       0.543     0.447      0.641
Accident + 1)
Any Non-Alcohol
                        0.048          0.215         0.427       0.495     0.394      0.489
Related Accident
log (Non-Alcohol
Related Accident +      0.059          0.297         0.629       0.838     0.581      0.825
1)



                                                     47
Figure A1: DUI Arrests By hour and Day of the Week
  900

  800

  700
                                                                                    Monday
  600
                                                                                    Tuesday
  500
                                                                                    Wednesday
  400
                                                                                    Thursday
  300                                                                               Friday
  200                                                                               Saturday

  100                                                                               Sunday

    0
            8 pm    9 pm    10 pm 11 pm 12 am    1 am   2 am   3 am   4 am   5 am




Figure A2: Alcohol Related Arrests By hour and Day of the Week

  1,800

  1,600

  1,400

  1,200                                                                             Monday

  1,000                                                                             Tuesday
                                                                                    Wednesday
   800
                                                                                    Thursday
   600
                                                                                    Friday
   400                                                                              Saturday

   200                                                                              Sunday

        0
             8 pm    9 pm    10 pm 11 pm 12 am   1 am   2 am   3 am   4 am   5 am




                                                          48
