NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SURFING THE WAVES OF GLOBALIZATION:
ASIA AND FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION IN THE CONTEXT OF THE TRILEMMA
Joshua Aizenman
Menzie D. Chinn
Hiro Ito
Working Paper 15876
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15876

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

This paper was initially prepared as a background material for the Asian Development Bank's (ADB)
Asian Development Outlook 2009 Update (available at www.adb.org/Economics/). The authors thank
Akiko Terada-Hagiwara and Jong-Wha Lee for valuable comments. Ito thanks the ADB Institute for
its hospitality during his stay as a visiting scholar, during which time part of this paper was completed.
The financial support of faculty research funds of Portland State University is also gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of ADB or ADB Institute.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Joshua Aizenman, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Surfing the Waves of Globalization: Asia and Financial Globalization in the Context of the
Trilemma
Joshua Aizenman, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 15876
April 2010
JEL No. F15,F21,F31,F36,F41,O24
ABSTRACT
Using the “trilemma indexes” developed by Aizenman et al. (2008) that measure the extent of achievement
in each of the three policy goals in the trilemma—monetary independence, exchange rate stability,
and financial openness—we examine how policy configurations affect macroeconomic performances,
with focus on the Asian economies. We find that the three policy choices matter for output volatility
and the medium-term level of inflation. Greater monetary independence is associated with lower output
volatility while greater exchange rate stability implies greater output volatility, which can be mitigated
if a country holds international reserves (IR) at a level higher than a threshold (about 20% of GDP).
Greater monetary autonomy is associated with a higher level of inflation while greater exchange rate
stability and greater financial openness could lower the inflation rate. We find that trilemma policy
configurations and external finances affect output volatility through the investment or trade channel
depending on the openness of the economies. While a higher degree of exchange rate stability could
stabilize the real exchange rate movement, it could also make investment volatile, though the volatility-enhancing
effect of exchange rate stability on investment can be offset by holding higher levels of IR. Our results
indicate that policy makers in a more open economy would prefer pursuing greater exchange rate stability
while holding a massive amount of IR. Asian emerging market economies are found to be equipped
with macroeconomic policy configurations that help the economies to dampen the volatility of the
real exchange rate. These economies’ sizeable amount of IR holding appears to enhance the stabilizing
effect of the trilemma policy choices, and this may help explain the recent phenomenal buildup of
IR in the region.

Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu
Menzie D. Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu

Hiro Ito
Portland State University
1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
Portland, Oregon 97201
ito@pdx.edu

1.

Introduction
Originating from the financial crisis in the United States, the waves of the global crisis

quickly hit hard many economies, including those in Asia, in the summer of 2008, devastating
economies on the global scale by the end of 2008. According to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), all of the United States, the Euro area, and Japan are expected to experience negative
output growth in 2009 for the first time in the post-World War II era. Emerging and developing
economies are expected to grow at a mere 1.7%, plunging from 8.3% in 2007 and 6.0% in 2008.
Asia is no exception; newly industrialized Asian economies are expected to shrink by 2.4% in
2009, and the two high-growth economies in Asia, People's Republic of China and India, are
predicted to significantly slow down to 7.5% and 5.4%, respectively. Clearly, economies have
experienced the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
By the summer of 2009, however, there were somemixed signs of recovery among some
economies. Even the U.S., the epicenter of the crisis, started to exhibit indications of recovery by
the fall of 2009. Although smaller economies still seem to be in a frail situation, bigger emerging
economies in Asia started reporting economic data that suggest robust recovery. In the second
quarter of 2009, emerging Asian economies’ gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average
annualized rate of over 10% while the U.S. fell by 1%. As early as July 2009, the Asian
Development Bank Chief Economist Jong-Wha Lee commented “Emerging East Asia could see
a V-shaped recovery, with growth dipping sharply in 2009 before regaining last year’s pace in
2010.”1
If it comes to pass, the V-shaped recovery in Asia, will not be unprecedented. In fact, that
is how many economies in the region behaved in the aftermath of the Asian crisis of 1997-98.
Despite a severe output contraction in 1998, Asian crisis economies exhibited a remarkable
comeback with robust growth in exports and output as early as in 1999. Park and Lee (2002)
attribute the quick recovery to the openness of these economies, and their close links to the rest
of the world. Asia’s sharp bounceback this time is not only impressive but also surprising given
that, unlike in the aftermath of the Asian crisis, the U.S. economy did not provide the “demand
of last resort” (Aizenman and Jinjarak, 2008) that can fill the foregone demand in the world
economy.
1

Asian Development Bank News Release on 23 July 2009,
www.adb.org/Media/Articles/2009/12944-east-asian-economics-growths/

1

If the Asian economies do show robust and sustainable recovery while the advanced
economies do not, that would have two implications. First, robust recovery is evidence for the
Asian economies “decoupling” from the advanced economies. Second, it suggests that the Asian
economies, most of which are quite open to international trade in goods and financial assets, are
better prepared to cope with economic crises in a highly globalized environment. Figure 1 shows
that output volatility—measured by the standard deviations of per capita output growth
rates—for Asian emerging market economies has been maintained at low levels comparable to
those of the industrialized economies. One interesting conjecture is that these countries have
adopted international economic policies that have afforded them better macroeconomic
performance. While we still have to wait a few more years to gather sufficient data in order to
conduct a meaningful analysis of the “decoupling” thesis, we can however investigate whether
the Asian economies are better-suited to cope with globalization by examining what has
happened historically over the past couple of decades. This will be the main focus of this paper.
To examine policy configurations in the context of international macroeconomics, this
paper focuses on a central hypothesis in international finance, namely the “impossible trinity,” or
the “trilemma.” The hypothesis states that a country may simultaneously choose any two, but not
all, of the following three goals: monetary independence, exchange rate stability, and financial
integration. This concept, if valid, is supposed to constrain policy makers by forcing them to
choose only two out of the three policy choices. Given that Asian emerging market economies
have collectively outperformed other developing economies in terms of output growth stability,
it is possible that their international macro-policy management, determined within the constraint
of the trilemma, has contributed to preparing these economies for higher output vulnerabilitypossibly exacerbated by recent globalization.
In this paper our objective is to investigate how policy configurations based on the
trilemma affect the macroeconomic performance of economies, with focus on emerging markets
in Asia. Given the complexity of the dynamics of policy choices and macroeconomic
performances, it is most appropriate and effective to conduct panel data analysis to unravel the
peculiarity, if there is, of international macroeconomic policies of these economies. More
specifically, using the “trilemma indexes” developed by Aizenman et al. (2008) that measure the
extent of achievement in each of the three policy goals, we propose to examine how policy

2

configurations based on the trilemma affect macroeconomic performances such as output
volatility, inflation volatility, and the medium rate of inflation for developing economies.
Furthermore, this study focuses on output volatility and attempts to identify the channels
by which the trilemma policy choices affect output volatility. We examine the volatilities of
investment and the real exchange rate as possible candidate channels. Our exercise should yield
conclusions about how policy configurations can vary depending on the extent of openness of the
economy.
In Section 2 we briefly review the theory of the trilemma and also assess the development
of the three macroeconomic policies based on the trilemma by using the “trilemma indexes.” In
Section 3 we conduct a more formal analysis on the effect of the policy choices on
macroeconomic policy goals, namely, output volatility, inflation rates, and the volatility of
inflation. We will examine the implications of the estimation results for Asian economies. In
Section 4, we extend our empirical investigation to investigate the channels through which
international macroeconomic policy configurations affect output volatility. Finally, in Section 5
we present concluding remarks.
2.

The “Impossible Trinity” or “Trilemma”: Theory and Evidence

2.1 Brief Review
As of this writing, it is unknown what the total length and depth of the current global
crisis will be. However, the crisis at least has put the current international financial architecture –
as well as individual economies’ macroeconomic policies – into question, as highlighted by the
series of G20 meetings in Washington, D.C., London, and Pittsburgh. Whatever configuration of
international financial architecture or international macroeconomic policies is considered by
policy makers, they cannot avoid confronting the “impossible trinity,” or the “trilemma”—a
hypothesis that states that a country simultaneously may choose any two, but not all, of the three
goals of monetary independence, exchange rate stability, and financial integration.
The trilemma is illustrated in Figure 2. Each of the three sides of the
triangle—representing monetary independence, exchange rate stability, and financial
integration—depicts a potentially desirable goal, yet it is not possible to be simultaneously on all
three sides of the triangle. The top vertex, labeled “closed capital markets” is, for example,

3

associated with monetary policy autonomy and a fixed exchange rate regime, but not financial
integration.2
History has shown that different international financial systems have attempted to
achieve combinations of two out of the three policy goals, such as the Gold Standard
system-guaranteeing capital mobility and exchange rate stability and the Bretton Woods systemproviding monetary autonomy and exchange rate stability. The fact that economies have altered
the combinations as a reaction to crises or major economic events may be taken to imply that
each of the three policy options is a mixed bag of both merits and demerits for managing
macroeconomic conditions.3
Greater monetary independence could allow policy makers to stabilize the economy
through monetary policy without being subject to other economies’ macroeconomic management,
thus potentially leading to stable and sustainable economic growth. However, in a world with
price and wage rigidities, policy makers could also manipulate output movement (at least in the
short-run), thus leading to increasing output and inflation volatility. Furthermore, monetary
authorities could also abuse their autonomy to monetize fiscal debt, and therefore end up
destabilizing the economy through high and volatile inflation.
Exchange rate stability could bring out price stability by providing an anchor, and lower
risk premium by mitigating uncertainty, thereby fostering investment and international trade.4
Also, at the time of an economic crisis, maintaining a pegged exchange rate could increase the
credibility of policy makers and thereby contribute to stabilizing output movement (Aizenman, et
al., 2009). However, greater levels of exchange rate stability could also rid policy makers of a
policy choice of using exchange rate as a tool to absorb external shocks. Prasad (2008) argues
that exchange rate rigidities would prevent policy makers from implementing appropriate
policies consistent with macroeconomic reality, implying that they would be prone to cause asset
boom and bust by overheating the economy. Hence, the rigidity caused by exchange rate stability
could not only enhance output volatility, but also cause misallocation of resources and
unbalanced, unsustainable growth.
2

See Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2005) for further discussion and references dealing with the trilemma.
Aizenman et al. (2008) have statistically shown that external shocks in the last four decades, namely, the collapse
of the Bretton Woods system, the debt crisis of 1982, and the Asian crisis of 1997-98, caused structural breaks in the
trilemma configurations.
4
Aghion, et al. (2005) argue that, for an economy equipped with well-developed financial markets, reduction in
uncertainty could enhance more efficient allocation of capital that could lead to higher productivities.
3

4

Financial liberalization is perhaps the most contentious and hotly debated policy among
the three policy choices of the trilemma. On one hand more open financial markets could lead to
economic growth by paving the way for more efficient resource allocation, mitigating
information asymmetry, enhancing and/or supplementing domestic savings, and helping transfer
of technological or managerial know-how (i.e., growth in total factor productivity).5 Also,
economies with greater access to international capital markets should be better able to stabilize
themselves through risk sharing and portfolio diversification. On the other hand, it is also true
that financial liberalization has often been blamed for economic instability, especially over the
last two decades, including the current crisis. Based on this view, financial openness could
expose economies to volatile cross-border capital flows resulting in sudden stops or reversal of
capital flows, thereby making economies vulnerable to boom-bust cycles (Kaminsky and
Schmukler, 2002).6
Thus, theory tells us that each one of the three trilemma policy choices can be a
double-edged sword, which should explain the wide and mixed variety of empirical findings on
each of the three policy choices.7 Furthermore, to make the matter more complicated, while
there are three ways of pairing two out of the three policies (i.e., three vertices in the triangle in
Figure 2), the effect of each policy choice can differ depending on what the other policy choice it
is paired with.8 Hence, it maybe worthwhile to empirically analyze the three types of policy
combinations in a comprehensive and systematic manner.
2.2 Development of the Trilemma Dimensions
Despite its pervasive recognition, there has been almost no empirical work that we are
aware of, that tests the concept of the trilemma systematically. Many of the studies in this
5

Henry (2006) argues that only when it fundamentally changes productivity growth through financial market
development could equity market liberalization policies have a long-term effect on investment and output growth.
Otherwise, the effect of financial liberalization should be short-lived, which may explain the weak evidence on the
link between financial liberalization and growth.
6
For a summary on the cost and benefits of financial liberalization, refer to Henry (2006) and Prasad and Rajan
(2008).
7
Monetary independence is often discussed in the context of the impact of central bank independence or inflation
targeting such as Alesina and Summers (1993) and Cechetti and Ehrmann (1999) among many others. On the impact
of the exchange rate regime, refer to Ghosh et al. (1997), Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003), and Eichengreen
and Leblang (2003). The empirical literature on the effect of financial liberalization is surveyed by Edison et al.
(2002), Henry (2006), Kawai and Takagi (2008), and Prasad et al. (2003).
8
For example, exchange rate stability can be more destabilizing when it is paired with financial openness. But if it
paired with greater monetary autonomy (i.e., closed financial markets), it can be stabilizing.

5

literature often focus on one or two variables of the trilemma, but fail to provide a
comprehensive analysis of all of the three policy aspects of the trilemma.9 This is partly because
of the lack of appropriate metrics that measure the extent of achievement in the three policy
goals.
Aizenman et al. (2008) overcame this deficiency by developing a set of the “trilemma
indexes” that measure the degree to which each of the three policy choices is implemented by
economies. Using these indexes, we tested whether the indexes are linearly related to each other,
and confirmed that a change in one of the trilemma variables would induce a change with the
opposite sign in the weighted average of the other two. This means, as theory predicts,
economies do face the trade-off of the three policy choices.
We create the “trilemma indexes” for more than 170 economies for 1970 through 2007.
The monetary independence index (MI) is based on the correlation of a country’s interest rates
with the base country’s interest rate. The index for exchange rate stability (ERS) is an invert of
exchange rate volatility, i.e., standard deviations of the monthly rate of depreciation, using the
exchange rate between the home and base economies. The degree of financial integration is
measured with the Chinn-Ito (2006, 2008) capital controls index (KAOPEN). More details on the
construction of the indexes can be found in the Appendix 1.
Figure 3 shows the trajectories of the trilemma indexes for different income-country
groups. For the industrialized economies, financial openness accelerated after the beginning of
the 1990s while the extent of monetary independence started a declining trend. After the end of
the 1990s, exchange rate stability rose significantly. All these trends seem to reflect the
introduction of the euro in 1999.10
Developing economies on the other hand do not present such a distinct divergence of the
indexes, and their experiences differ depending on whether they are emerging or non-emerging
market economies.11 For emerging market economies, exchange rate stability declined rapidly

9

Notable exceptions include works by Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2005, 2008, and 2009) and Shambaugh
(2004).
10
If the euro economies are removed from the sample (not reported), financial openness evolves similarly to the
IDC group that includes the euro economies, but exchange rate stability hovers around the line for monetary
independence, though at bit higher levels, after the early 1990s. The difference between exchange rate stability and
monetary independence has been slightly diverging after the end of the 1990s.
11
The emerging market economies are defined as the economies classified as either emerging or frontier during
1980–1997 by the International Financial Corporation. For those in Asia, emerging market economies are
“Emerging East Asia-14” defined by Asian Development Bank plus India.

6

from the 1970s through the mid-1980s. After some retrenchment around early 1980s (in the
wake of the debt crisis), financial openness started rising from 1990 onwards. For the other
developing economies, exchange rate stability declined less rapidly, and financial openness
trended upward more slowly. In both cases though, monetary independence remained more or
less trendless.
Interestingly, for the emerging market economies, the indexes suggest a convergence
toward the middle ground, even as talk of the disappearing middle has been doing the rounds.
This pattern of results suggests that developing economies may have been trying to cling to
moderate levels of both monetary independence and financial openness while maintaining higher
levels of exchange rate stability. In other words, they have been leaning against the trilemma
over a period that interestingly coincides with the time when some of these economies began
accumulating sizable international reserves (IR), potentially to buffer the trade-off arising from
the trilemma.12
None of these observations is applicable to non-emerging developing market economies
(Figure 3[c]). For this group of economies, exchange rate stability has been the most
aggressively pursued policy throughout the period. In contrast to the experience of the emerging
market economies, financial liberalization has not been proceeding rapidly for the non-emerging
market developing economies.
Furthermore Asia, especially those economies with emerging markets, stand out from
other geographical groups of economies.13 Panel (a) in Figure 4 shows that for Asian emerging
market economies, this sort of convergence is not a recent phenomenon. Since as early as the
early 1980s, the three indexes have been clustered around the middle range. However, for most
of the time, except for the Asian crisis years of 1997-98, exchange rate stability seems to have
been the most pervasive policy choice. In the post-crisis years in the 2000s, the indexes diverged,
but seem to be converging again in the recent years. This characterization does not appear to be
applicable to non-emerging market economies (non-EMG) in Asia (b) or Latin America (c). For
non-EMG economies in Asia or non-Asian developing economies, convergence in the trilemma
configurations seems to be the case in the last decade.

12

Willett (2003) has called this compulsion by economies with a mediocre level of exchange rate stability to hoard
reserves-the “unstable middle” hypothesis (as opposed to the “disappearing middle” view).
13
Appendix 2 lists “Asian economies” included in the sample.

7

Adding one more dimension to the three trilemma dimensions is helpful to shed further
light on the concept of the trilemma. The additional dimension is the role of IR holding. Since
the Asian crisis of 1997-98, developing economies, especially those in East Asia and the Middle
East, have been rapidly increasing the amount of IR holding. China, the world’s largest holder of
international reserves, currently holds about $2 trillion of reserves, accounting for 30% of the
world’s total. As of the end of 2008, the top 10 IR holders are all developing economies, with the
sole exception of Japan. The nine developing economies, including China, Republic of Korea
(Korea), Russian Federation, and Taiwan, hold about 50% of world IR. Against this backdrop, it
has been argued that one of the main reasons for the rapid IR accumulation is economies’ desire
to stabilize exchange rate movement. According to one perspective, economies accumulate
massive IR to achieve a target combination of exchange rate stability, monetary policy autonomy,
and financial openness
For example, a country pursuing a stable exchange rate and monetary autonomy may try
to liberalize cross-border financial transactions while determined not to give up the current levels
of exchange rate stability and monetary autonomy. This sort of policy combination, however,
could motivate the monetary authorities to hold a sizeable amount of IR so that they can stabilize
the exchange rate movement while retaining monetary autonomy. Or, if an economy with open
financial markets and fixed exchange rate faces a need to independently relax monetary policy, it
may be able to do so, though temporarily, as long as it holds a massive amount of IR. Thus,
evidently, one cannot discuss the issue of the trilemma without incorporating a role for IR
holding.
The “Diamond charts” in Figure 5 are useful to trace the changing patterns of the
trilemma configurations while incorporating IR holding. Each country’s configuration at a given
instant is summarized by a “generalized diamond,” whose four vertices measure monetary
independence, exchange rate stability, IR/GDP ratio, and financial integration. The origin has
been normalized so as to represent zero monetary independence, pure float, zero international
reserves, and financial autarky. Figure 5 summarizes the trends for industrialized economies,
emerging Asian economies, non-emerging market developing Asian economies, non-Asian
developing economies, and Latin American emerging market economies.
In Figure 5, we can observe again the divergence of the trilemma configurations for the
industrial economies—a move toward deeper financial integration, greater exchange rate

8

stability, and weaker monetary independence over the years. But this group of economies has
reduced the level of IR holding over years unlike the other country groups. Once we shift our
attention to regional comparison of the trilemma configurations, Asia, especially those
economies with emerging markets, appears distinct from other groups of economies.14 The
diamond chart for Asian emerging market economies shows that the middle-ground convergence
observed for the group of emerging market economies in general in Figure 3, is quite evident for
this particular group of economies. This is not a recent phenomenon for the Asian emerging
market economies. Since as early as the 1980s, the three indexes have been clustered around the
middle range, though exchange rate stability has been the most pervasive policy choice and the
degree of monetary independence has been gradually declining. This characterization does not
appear to be applicable to the other groups of developing economies, whether or not they are
Asian. On the other hand, Latin American emerging market economies appear to have gone
through a distinctively different path of development compared to the Asian countries. Most
importantly, the group of Asian emerging market economies stands out from the others with their
sizeable and rapidly increasing amount of IR holding, that may make one suspect potential
implications of such IR holdings on trilemma policy choices and macroeconomic performances.
3.

Regression Analyses
Although the above characterization of the trilemma indexes allows us to observe the

development of policy orientation among economies, it fails to identify economies’ motivations
for policy changes. Hence, we examine econometrically how the various choices regarding the
three policies affect final macro-policy goals, namely, high economic growth, output growth
stability, low inflation, and inflation stability.
The estimation model is given by:
yit   0  1TLM it   2 IRit   3 (TLM it  IRit )  X it   Z t   Di    it (1)

14

The “Asian Economies” sample include Armenia*, Azerbaijan*, Bangladesh, Bhutan*, Cambodia, People’s
Republic of China, Fiji Islands, Georgia, Hong Kong, China, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan*, Kyrgyz Republic*,
Korea, Republic of, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Maldives*, Micronesia, Federated States of*,
Mongolia, Myanmar*, Nepal, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea*, Philippines, Samoa*, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri
Lanka, Tajikistan*, Thailand, Tonga*, Turkmenistan*, Uzbekistan, and Vietnam. Economies with asterisk indicate
the economies that are not included in the regression estimations.

9

yit is the measure of macro policy performance for country i in year t, i.e., output volatility,
inflation volatility, and the medium-term level of inflation.15 TLMit is a vector of any two of the
three trilemma indexes, namely, MI (monetary independence), ERS (exchange rate stability), and
KAOPEN(financial openness). Aizenman et al. (2008) have shown that these three measures of
the trilemma are linearly related. Therefore, it is most appropriate to include two of the indexes
simultaneously, rather than individually or all three jointly.16 TRit is the level of IR (excluding
gold) as a ratio to GDP, and (TLMit x TRit) is an interaction term between the trilemma indexes
and the level of IR, that may allow us to observe whether IR complement or substitute for other
policy stances.
Xit is a vector of macroeconomic control variables that include the variables most used in
the literature. More specifically, for the estimation on economic growth, Xit includes relative
income (to the U.S. per capita real income—based on Penn World Table (PWT)), its quadratic
term, trade openness, the terms-of-trade (TOT) shock defined as the 5-year standard deviation of
trade openness times TOT growth, fiscal procyclicality (measured as the correlations between
Hodrick-Prescott (HP)-detrended government spending series and HP-detrended real GDP
series), 5-year average of M2 growth, private credit creation (as percent of GDP), the inflation
rate, and inflation volatility, with some variation of included independent variables depending on
the type of the dependent variable. Zt is a vector of global shocks that includes the change in U.S.
real interest rate, the world output gap, and relative oil price shocks (measured as log of the ratio
of oil price index to the world’s consumer price index). Di is a set of characteristic dummies that
includes a dummy for oil exporting economies and regional dummies. Explanatory variables that
persistently appear to be statistically insignificant are dropped from the estimation.  it is an i.i.d.
error term.
The estimation model is also extended by including a vector, ExtFinit, of external
finances, that includes net foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows, net portfolio inflows, net
“other” inflows (which mostly include bank lending), short-term debt, and total debt service. For
net capital flows, we use the International Financial Statistics (IFS) data and define them as
15

Output growth is measured as the 5-year average of the growth rate of per capita real output (using Penn World
Table 6.2); output volatility is measured as the 5-year standard deviations of the per capita output growth rate;
inflation volatility as the 5-year standard deviations of the monthly rate of inflation; and the medium-term level of
inflation as the 5-year average of the monthly rate of inflation.
16
That means that for each dependent variable, three types of regressions, i.e., those with three different
combinations of two trilemma variables, are estimated.

10

external liabilities (= capital inflows with a positive sign) minus assets (= capital inflows with a
negative sign) for each type of flows. Negative values mean that a country experiences a net
outflow capital of the type of concern. Short-term debt is included as the ratio of total external
debt and total debt service as is that of gross national income (GNI). Both variables are retrieved
from World Development Indicators (WDI).
The data set is organized into 5-year panels of 1972–1976, 1977–1981, 1982–1986,
1987–1991, 1992–1996, 1997–2001, 2002–2006. All time-varying variables are included as
5-year averages. The regression is conducted for the group of developing countries (LDC).
Given that a group of developing countries recently emerged as major players in the world
economy, and that these countries share some commonality among them (in terms of high levels
of institutional development and/or high degrees of economic openness, etc.), we also focus on a
subgroup of developing countries with emerging markets, or just emerging market economies
(EMG). The estimation model for economic growth is based upon the one used in Kose et al.
(2009), namely, OLS with fixed effects and system GMM, and the model for output volatility,
inflation volatility, and the level of inflation is based upon Aizenman et al. (2008), i.e., the robust
regression model that down-weights outliers arising in both the dependent variable and
explanatory variables such as inflation volatility.
3.1 Estimation Results of the Basic Models
Our discussions on the estimations focus on the regression results pertaining to output
volatility and the level of inflation, simply because they are primary concerns of policy makers.
As a preliminary exercise, we examined the impact of trilemma policy configurations on per
capita output growth by using a parsimonious model akin to that of Kose et al. (2009).17 Three
different types of estimation methods, pooled OLS, Fixed Effects (FE) model (with robust
standard errors clustered by country), and system GMM, yielded weak correlation between the

17

The explanatory variables for the estimation model include income per capita from the initial year of each
five-year panel, average investment ratio to GDP, years of schooling (based on Barro and Lee, 2001), population
growth, trade openness (=(EX+IM)/GDP), and private credit creation (% of GDP) as a measure of financial
development. The trilemma variables are also included in the same way as mentioned above. Neither the IR variable
nor the interaction terms between trilemma variables and IR are included in the estimation because of the lack of
theoretical rationale for the link between IR holding and economic growth.

11

trilemma variables and per capita output growth for the sample of developing economies and a
subsample of emerging market economies.18
One of the reasons for the relatively weak results for the trilemma configurations in the
growth regression can be because policy arrangements relevant to the trilemma may primarily
affect the volatilities in output or inflation, and then indirectly, output growth. Hnatkovska and
Loayza (2005) find that macroeconomic volatility and long-run economic growth are negatively
related, and that the negative link is considerably larger for the last two decades.19 W e next
report and discuss the estimations on the effect of the trilemma configurations on other
macroeconomic performances, namely, volatility, inflation volatility, and the level of inflation.
3.1.1 Output Volatility
The estimation results are shown in Tables 1-1 and 1-2. Overall, macroeconomic
variables retain the characteristics consistent with what has been found in the literature. In the
regression for output volatility (shown in columns (1) through (3) of Tables 1-1 and 1-2), the
higher the level of income is (relative to the U.S.), the more reduced output volatility is, though
the effect is nonlinear. Output volatility could also increase with a change in U.S. real interest
rate, indicating that the U.S. real interest rate may represent the debt payment burden on these
economies. The higher the TOT shock, the higher the output volatility that economies experience,
consistent with Rodrik (1998) and Easterly, et al. (2001), who argue that volatility in world
goods through trade openness can raise output volatility.20 Economies with procyclical fiscal
policy tend to experience more output volatility while economies with more developed financial
markets tend to experience lower output volatility, though they are not statistically significant.21

18

The regression results are available from the authors upon request.
They also investigate the determinants of the negative link and find that the negative link can be exacerbated by
underdevelopment of institutions, intermediate stages of financial development, and inability to conduct
countercyclical fiscal policies.
20
The effect of trade openness is found to have insignificant effects for all subgroups of economies and is therefore
dropped from the estimations. This finding reflects the debate in the literature, which offers evidence of both
positive (i.e., volatility enhancing) and negative (i.e., volatility reducing) effects of trade openness. The
volatility-enhancing effect in the sense of Easterly et al. (2001) and Rodrik (1998) is captured by the term for
(TOT*Trade Openness) volatility. For the volatility reducing effect of trade openness, refer to Calvo et al. (2004),
Cavallo (2005, 2007), and Cavallo and Frankel (2004). The impact of trade openness on output volatility also
depends on the type of trade, i.e., whether it is inter-industry trade (Krugman, 1993) or intra-industry trade (Razin
and Rose,1994).
21
For theoretical predictions on the effect of financial development, refer to Aghion, et al. (1999) and Caballero and
Krishnamurthy (2001). For empirical findings, see Blankenau, et al. (2001) and Kose et al. (2003).
19

12

The results hold qualitatively for the subsample of emerging market economies though the
statistical significance tends to appear weaker.
Among the trilemma indexes, monetary independence is found to have a significantly
negative effect on output volatility. The greater monetary independence one embraces, the less
output volatility the country tends to experience, naturally reflecting the impact of stabilization
measures.22,23 Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2007) find that economies that adopt inflation
targeting—one form of increasing monetary independence—are found to reduce output volatility,
and that the effect is bigger among emerging market economies.24 This volatility-reducing effect
of monetary independence may explain the tendency for developing economies, especially
non-emerging market ones, to not reduce the extent of monetary independence over years.
Economies with more stable exchange rate tend to experience higher output volatility for
both LDC and EMG groups, which conversely implies that economies with more flexible
exchange rates will experience lower levels of output volatility, as has been found in Edwards
and Levy-Yeyati (2003) and Haruka (2007). However, the interaction term is found to have a
statistically negative effect, suggesting that economies holding high levels of IR are able to
reduce output volatility. The threshold level of international reserves holding is 13–18% of
GDP.25 Singapore, a country with a middle level of exchange rate stability (0.50 in 2002–2006)
and a very high level of IR holding (100% as a ratio of GDP), is able to reduce the output
volatility by 2.7-2.9 percentage points.26 China, whose exchange rate stability index is as high as
0.97 and whose ratio of reserves holding to GDP is 40% in 2002–2006, is able to reduce
volatility by 1.4–1.7 percentage points.
22

Once the interaction term between monetary independence and IR holding is removed from the estimation model,
the coefficient of monetary independence becomes significantly negative with the 5% significance level in model (1)
of the LDC sample and in models (1) and (2) of the EMG sample.
23
This finding can be surprising to some if the concept of monetary independence is taken synonymously to central
bank independence because many authors, most typically Alesina and Summers (1993), have found more
independent central banks would have no or at most, little impact on output variability. However, in this literature,
the extent of central bank independence is usually measured by the legal definition of the central bankers and/or the
turnover ratios of bank governors, which can bring about different inferences compared to our measure of monetary
independence.
24
The link is not always theoretically predicted to be negative. When monetary authorities react to negative supply
shocks, that can amplify the shocks and exacerbate output volatility. Cechetti and Ehrmann (1999) find the positive
association between adoption of inflation targeting and output volatility.
25
In Model (3) of Table 3-1, ˆ1TLM it  ˆ 3 (TLM it  IRit ) for ERS is found to be 0.009ERSit  0.067( ERSit  IRit )
or (0.009  0.067 IRit ) ERSit . In order for ERS to have a negative impact, 0.009  0.067 IRit  0 , and therefore, it
must be that IRit  0.009
26

 0.13 .
0.067
See Moreno and Spiegel (1997) for an earlier study of trilemma configurations in Singapore.

13

When the model is extended to incorporate external finances, (results are reported in
Tables 2-1 and 2-2) in general the control variables remain qualitatively unchanged, but the
statistical significance of the trilemma variables slightly increase.27 Among the trilemma indexes,
greater monetary independence continues to be an output volatility reducer. The nonlinear effect
of greater exchange rate stability in interaction with IR holding remains, but the threshold level is
found to be 12.6% of GDP in model (3) for developing economies and 18–19% for emerging
market economies.
Economies with more open capital account tend to experience lower output volatility
according to Table 2-1. However, those with IR holding higher than 23% of GDP can experience
higher volatility by pursuing more financial openness, which is somewhat counterintuitive.28
Among the external finance variables, an increase in the “other” capital inflows, i.e.,
banking lending or more net portfolio inflows, received by an economy, increases the likelihood
that the economy might experience higher output volatility. This reflects the fact that economies
that experience macroeconomic turmoil often witness an increase in inflows of bank-lending or
“hot money” such as portfolio investment. Total debt service is found to be a positive contributor
to output volatility while short-term debt does not seem to have an effect. These results contrast
with the conventional wisdom regarding short-term external debt.29
3.1.2 Inflation Volatility
The regression models for inflation volatility do not turn out to be as significant as those
for output volatility including the performance of the trilemma indexes. We do not report the
results in the table. While the findings on the macro variables are generally consistent with the
27

We must note the possibility that the KAOPEN index may not capture the actual ebb and flow of cross border
capital and its impact. Edwards (1999) discusses that the private sector often circumvents capital account restrictions,
nullifying the expected effect of regulatory capital controls. More recently, the PRC’s de facto openness, despite its
de jure closeness, is often the subject of researchers (Aizenman and Glick, 2008, Prasad and Wei, 2007, and Shah
and Patnaik, 2009).
28
The result of model (2) in Table 2-1 is consistent with those of models (1) and (3). That is, model (2) predicts that
if a country increases its level of monetary independence and financial openness concurrently, it could reduce output
volatility. As long as the concept of the trilemma holds true, i.e., the three policy goals are linearly related, as
Aizenman et al. (2008) empirically proved, the efforts of increasing both MI and KAOPEN is essentially the same as
lowering the level of exchange rate stability. Models (1) and (3) predict that lower ERS leads to lower output
volatility. But these models also predict that if the country holds IR more than thresholds, it would have to face
higher output volatility, which is found in model (2).
29
One might suspect that this result can be driven by multicollinearity between the short-term debt variable and the
variables for the various net inflows. However, even when the three net inflow variables are removed from the
models, still the total debt service continues to be a positive factor while the short-term debt variable continues to be
an insignificant one.

14

literature, the performance of the trilemma indexes appears to be the weakest for this group of
estimations. However, exchange rate stability is now a volatility-increasing factor, which is
contrary to what has been found in the literature (such as Ghosh, et al., 1997) and somewhat
counterintuitive, because economies with more stability in their exchange rates should
experience lower inflation and thereby lower inflation volatility. One possible explanation is that
economies with fixed exchange rates tend to lack fiscal discipline and eventually experience
devaluation as argued by Tornell and Velasco (2000).30 When we include the interaction term
between the crisis dummy and the ERS variable to isolate the effect of exchange rate stability for
the crisis economies, the estimated coefficient on ERS still remains with the same magnitude and
statistical significance.31
3.1.3 Medium-Run Level of Inflation
The models for the medium-run level of inflation fit as well as those for output volatility.
Higher inflation volatility, higher M2 growth, and oil price shocks are associated with higher
inflation. Also, when the world economy experiencesa boom, developing economies tend to
experience higher inflation, which presumably reflects strong demand for goods produced and
exported by developing economies.
Among the trilemma variables, greater exchange rate stability leads to lower inflation for
both developing and emerging market economies, a result consistent with the literature (such as
Ghosh et al., 1997). This finding and the previously found positive association between exchange
rate stability and output volatility are in line with the theoretical prediction that establishing
stable exchange rates is a trade-off issue for policy makers. It will help the country to achieve
lower inflation by showing a higher level of credibility and commitment on part of the monetary
authorities, but at the same time, efforts of maintaining stable exchange rates will rid policy
makers of an important adjustment mechanism through fluctuating exchange rates.

30

Tornell and Velasco argue that while economies with flexible exchange rates face the cost of having lax fiscal
policy immediately, economies with fixed exchange rates tend to lack fiscal discipline because “under fixed rates
bad behavior today leads to punishment tomorrow.”
31
Even when the model incorporates external finances, the estimation results remain to be weak, except for FDI
inflows and total debt service. While FDI inflows are found to be inflation stabilizers, total debt service can be
destabilizing inflation, both consistent with the literature.

15

The estimations for both subsamples show that the more financially open a developing
country is, the lower the inflation it will experience. Interestingly, the more open to trade a
country is, the more likely it is to experience lower inflation for the LDC regressions.
The negative association between “openness” and inflation has been the subject of debate
as globalization has proceeded.32 Romer (1993), extending the Barro-Gordon (1983) model,
verified that the more open to trade a country becomes, the less motivated its monetary
authorities are to inflate, suggesting a negative link between trade openness and inflation. Razin
and Binyamini (2007) predicted that both trade and financial liberalization will flatten the
Phillips curve, so that policy makers will become less responsive to output gaps and more
aggressive in fighting inflation.33 Here, across different subsamples of developing economies,
we present evidence consistent with the negative openness-inflation relationship.
The extended versions of the regressions that incorporate external finances retain the
same characteristics in general. However, for emerging market economies, the interaction term
between ERS and IR holding is found to have a positive impact on the rate of inflation. Models
(8) and (9) in Table 2-2 show that if the ratio of reserves holding to GDP is greater than about
24%, the efforts of pursuing exchange rate stability can help increase the level of inflation. This
means that economies with excess levels of reserves holding will eventually face the limit in the
efforts of fully sterilizing foreign exchange intervention to maintain exchange rate
stability—thereby experiencing higher inflation. In the LDC sample (Table 2-1), we can find the
same kind of threshold as in models (8) and (9). Financial openness can lead to lower inflation,
but only for the case when IR hold is below 21–22% as a ratio to GDP. Given that it is only in a
financially open economy that monetary authorities face the need for foreign exchange
interventions, the threshold of IR holding for financial openness can be interpreted in the same
way as that for exchange rate stability. This implies that there are limits to sterilized
interventions, and that it is more binding for financially open economies. Aizenman and Glick
(2008) and Glick and Hutchison (2008) show that China has started facing more inflationary
pressure in 2007 when allegedly intervening in the foreign exchange market to sustain exchange
rate stability. This finding indicates that sterilized interventions would eventually lead to a rise in
expected inflation if they are conducted as an effort to maintain monetary independence and
32

Rogoff (2003) argues that globalization contributes to dwindling mark-ups, and therefore, disinflation.
Loungani et al. (2001) provides empirical evidence that economies with greater restrictions on capital mobility
face steeper Phillips curves.
33

16

exchange rate stability while having somewhat open financial markets. The rise in the
inflationary pressure provides evidence that policy makers cannot evade the constraint of the
trilemma.
Lastly, among the external finances variables, FDI is found to be an inflation reducer.
One possible explanation is that economies tend to stabilize inflation in order to attract FDI.
Lastly, and unsurprisingly, higher levels of total debt services are found to increase inflation for
the LDC sample.
3.2 Implications for Asia
The estimation results on the determinants of output volatility provide some interesting
insights on Asian economic development. The finding that economies can reverse the
volatility-increasing effect of greater exchange rate stability by holding higher levels of IR than
some threshold (about 13–18% of GDP) may explain the reason why many Asian emerging
economies hold higher levels of IR. Unraveling the motive for IR holding also has an important
implication for the current global crisis. Some economists argue that the efforts made by Asian
economies to hold IR in an attempt to stabilize their exchange rates could have expanded
liquidity rapidly in global capital markets and contributed to finance profligacy in the advanced
economies, an outcome of which has been the recent housing bubble in the U.S.. Hence, we do
need to shed further light on how IR holding and the exchange rate regime interact with each
other.
Figure 6 shows the marginal interactive effects between ERS and IR based on the
estimates from Column 3 of Table 1-2. For presentation purposes, the EMG group of economies
is divided into three subgroups: (i) an Asian group, (ii) a Latin American group, and (iii) all other
EMG economies. In all the panels of figures, the contours are drawn to present different levels of
the effect of ERS on output volatility conditional on the level of IR. The solid horizontal line
refers to the threshold of IR at 18% of GDP, above which higher levels of ERS has a negative
impact on output volatility.34 For example, the solid contour line above the threshold shows the
34

In Model (3) in Table 1-2, ˆ1TLM it  ˆ 3 (TLM it  IRit ) for ERS is found to be 0.012ERSit  0.066( ERSit  IRit ) .
If the marginal effect is –1%, it must be that  0.01  0.012 ERSit  0.066( ERSit  IRit ) . If we solve this for IR, then
we obtain IR  0.012 
it
0.066

the other contours.

 0.01 . We repeat this calculation for the –2% impact, –3% impact, etc. so as to create
0.066ERSit

17

combinations of ERS and IR that lead to a one percentage point reduction in output volatility. In
the figure, the further toward the northeast corner in the panel, i.e., the higher level of ERS and
IR a country pursues, the more negative the impact on output volatility is. Below the threshold,
however, it is true that the further one movoes toward the southeast corner, (i.e., higher level of
ERS and lower level of IR holding), the more positive the impact on output volatility. In each of
the panels, the scatter diagrams of ERS and IR are superimposed. The black circles indicate ERS
and IR for 2002–2006 and the red “x’s” for 1992–1996.35
These diagrams highlight several interesting observations. First, from the 1992 to 1996
and 2002 to 2006 periods, periods that encompass the last wave of global crises whose epicenter
was in Asia, many economies, especially those in East Asia and Eastern Europe, increased their
IR holding above the threshold. Second, the movement is not necessarily toward the northeast
direction. Rather, it is around the threshold level where the effect of ERS is neutral (i.e., zero
percentage point impact), unless they move much higher toward output volatility-reducing
territory (such as Bulgaria and China). Last, only a handful of economies have achieved
combinations of ERS and IR that significantly reduce output volatility. Such economies include
Botswana, China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Jordan, and Singapore. However, the fact that three
Asian economies are among the economies with large IR holding and great ERS may explain
why Asian economies are often perceived to be currency manipulators although they are more of
exceptions than the rule.
Interestingly, in addition to the interactive effect of IR holding with ERS, Table 4-2
shows that if a country holds a level of IR greater than 24% of GDP, it would nullify the negative
effect of pursuing greater exchange rate stability, which indicates that foreign exchange
interventions can be inflationary. The fact that many Asian emerging market economies hold a
greater amount of IR than the 24% threshold as shown in Figure 6, means that these economies
need to perceive the double-edged sword aspect of the policy of pursuing both greater exchange
rate stability and more IR. As we have previously discussed, these economies include China.
4.

Further Investigation into Output Volatility and Trilemma Choices

35

The estimated coefficient on IR (level) is significantly positive in Column (1) of Table 1-2, which indicates the
volatility-enhancing effect of IR itself. Hence, it is essentially a trade-off between holding more IR and pursuing
greater exchange rate stability once the level of IR surpasses the threshold level. The analysis presented in Figure 7
focuses on the marginal effect of ERS and how it changes depending on the level of IR while keeping in mind that
higher levels of IR is volatility-increasing.

18

4.1 Channels to Output Volatility
Given the current state of the world economy, one cannot help but focus on the
estimation results for output volatility. One natural question that arises is through what channels
do these factors contribute to output volatility. To answer this question, we estimate similar
models for output volatility but replace the dependent variable with real exchange rate stability,
through which net exports can be affected, and the volatility of investment. This exercise should
help us examine whether and to what extent policy choices can differ depending on the extent of
economic openness.
4.1.1 Results on Investment Volatility and Real Exchange Rate Volatility
The results shown in columns (1) through (3) of Table 3 correspond to investment
volatility and columns (4) through (6) of Table 3 correspond to real exchange rate stability
specifications. However, for the estimation of the real exchange rate stability, some of the
explanatory variables have been changed. In particular, change in the U.S. real interest rate,
fiscal procyclicality, and financial development (measured by private credit creation as a ratio to
GDP) are dropped from the estimation, and replaced with inflation volatility, and differentials in
inflation volatility between the home and base economies.36
By comparing the results of these specifications with different dependent variables, we
can make some interesting observations. First, we can also observe the negative effect of
monetary independence on the investment volatility estimation as we did in that on output
volatility. However, if the level of IR holding is above 15–20% of GDP, higher monetary
independence could lead to higher volatility in investment. This may be because higher levels of
IR could lead to higher levels of liquidity, and thus to more volatile movement in the cost of
capital. Second, while a higher degree of exchange rate stability could (unsurprisingly) induce
greater real exchange rate stability, it could also lead to more volatile investment. But as was the
case with output volatility, if the level of IR holding exceeds a given threshold, greater exchange
rate stability reduces investment volatility.37 Third, financial openness has a negative impact on
both real exchange rate stability and investment volatility. Hence, we can conclude that financial
36

We also tested interest rate differentials, but they did not turn out to be significant. Therefore, they are not
included in the estimation.
37
The threshold levels of IR holding are 18% of GDP in model (1) and 28% of GDP in model (3) in Table 3-1. In
Table 3-2, they are 14% in model (1) and 26% in model (3).

19

liberalization could help reduce output volatility by making both real exchange rate and
investment more stable. Last, the investment volatility regressions show that net portfolio and
bank lending inflows can be volatility-increasing, although bank lending inflows can reduce real
exchange rate volatility.
4.1.2.

Results on Other Aspects of Macroeconomic Performance
In addition, we repeat the same exercise for variables pertaining to other aspects of

macroeconomic performance, namely, the volatility of final consumption—the sum of private
consumption and government expenditure, the volatility of GNI (gross national income), and the
ratio of the two variables. The motivation for these estimations is twofold. First, we need to
ensure if there are channels other than investment and net exports through which the trilemma
policy configurations can affect output volatility. Second, the ratio of the volatility of GNI to that
of final consumption is essentially a proxy to the measure of risk sharing. In other words, a
higher value of the ratio means a lower volatility of final consumption compared to that of GNI,
which can arise when economic agents successfully diversify risk and smooth consumption.
Hence, if trilemma policy choices are found to reduce the ratio, that can be interpreted as
evidence for successful international risk sharing.38
The regression results for final consumption volatility are not robust in terms of not only
the macroeconomic control variables, but also of the trilemma variables (not reported). Although
the weak estimation results may indicate a possibility of misspecification in these regressions, at
the very least this finding suggests that the channel of final consumption can be ruled out. It is
either investment or net exports through which trilemma configurations affect output volatility.
While the estimation results for GNI are found to be quite similar to the estimation of
output volatility, the estimation involving the ratio of GNI volatility to final consumption
volatility do not perform well at all. Considering that home bias is much more pervasive in
developing economies, the insignificant results are not surprising. Developing economies are not
reaping the benefits of international risk sharing, though that could also mean that there is room
for these economies to reap the benefit from financial liberalization.
38

However, plotting the time series of the ratio of final consumption volatility to GNI volatility is not promising.
While the ratio appears to be trending up moderately among industrialized economies, i.e., they are reaping the
benefits of diversifying risk and smoothing consumption, there is no discernable trend for the group of developing
economies.

20

4.2 A Closer Look at the Transmission Channels and Policy Implications for Asia
In the previous exercise, we found different dynamics between the models for investment
volatility and that for real exchange rate volatility. This difference should suggest that the effect
of international macroeconomic policy configurations differ depending upon how much weight
policy makers place between these two policy goals. For example, if policy makers put greater
weight on real exchange rate stability, it is better to pursue more exchange rate stability and
greater financial openness (which implies lower levels of monetary independence), which could
have a volatility-enhancing impact on investment and output, though the answer depends on the
level of IR holding. More concretely, the results from model (1) in Table 3-2 show that greater
(weaker) monetary independence increases (decreases) real exchange rate volatility. The
estimation results also indicate that the IR threshold (as a ratio to GDP) necessary for greater
(weaker) monetary independence to have a positive (negative) effect on investment volatility, is
15% of GDP whereas that for greater (weaker) exchange rate stability to have a negative
(positive) effect is 16%. Hence, if an emerging market country holds a level of IR higher than 16%
and tries to pursue a higher level of exchange rate stability and a lower level monetary
independence (i.e., a combination of greater exchange rate stability and greater financial
openness), that country could achieve lower levels of not only real exchange rate stability, but
also investment. This result may explain why many emerging market economies, especially
those that are more open to international trade such as Asian emerging market economies, tend to
prefer exchange rate stability and holding a massive amount of IR while also pursuing financial
liberalization.
This finding has a significant relevance to Asian economies. Panel (a) in Figure 7 shows
the average ratio of trade openness (the sum of exports and imports as a ratio to GDP) to
investment (as a ratio to GDP) from 1990 to 2006 for different groups of developing economies.
While the ratio for the group of non-emerging market Asian developing economies is below the
average for the entire group of developing economies, the ratio for the Asian emerging market
economies (EMG) is the highest among the regional subgroups. This means that the results
shown in columns (4) through (6) of Tables 3-1 and 3-2 are more relevant to this group of
economies than any other groups. Our estimation results indicate that more open economies
could reduce volatility in both investment and real exchange rate by pursuing more stable

21

exchange rate as long as they hold higher levels of IR. Panels (b) through (d) show the period
averages of IR holding (% of GDP), ERS, and MI, respectively. In Panel (b), the level of IR
holding for the Asian EMG is much greater than the threshold of 15–16% we just discussed
above, though both ERS and MI are around the group averages of developing economies. These
panels of figures indicate that Asian emerging market economies may have pursued international
macroeconomic policies that help reduce the level of volatility in both investment and the real
exchange rates, or at least the latter if not both. In fact, according to Figure 8, Asian EMGs have
achieved lower levels of volatilities in both investment and the real exchange rate than any other
group of developing economies(naturally, except for the 1990s because of the Asian crisis), and
their levels are comparable to that of industrialized economies.
Figure 9 illustrates the estimated effects of the three trilemma variables on the volatilities
of investment volatility and the real exchange rate calculated using the estimation results shown
in Table 3-1.39 The panels of Figure 9 allow us to make several interesting observations for the
Asian economies. First, across different groups of developing economies, exchange rate stability
and its interaction with IR holding have contributed significantly to lowering the real exchange
rate volatility over years. Second, between the group of Asian developing economies and that of
non-Asian economies, the role of monetary independence is different.40 For the Asian
economies, it has been a volatility enhancing factor for investment with its impact rising rapidly
over the last period (2002-2006). The rapid increase in the volatility-increasing impact for this
group of economies can be explained by the rapid increase in the level of IR holding in this
period. For non-Asian economies, on the other hand, monetary independence has been a
volatility reducer, especially for Latin American economies though its impact dwindled in the
last period. Third, exchange rate stability and its interaction with IR holding, contribute to
lowering investment volatility among the Asian economies but only during the 2002–2006
period, while it has been a volatility-increasing factor throughout the period for the other groups.

39

That is, the bars in the panels of figures refer to ˆ1TLM it  ˆ 3 (TLM it  IRit ) for each of the trilemma indexes and
its interaction with IR holding. The estimated effects are calculated using the estimated coefficients and actual
values for the trilemma indexes and the IR ratio. However, because only two out of the three trilemma variables are
included in the estimations, the estimation results from two types of regressions: one with MI and ERS included in
TLMit and the other with ERS and KAOPEN, are used to calculate the estimated effects for all the three indexes. The
estimated effect of ERS is, however, based on the average of the estimated coefficients for the two regressions.
40
Most of the “Asian developing economies” are emerging market economies due to data availability.

22

Fourth, although we have found in the previous estimation that a country with a greater
level of IR holding than the threshold of 15-16% of GDP should lessen the volatilities in both
investment and the real exchange rate by pursuing weaker monetary independence and greater
exchange rate stability, the Asian economies on average do not appear to be following that sort
of policy combinations. In the last five-year period, although they have succeeded in making
exchange rate stability contribute to lowering investment volatility and the real exchange rate
stability, their monetary independence levels are not low enough to contribute to reducing
investment volatility with the high level of IR holding. Fifth, financial openness does not play a
role in affecting the volatilities of investment and the real exchange rate, which reflects the
ambivalent impact of financial liberalization as we discussed previously. This also suggests that
the motivation for financial liberalization may not be relevant to policy makers’ intention of
alleviating macroeconomic volatilities through more open financial markets. Last, for all groups,
the three policies on net, have contributed negatively to the real exchange rate volatility, but
positively to investment volatility over years, though the net impact of the trilemma policies
seems to be nil for the group of Latin American economies. Having the trilemma policy
combinations as volatility-increasing factors for investment may not be such a big concern for
Asian emerging market economies which are quite open to international trade (Figure 7(a)).
The top row of Figure 10 displays the actual levels of volatilities in output, investment,
and the real exchange rate (blue bars) along with the estimated impacts of the trilemma
configurations (orange bars) for the period of 2002-2006, using the estimated coefficients from
and the actual data for model (1) in Table 2-1 (for output volatility) and models (1) and (4) in
Table 3-1 (for investment volatility and real exchange rate volatility, respectively). The bottom
row presents the diamond charts for each of the country groups. Also, the figures in parentheses
beside the name of the country groups report the average ratios of trade openness to the
investment rates for the period of 2002-2006 to indicate how open the economies are.
For the group of Asian emerging market economies, the trilemma policy combination
contributes to lowering the volatilities of output and the real exchange rate, but to raising the
volatility of investment. However, given that these economies are quite open (the ratio of relative
trade openness to the investment rate (x) is 4.83), the volatility-reducing impact of the trilemma
policy combination on the real exchange rate volatility should outweigh the volatility-increasing
impact on the investment volatility, thus contributing to lowering output volatility. Latin

23

American EMGs are on average less of open economies (x = 2.37). As an aggregate, we can see
that the impact of trilemma policy combinations of these economies is nil though the level of
investment volatility is high.41 This may imply that these economies design their trilemma
policies in a way that does not exacerbate the volatilities of investment or output.
Based on what we have found so far, economies should be able to alleviate volatilities in
both investment and the real exchange rate by implementing certain trilemma combinations. It
may be important, especially for relatively closed economies, to pursue investment stability.
Hence, for relatively closed economies which hold high levels of IR (higher than the threshold of
15-16% of GDP), policy makers may choose to pursue weaker monetary independence and
greater exchange rate stability so that they can achieve higher stabilities in both investment and
real exchange rates. However, in those economies which hold low levels of IR, policy makers
may choose to pursue greater monetary independence and lower exchange rate stability although
they could not minimize the volatility of the real exchange rate with greater monetary
independence and lower ERS.42 Table 4 presents the summary of these points.
Those economies that are highly open may focus on pursuing real exchange rate stability.
For these open economies, the volatility of investment becomes less important, but that makes
holding high levels of IR more important. It is important to pursue greater exchange rate stability
to achieve more stable real exchange rate movement, but to alleviate the volatility-increasing
impact of greater exchange rate stability, a country needs to hold higher levels of IR. Because
monetary independence is a volatility-increasing factor for the real exchange rate, and because it
can be a volatility-reducer for a country with high IR, monetary independence must be at low
levels. But given that we found the effect of monetary independence is minimal for the real
exchange rate stability, monetary independence can be at middle levels depending upon how
open the economy is. The more open the economy, the more it can afford to have slightly higher
levels of monetary independence because it can then neglect the volatility-increasing impact of
greater monetary independence on investment (Table 4). This may explain the reason why
emerging market economies, many of which are very open economies, as a group appears to
have a well-balance combination of the three trilemma policies.
41

Note that the scale for the volatility level is different for this group of economies than the other groups.
As we have discussed, the level of financial openness is irrelevant in terms of its impact on these volatilities. But
because monetary independence and exchange rate stability is a trade-off issue, whether it holds a high or low level
of IR, it can pursue greater financial openness.

42

24

Panels (b) through (d) of Figure 10 again present the contributions of the trilemma
policies to the volatilities of output, investment, and the real exchange rates and the diamond
charts for individual economies ((b) Asian economies, (c) Latin American economies, and (d)
others). Although the predictions summarized in Table 4 do not necessarily fit well with the
actual experiences of individual economies, we can find some cases that are consistent with the
above discussions. Brazil and Mexico may be considered good examples of scenario (b) shown
in Table 4- closed economies in terms of low trade-investment ratios, with low IR, high MI,
lower ERS, and higher KAOPEN. Egypt can be representative of scenario (a). Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand are somewhat consistent with scenarios (c) and (d) though the high IR
holdings allow the latter two economies to have lower levels of ERS. For these economies, it is
clear that the trilemma policies contribute to lowering output volatility by stabilizing the real
exchange rate movement. Jordan is a good example of scenario (c) while Gabon is of scenario
(d). One interesting outlier is China; its level of monetary independence is so high that it
contributes positively to higher investment volatility despite having a combination of very high
IR and ERS. Despite the high volatility-increasing impact of the trilemma configuration on
investment, the volatility-reducing effect on the real exchange rate seems to be outweighing the
former and contributing to lower output volatility although relatively it is not such an open
economy. Overall, the trilemma policy configuration seems to be effective in reducing the
volatility of the real exchange rate for the Asian economies. For this group of economies, it is the
trade channel through which the trilemma policies seem to be affecting the volatility of output.
5. Concluding Remarks
More than one year after the onset of the most severe global crisis since the Great
Depression, we have started observing signs of economic recovery, the durability of which
remains in question. Asia has impressed the world with the strength ofits recovery, thus
appropriately attracting attention from both the academic and policy communities.43 In this
paper we add to the ongoing assessment by focusing on how the region has dealt with the
process of financial globalization, in terms of varying its international macroeconomic policies,
through the lens of the “trilemma”.
43

See the 15 August 2009 issue of The Economist for a report on Asia’s recovery from the financial crisis of
2008–2009.

25

The “trilemma indexes” developed by Aizenman et al. (2008) allow us to trace the
changing patterns of the trilemma configurations among economies and bring to light striking
differences between the policy choices adopted by industrialized and developing economies
during the period 1970–2007. The recent trend suggests that industrialized economies have been
experiencing divergence of the three dimensions of the trilemma, and have moved towards a
combination of high exchange rate stability and financial openness and low monetary
independence- a trend most distinctively exemplified by the experience of the euro economies.
Emerging market economies, on the other hand, appear to be converging towards a “middle
ground” with managed exchange rate flexibility, while maintaining medium levels of monetary
independence and financial integration. Interestingly, for Asian emerging market economies,
convergence is not a recent phenomenon. As early as the 1980s, the three indexes have been
clustered around the middle range, though exchange rate stability has been the most pervasive
policy choice. Another, more recent development involves the high level of international
reserves (IR) holding –a feature that we incorporate into our analysis.
Our finding that economies’ policy configurations have evolved over years must imply
that combinations of the three policies have their own respective strengths and weaknesses in
terms of macroeconomic performance, in terms of output volatility, inflation volatility, and
medium-term rate of inflation., To reveal the special attributes of the Asian experience along
both in time series and cross sectional dimensions, we applied a panel data analysis.
We obtained a series of interesting findings. First, we found that some of the policy
choices significantly affect output volatility and inflation rate. Specifically, higher levels of
monetary independence seem to be associated with lower output volatility. Economies with
higher levels of exchange rate stability tend to experience higher output volatility, though this
effect can be mitigated by holding a level of IR higher than the threshold of about 20% of GDP.
This result is consistent with the phenomenon of many emerging market economies
accumulating massive IR.
We also found that economies with greater monetary independence tend to experience
higher inflation while economies with higher exchange rate stability tend to experience lower
inflation. Furthermore, financial openness is associated with lower inflation. However, we found
some evidence that if economies pursue greater exchange rate stability and financial openness
while holding a sizeable amount of IR, they can experience a rise in the level of inflation. This

26

finding suggests that economies with excess levels of reserve holding may eventually face a limit
in foreign exchange sterilization.
We further find that greater monetary independence helps reduce investment volatility.
However, if the level of IR holding exceeds 15–20% of GDP, greater monetary independence
may become volatility-enhancing for investment by providing too much liquidity and thereby
making the cost of capital volatile. However, the volatility-enhancing effect of exchange rate
stability on investment can be mitigated by holding higher levels of IR. We also find that greater
financial openness helps reduce real exchange rate volatility. Our results indicate that policy
makers in a relatively more open economy may prefer pursuing greater exchange rate stability
and greater financial openness while holding a massive amount of IR because this policy
combination would help them stabilize both investment and real exchange rate.
Overall, we find that Asian economies, especially the emerging market economies, are
equipped with macroeconomic policy configurations that dampen the volatility of the real
exchange rate. These economies’ sizeable amount of IR holding appears enhance the stabilizing
effect of the trilemma policy choices while allowing them to achieve middle-ground policy
arrangements. This finding provides a motivation for the recent phenomenal buildup of
international reserve holdings in the region.

27

Appendix: Construction of the Trilemma Measures
Monetary Independence (MI)
The extent of monetary independence is measured as the reciprocal of the annual
correlation between the monthly interest rates of the home country and the base country. Money
market rates are used for the calculation.1
The index for the extent of monetary independence is defined as:
MI = 1 

corr (ii , i j )  (1)
1  (1)

where i refers to home countries and j to the base country. By construction, the maximum value
is 1, and the minimum value is 0. Higher values of the index mean more monetary policy
independence.2,3
Here, the base country is defined as the country that a home country’s monetary policy
is most closely linked with as in Shambaugh (2004). The base countries are Australia, Belgium,
France, Germany, India, Malaysia, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States. For
the countries and years for which Shambaugh’s data are available, the base countries from his
work are used, and for the others, the base countries are assigned based on the International
Monetary Fund’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
(AREAER) and Central Intelligence Agency Factbook.
Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)
To measure exchange rate stability, annual standard deviations of the monthly exchange
rate between the home country and the base country are calculated and included in the following
formula to normalize the index between 0 and 1:

ERS 

0.01
0.01  stdev((log(exch _ rate))

1

The data are extracted from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (60B..ZF...). For the countries whose
money market rates are unavailable or extremely limited, the money market data are supplemented by those from
the Bloomberg terminal and also by the discount rates (60...ZF...) and the deposit rates (60L..ZF...) series from IFS.
2
The index is smoothed out by applying the 3-year moving averages encompassing the preceding, concurrent, and
following years (t – 1, t, t+1) of observations.
3
We note one important caveat about this index. Among some countries and in some years, especially early ones,
the interest rate used for the calculation of the MI index is often constant throughout a year, making the annual
correlation of the interest rates between the home and base countries (corr(ii, ij) in the formula) undefined. Since we
treat the undefined corr the same as zero, it makes the MI index value 0.5. One may think that the policy interest
rate being constant (regardless of the base country’s interest rate) is a sign of monetary independence. However, it
can reflect the possibilities not only that (i) the home country’s monetary policy is independent from the base
country’s; but also (ii) the home country uses other tools to implement monetary policy than manipulating the
interest rates, such as changing the required reserve ratios and providing some window guidance (while leaving the
policy interest rate unchanged); and/or that (iii) the home country implements a strong control on financial
intermediary, including credit rationing, that makes the policy interest rate appear constant. To make the matter
more complicated, some countries have used (ii) and (iii) to exercise monetary independence while others have used
them while strictly following the base country’s monetary policy. The bottom line is that it is impossible to
incorporate these issues in the calculation of MI without over- or under-estimating the degree of monetary
independence. Therefore, assigning an MI value of 0.5 for such a case should be a reasonable compromise. However,
it does not preclude the necessity of robustness checks on the index, which we plan to undertake.

28

Merely applying this formula can easily create a downward bias in the index, that is, it would
exaggerate the “flexibility” of the exchange rate especially when the rate usually follows a
narrow band, but is de- or revalued infrequently.4 To avoid such downward bias, we also apply a
threshold to the exchange rate movement as has been done in the literature. That is, if the rate of
monthly change in the exchange rate stayed within +/-0.33 percent bands, we consider the
exchange rate is “fixed” and assign the value of one for the ERS index. Furthermore, single year
pegs are dropped because they are quite possibly not intentional ones.5 Higher values of this
index indicate more stable movement of the exchange rate against the currency of the base
country.
Financial Openness/Integration (KAOPEN)
Without question, it is extremely difficult to measure the extent of capital account
controls.6 Although many measures exist to describe the extent and intensity of capital account
controls, it is generally agreed that such measures fail to capture fully the complexity of
real-world capital controls. Nonetheless, for the measure of financial openness, we use the index
of capital account openness, or KAOPEN, by Chinn and Ito (2006, 2008). KAOPEN is based on
information regarding restrictions in the International Monetary Fund’s Annual Report on
Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). Specifically, KAOPEN is the
first standardized principal component of the variables that indicate the presence of multiple
exchange rates, restrictions on current account transactions, on capital account transactions, and
the requirement of the surrender of export proceeds.7 Since KAOPEN is based on reported
restrictions, it is necessarily a de jure index of capital account openness (in contrast to de facto
measures such as those in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti [2006]). The choice of a de jure measure of
capital account openness is driven by the motivation to look into policy intentions of the
countries; de facto measures are more susceptible to other macroeconomic effects than solely
policy decisions with respect to capital controls.8
The Chinn-Ito index is normalized between zero and one. Higher values of this index
indicate that a country is more open to cross-border capital transactions. The index is originally
available for 181 countries for 1970 through 2006.9 The data set we examine does not include
the United States.
4

In such a case, the average of the monthly change in the exchange rate would be so small that even small changes
could make the standard deviation big and thereby the ERS value small.
5
The choice of the +/-0.33 percent bands is based on the +/-2% band based on the annual rate, that is often used in
the literature. Also, to prevent breaks in the peg status due to one-time realignments, any exchange rate that had a
percentage change of 0 in 11 out of 12 months is considered fixed. When there are two re/devaluations in 3 months,
then they are considered to be one re/devaluation event, and if the remaining 10 months experience no exchange rate
movement, then that year is considered to be the year of fixed exchange rate. This way of defining the threshold for
the exchange rate is in line with the one adopted by Shambaugh (2004).
6
See Chinn and Ito (2008), Edison and Warnock (2001), Edwards (2001), Edison et al. (2002), and Kose et al.
(2006) for discussions and comparisons of various measures on capital restrictions.
7
This index is described in greater detail in Chinn and Ito (2008).
8
De jure measures of financial openness also face their own limitations. As Edwards (1999) discusses, it is often
the case that the private sector circumvents capital account restrictions, nullifying the expected effect of regulatory
capital controls. Also, IMF-based variables are too aggregated to capture the subtleties of actual capital controls, that
is, the direction of capital flows (i.e., inflows or outflows) as well as the type of financial transactions targeted.
9
The original dataset covers 181 countries, but data availability is uneven among the three indexes. MI is available
for 172 countries; ERS for 182; and KAOPEN for 178. Both MI and ERS start in 1960 whereas KAOPEN in 1970.
For MI and ERS are updated to 2008 while KAOPEN is updated only to 2007 because the information ion AREAER
is available up to 2007.

29

References

Aghion, P., A. Banerjee, and T. Piketty. 1999. “Dualism and Macroeconomic Volatility.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 1359–1397.
Aghion, Philippe, Bacchetta, Philippe, Ranciere, Romain and Rogoff, Kenneth S., Productivity
Growth and the Exchange Rate Regime: The Role of Financial Development (May 2005).
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF) Economics and Business Working Paper No. 850.
Barcelona, Spain: UPF. Aizenman, J., M.D. Chinn, and H. Ito. 2009. “The Financial
Crisis, Rethinking of the Global Financial Architecture, and the Trilemma. Mimeo.
Portland State University.
Aizenman, J., M.D. Chinn, and H. Ito. 2008. “Assessing the Emerging Global Financial
Architecture: Measuring the Trilemma's Configurations over Time.” National Bureau of
Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper Series #14533. (December 2008; revised in
April 2009).
Aizenman, J. and R. Glick. 2008. “Sterilization, Monetary Policy, and Global Financial
Integration,” mimeo, University of California, Santa Cruz. Forthcoming in Review of
International Economics.
Aizenman, J. and Y. Jinjarak. 2008. “The U.S. as the "Demander of Last Resort" and its
Implications on China's Current Account.” NBER Working Paper #14453. (October).
Alesina, A. and Summers, L., 1993. “Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic
Performance.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 25: 151–162
Barro, R. and Gordon, D. 1983. “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate
Model.” Journal of Political Economy 91: 589–610.
Barro, R. J., and J.-W. Lee. 2001. “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and
Implications.” Oxford Economic Papers 53(3): 541–563.
Blankenau,W.,M.A. Kose, and K. Yi. 2001. “Can World Real Interest Rates Explain Business
Cycles in a Small Open Economy?” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25:
867–889.
Caballero, R.J., and A. Krishnamurthy. 2001. “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints
in a Model of Emerging Market Crises.” Journal of Monetary Economics 48: 513–548.
Calvo, G.A., A. Izquierdo and L.F. Mejía. 2004. “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The
Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects.” Research Department Working Paper 509.
Washington, DC, United States: Inter-American Development Bank.
Cavallo, E.A. 2007. “Output Volatility and Openness to Trade: A Reassessment.”
Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper #604. Washington, D.C.:
Inter-American Development Bank (April).
Cavallo, E.A. 2005. “Trade, Gravity and Sudden Stops: On How Commercial Trade Openness
Can Increase the Stability of Capital Flows.” Mimeo. Cambridge, United States: Harvard
University.
Cavallo, E.A., and J.A. Frankel. 2004. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More
Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, or Less?” NBER Working Paper 10957. Cambridge, United
States: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cecchetti, S.G. and M. Ehrmann. 1999. “Does Inflation Targeting Increase Output Volatility?
An International Comparison Of Policymakers’ Preferences And Outcomes.” NBER
Working Paper #7426. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

30

Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2008. “A New Measure of Financial Openness.” Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis 10(3): 309–322.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
Institutions, and Interactions.” Journal of Development Economics 81(1): 163–192
(October).
De Grauwe, P. and G. Schnabl. 2004. “Exchange Rates Regimes and Macroeconomic Stability in
Central and Eastern Europe.” CESifo Working Paper 1182: 1–34.
Dubas, J. M., B. J. Lee, and N. C. MMark. 2005. “Effective Exchange Rate Classifications and
Growth.” NBER Working Paper No. W11272. (April).
Easterly, W., R. Islam and J. Stiglitz. 2001. “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth Volatility.”
In B. Plesokovic and N. Stern, eds. Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics. Washington, DC, United States: World Bank.
Edison, Hali J., M. W. Klein, L. Ricci, and T. Sløk. 2002. “Capital Account Liberalization and
Economic Performance: A Review of the Literature.” IMF Working Paper. Washington,
D.C.: International Monetary Fund (May).
Edison, Hali J. and F. E. Warnock. 2001. “A simple measure of the intensity of capital controls,”
International Finance Discussion Paper #708 Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System (September).
Edwards, S. 2001. “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076.
Edwards, S., 1999. “How effective are capital controls?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13:
65–84.
Edwards, S. and E. Levy-Yeyati. 2005. “Flexible exchange rates as shock absorbers,” European
Economic Review 49(8): 2079–2105 (November).
Eichengreen, B. and D. Leblang. 2003. Exchange Rates and Cohesion: Historical Perspectives
and Political-Economy Considerations. Journal of Common Market Studies, 41(5):
797–822.
Eichengreen, B., Rose, A. K., and Wyplosz, C. 1996. “Contagious Currency Crises,” NBER
Working Paper 5681.
Glick, R. and M. Hutchison. 2008. “Are Capital Controls Effective? Duration of Capital Controls
and the Survival of Pegged Exchange Rate Regimes with Special Reference to the
People’s Republic of China.” Mimeo. University of California, Santa Cruz.
Glick, R. and M. Hutchison. 2001. “Banking and Currency Crises: How Common Are Twins?”
In R. Glick, R. Moreno, and M. Spiegel, eds. Financial Crises in Emerging Markets.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ghosh, A., A. Gulde and J. Ostry. 1997. “Does the Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter?”
NBER Working Paper No 5874.
Haruka, D. S. 2007. “Output Volatility and Large Output Drops in Emerging Market and
Developing Countries.” IMF Working Paper WP/07/114 (May). Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund.
Henry, P. B. 2006. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation.” NBER
Working Paper No. 12698.
Hnatkovska, V. and N. Loayza. 2005. “Volatility and Growth.” In J. Aizenman and B. Pinto, eds.
Managing Economic Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner’s Guide. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press (October).

31

Kaminsky, G. and C. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Currency
Balance-of-Payments Problems.” American Economic Review 89: 473–500.
Kaminsky, G. and S. L. Schmukler. 2002. “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Effects of
Financial Liberalization. World Bank Working Paper No. 2912; IMF Working Paper No.
0334. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund (October).
Kawai, M. and S. Takagi. 2008. “A Survey of the Literature on Managing Capital Inflows.”
ADBI Discussion Paper #100. Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI).
Kose, M. A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. J. Wei, 2006, “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal.”
IMF Working Paper, WP/06/189. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Kose, M.A., E. Prasad and A. D. Taylor. 2009. “Thresholds in the Process of International
Financial Integration.” NBER Working Paper #14916. (April).
Kose, M.A., E. Prasad and M. Terrones. 2003. “Financial Integration and Macroeconomic
Volatility.” IMF Working Paper WP/03/50. Washington, DC, United States: International
Monetary Fund.
Krugman, P., 1993. “Lessons of Massachusetts for EMU.” In F. Giavazzi and F. Torres, eds. The
Transition to Economic and Monetary Union in Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press (pp. 241–261).
Lane, P. R. and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2006. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised
and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004.” IMF Working
Paper 06/69. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Levy-Yeyati, E. and F. Sturzenegger. 2003. “To float or to fix: Evidence on the impact of
exchange rate regimes on growth.” The American Economic Review 93(4): 1173–1193.
Loungani, P., A. Razin, C. W . Yuen. 2001. “Capital Mobility and the Output–Inflation Tradeoff.”
Journal of Development Economics 64: 255–274.
Mishkin, F. S. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. 2007. “Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?”
NBER Working Paper #12876. Cambridge, MA : National Bureau of Economic Research
(January).
Moreno R. and M. M. Spiegel. 1997. “Are Asian economies exempt from the "impossible
trinity?": Evidence from Singapore.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Pacific
Basin Working Paper Series. (pp. 97–101).
Obstfeld, M., J.C. Shambaugh, and A.M. Taylor. 2009. “Financial Instability, Reserves, and
Central Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008.” NBER Working Papers 14826.
Cambridge, MA : National Bureau of Economic Research (March).
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor. 2008. “Financial Stability, The Trilemma, and
International Reserves.” NBER Working Paper 14217. (August).
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor. 2005. “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs
among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility." Review of Economics
and Statistics 87 (August): 423–438.
Park, Y. C. and J. W. Lee. 2002. “Financial Crisis and Recovery: Patterns of Adjustment in East
Asia, 1996-99.” Asian Development Bank Institute Research Paper 45. (October).
Prasad, E. S. 2008. “Monetary Policy Independence, the Currency Regime, and the Capital
Account in China. In Goldstein, M. and N. R. Lardy, eds. Debating China’s Exchange
Rate Policy. Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Prasad, E. S. and R. Rajan. 2008. “A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account Liberalization.”
NBER Working Paper #14051. (June).

32

Prasad, E.S., K. Rogoff, S. J. Wei, and M. A. Kose. 2003. “Effects of Financial Globalization on
Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” Occasional Paper 220. Washington,
D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Prasad, E.S., and S. J. Wei. 2007. “China’s Approach to Capital Inflows: Patterns and Possible
Explanations. In S. Edwards ed., Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging
Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Razin, A. and A. Binyamini. 2007. “Flattening the Short-Run Trade-Off Between Inflation and
Domestic Activity: The Analytics of the Effects of Globalization.” Kiel Working Paper
No. 1363 (June). Kiel: Kiel Institute for World Economics.
Razin, A., and A.K. Rose. 1994. “Business Cycle Volatility and Openness: An Exploratory
Cross-Sectional Analysis.” In L. Leiderman and A. Razin, eds. Capital Mobility: the
Impact on Consumption, Investment, and Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rodrik, D. 1998. “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?” Journal of
Political Economy 106(5): 997–1032.
Rogoff, K. 2003. Globalization and global disinflation. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Review 4th quarter issue: 45–78.
Romer, D. 1993. “Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108: 869–903.
Shah, A. and I. Patnaik. 2009. “Asia Confronts the Impossible Trinity.” Mimeo, NIPFP-DEA.
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. “The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119 (February): 301–352.
Tornell, A. and A. Velasco. 2000. “Fixed Versus Flexible Exchange Rates: Which Provides
More Fiscal Discipline?” Journal of Monetary Economics 45(2): 399–436.
Willett, T. 2003. “Fear of Floating Need Not Imply Fixed Exchange Rates.” Open Economies
Review 14: 77–91.
Windmeijer, F. 2005. “A finite sample correction for the variance of linear efficient two-step
GMM estimators.” Journal of Econometrics 126: 25–51.

33

Table 1-1: The Macroeconomic Impact of the Trilemma Configurations: Less Developed Countries (LDC)

Relative Income
Relative Income, sq.
Change in US real interest rate
Volatility of TOT*OPN
Inflation volatility
Fiscal Procyclicality
Relative oil price shocks

(1) (2
-0.059 [0.019]*** [
0.094 0.
[0.022]*** [0.
0.126
[0.041]*** [0.
0.03
[0.007]*** [0.
0.026 0.024
[0.006]*** [0.
0.004 0.
[0.002]** [

Output volatility
) (3
0.056 0.019]*** [
094 0.
024]*** [0.
0.126
042]*** [0.
0.03 0.027
007]*** [0.

) (4
0.064 0.019]*** [
112 0.
024]*** [0.
0.132
041]***
007]***
0.027 0.336
006]*** [0.
004 0.
0.002]**

006]*** [0.
004 0.
0.002]** [

World Output Gap
Trade openness
M2 growth
Private credit creation
Total Reserve (as % of GDP)
Monetary Independence (MI)
[0.
MI x reserves
Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)
[0.
ERS x reserves

-0.002 [0.005] [0.
0.059
[0.038]
-0.013
011]
-0.026
[0.063] [0.
0.006 0.009
005]
-0.06
[0.031]** [
-

0.004 005] [0.
0.015
[0.032] [0.
-0.019
[0.011]*
0.012
060]

0.001 005] [0.
0.067
024]*** [0.

) (5
0.125 0.046]***
207 0.
055]***
0
[0.016]
014]*** [0.
002 0.
[0.004]
0.029
[0.005]***
0.641
[0.273]**
-0.012
[0.007]*
0.381
[0.019]***
0.008 012] [0.
-0.085
091]
0.012
[0.027]
-0.019
[0.148] [0.
-0.058
[0.013]***
0.074
[0.072]
-

Inflation volatility
) (6
0.068 [0.049]
123 0.
[0.060]**

-0.001 -0.002
[0.017]
0.317 0.328
014]*** [0.
005 0.
[0.004]
0.023
[0.005]***
0.396
[0.282]
-0.016
[0.007]**
0.419
[0.019]***
0.004 012] [0.
-0.08
[0.079] [0.
0.017
[0.027]
-0.027
146]

)
0.096
[0.047]**
167
[0.058]***

[0.016]
014]***
002
[0.004]
0.026
[0.005]***
0.601
[0.267]**
-0.011
[0.007]*
0.373
[0.019]***
0.011
012]
-0.142
055]***

-0.06
[0.005]*
[0.012]***
-0.067
0.083
0.029]**
[0.067]
KA Openness
0.003
0
0.048
-0.045
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.013]***
[0.012]***
KAOPEN x reserves
-0.008
-0.027
0.126
0.1
[0.025]
[0.024]
[0.062]**
[0.058]*
Observations
417 417
417
417
417
417
Adjusted R-squared
0.26 0.
25 0.
26 0.
84 0.
83 0.
84
Robust regressions are implemented. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The regional dummies are included in the regressions
for output and inflation, so is the dummy for oil exporters in the output volatility regression. But the estimated coefficients of these dummies are not reported
to conserve space.

34

Table 1-2: The Macroeconomic Impact of the Trilemma Configurations: Emerging market economies (EMG)

Relative Income
Relative Income, sq.
Change in US real interest rate
Volatility of TOT*OPN
Inflation volatility
Fiscal Procyclicality
Relative oil price shocks

(1) (2
-0.043 [0.024]* [0.
0.058 0.
[0.030]* [0.
0.157
[0.049]*** [0.
0.021
[0.013]
0.038 0.036
[0.007]*** [0.
0.003 0.
[0.002] [0.

Output volatility
) (3
0.031 025] [0.
041 0.
033] [0.
0.145
050]*** [0.
0.025 0.02
[0.013]*

) (4
0.043 025]* [0.
058
034]* [0.
0.155
049]***
[0.013] [0.
0.037 0.348
007]*** [0.
003
002] [0.

007]*** [0.
003 0.
002] [0.

World Output Gap
Trade openness
M2 volatility
Private credit creation
Total Reserve (as % of GDP)
Monetary Independence (MI)
MI x reserves
Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)

-0.002 [0.005] [0.
0.085
[0.036]** [
-0.008
[0.013] [0.
-0.048
[0.060] [0.
0.011 0.012
[0.007]*
-0.073
[0.032]** [
-

0.005 005] [0.
0.024
0.035]
-0.016
014]
-0.007
059]

0.002
005] [0.
0.059
[0.023]** [
0.

) (5
0.074 084]
0.12
104]

Inflation volatility
) (6
0.022 [0.080]
0.078 0.
[0.102]

0.063 0.034 0.047
040] [0.
022]*** [0.
-0.003
007] [0.
0.01
[0.008]
0.911
[0.412]**
0
[0.010]
0.455 0.424
[0.028]***
-0.02
018] [0.
-0.164
0.111]
-0.022
[0.040] [0.
099
[0.179] [0.
-0.053
[0.021]** [
0.12
[0.095]

037] [0.
0.387 0.38
021]*** [0.
-0.003
006] [0.
0.003
[0.007]
0.778
[0.380]**
0.002
[0.010]
0.415
[0.027]***
-0.026 016] [0.
-0.087
[0.096]
-0.028
038]
0.039
165]

)
0.044
[0.084]
096
[0.108]

037]
021]***
-0.004
006]
0.006
[0.007]
0.855
[0.385]**
0.002
[0.010]
[0.027]***
0.026
017]
-0.106
[0.068]

-0.04
[0.007]*
0.020]**
ERS x reserves
-0.066
0.096
0.030]**
[0.087]
KA Openness
0.005
-0.002 0.047
-0.043
[0.006]
[0.006]
[0.017]***
[0.017]**
KAOPEN x reserves
0.
013
0.004 0.
037
0.025
[0.
026]
[0.025]
[0.
077]
[0.077]
Observations
196 196
196
196
196
196
Adjusted R-squared
0.3
0.27 0.
29 0.
87 0.
89 0.
89
Robust regressions are implemented. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The regional dummies are included in the regressions
for output and inflation, so is the dummy for oil exporters in the output volatility regression. But the estimated coefficients of these dummies are not reported
to conserve space.

35

Table 2-1: The Impact of the Trilemma Configurations and External Financing: Less Developed Countries (LDC)
(1) (2

Currency Crisis
Private credit creation
Total Reserve (as % of GDP)
Monetary Independence (MI)
MI x reserves
Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)
ERS x reserves
KA Openness
KAOPEN x reserves
Net FDI inflows/GDP
Net portfolio inflows/GDP
Net 'other' inflows/GDP

Output volatility
) (3

) (4

) (5

Level of Inflation
) (6

0.005 0.005
0.005
0.031
0.032
0.029
[0.003]* [0.003]
* [0.003]
*
[0.006]***
[0.007]***
-0.003 -0.008
-0.005
-0.018
-0.014
-0.019
[0.006] [0.006]
[0.007]
[0.017]
[0.017]
[0.016]
0.072 -0.055
0.065
-0.053
-0.182
[0.052] [0.052]
[0.034]*
[0.122] [0.123]
-0.019 -0.035
-0.002 -0.017
[0.014] [0.014]
**
[0.033]
[0.034]
0.005
0.112
-0.04
0.055
[0.085] [0.089]
[0.199] [0.208]
0.008
0.012
-0.04 -0.04
[0.007]
[0.006]*
[0.016]**
-0.086
-0.095
0.074
[0.044]*
[0.044]**
[0.104]
-0.02
-0.014
-0.055
[0.008]
**
[0.008]*
[0.019]***
0.086
0.048
0.261
[0.045]
*
[0.042]
[0.107]**
0.047 0.092
0.109
-0.477
-0.442
[0.068] [0.071]
[0.070]
[0.177]***
[0.184]**
0.241 0.289
0.286
0.064
0.297
0.228
[0.122]** [0.129]
** [0.127]
**
[0.286]
[0.302]
0.069 0.063
0.071
0.037
0.09
[0.029]** [0.029]
** [0.029]
**
[0.069]
[0.070]
-0.009 -0.008
-0.007
-0.007
-0.003
[0.016] [0.016]
[0.016]
[0.037]
[0.038]
[0.036]
0.063 0.081
0.078
0.176
0.184
0.154
[0.035]*
[0.035]** [0.035]
** [0.088]
** [0.088]
**
311 311 311 311 310 310
0.37 0.39
0.4
0.86 0.86
0.86

)

[0.006]***
-0.198
[0.076]***

[0.015]***
0.071
[0.098]
-0.055
[0.018]***
0.254
[0.097]***
-0.441
[0.173]**
[0.287]
0.045
[0.068]
0.012

Short-term Debt
(as % of total external debt)
Total debt service
[0.086]*
(as % of GNI)
Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Robust regressions are implemented. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dummy for Sub-Saharan economies is included in
the regressions for output and inflation volatility, so are the dummies for Latin America and Caribbean and East Europe and Central Asia in the regression for
the level of inflation. “Trade openness” that is insignificant is omitted from presentation to conserve space.

36

Table 2-2: The Impact of the Trilemma Configurations and External Financing: Emerging market economies (EMG)
(1) (2

Currency Crisis
Private credit creation
Total Reserve (as % of GDP)
Monetary Independence (MI)
MI x reserves
Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)
ERS x reserves
KA Openness
KAOPEN x reserves
Net FDI inflows/GDP
Net portfolio inflows/GDP
Net 'other' inflows/GDP

Output volatility
) (3

) (4

) (5

Level of Inflation
) (6

)

0.004 0.007
0.004
0.024
0.017
0.02
[0.003] [0.003]
** [0.004]
[0.010]
**
[0.009]*
[0.010]**
0
-0.005 0.001
-0.037
-0.027
-0.043
[0.007] [0.007]
[0.007]
[0.026]
[0.022]
[0.025]*
0.087 -0.043
0.096
-0.18
-0.242
-0.176
[0.055] [0.056]
[0.035]***
[0.162] [0.153]
[0.098]*
-0.018 -0.038
-0.037 -0.051
[0.017] [0.018]
**
[0.051]
[0.048]
0.008 0.096
0.063
0.14
[0.088] [0.094]
[0.257] [0.249]
0.023
0.028
-0.06
-0.053
[0.009]**
[0.009]***
[0.028]**
[0.026]**
-0.125
-0.15
0.25
0.225
[0.052]**
[0.051]***
[0.151]**
[0.140]11%
-0.01
-0.002
-0.065
-0.045
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.024]***
[0.024]*
0.062
0.016
0.252
0.11
[0.047]
[0.042]
[0.126]**
[0.121]
-0.121 -0.105
-0.155
-0.847
-0.598
-0.678
[0.107] [0.112]
[0.113]
[0.345]**
[0.324]*
[0.347]*
-0.113 -0.048
-0.081
-0.34
-0.06
-0.159
[0.140] [0.145]
[0.147]
[0.411]
[0.383]
[0.412]
0.025 0.017
0.022
0.016
0.059
0.018
[0.037] [0.037]
[0.037]
[0.121]
[0.107]
[0.116]
-0.013 -0.008
-0.011
0.047
0.041
0.069
[0.019] [0.019]
[0.019]
[0.058]
[0.052]
[0.057]
0.008 0.037
0.011
0.197
0.07
0.206
[0.044] [0.044]
[0.044]
[0.164]
[0.147]
[0.159]
154 154 154 151 151 151
0.45 0.29
0.46
0.88
0.91
0.89

Short-term Debt
(as % of total external debt)
Total debt service
(as % of GNI)
Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Robust regressions are implemented. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dummy for Sub-Saharan economies is included in
the regressions for output and inflation volatility, so are the dummies for Latin America and Caribbean and East Europe and Central Asia in the regression for
the level of inflation.

37

Table 3-1: Determinants of Volatilities of Investment and Real Exchange Rates: Less Developed Countries (LDC)
Investment volatility

Relative Income
Relative Income, sq.
Change in US real interest rate
Volatility of TOT*OPN
Inflation volatility
(Infl. vol. differentials in (4)-(6))
Fiscal Procyclicality
Trade openness

(1) (2
-0.1
[0.143] [0.
0.121 0.
[0.264] [0.
0.39
[0.199]*
0.095
[0.036]*** [0.
0.134 0.133
[0.025]*** [0.
-0.001
[0.009] [0.

) (3
) (4
-0.15
-0.125
142] [0.
139] [0.
239 0.
211 0.
265] [0.
258] [0.
0.306
0.259
[0.198]
[0.194]
0.121 0.103 0.008
036]*** [0.
035]***
0.131 0.038
025]*** [0.
025]*** [0.
0.003
0.004
009] [0.
009]

Currency Crisis

Real exchange rate volatility

) (5
-0.016 0.
020] [0.
017
037] [0.

) (6
027 031] [0.
-0.041
057] [0.

0.011 0.008
[0.005]
[0.008]
0.031 0.038
003]*** [0.
005]*** [0.
-0.005
[0.003]*
009 0.
[0.002]***

-0.011
[0.004]***
013 0.
[0.002]***

)
0.015
020]
0.019
038]

[0.005]
004]***
-0.005
[0.003]*
009
[0.002]***

0.01
0.002 0.
007 0.
[0.011] [0.
011] [0.
011]
Private credit creation
-0.011 0.012 0.001
[0.026] [0.
026] [0.
025]
Total Reserve (as % of GDP)
-0.229
-0.393
0.158
0.022
0.038
-0.013
[0.210]
[0.205]*
[0.132] [0.
030] [0.
045] [0.
019]
Monetary Independence (MI)
-0.181
-0.159
0.004
0.024
[
0.056]***
[0.057]***
[0.008]
[0.012]**
MI x reserves
1.193
0.785
0.049
-0.086
[
0.342]***
[0.351]**
[0.048]
[0.076]
Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)
0.077
0.07
-0.037 -0.038
[0.026]***
[0.025]***
[0.004]***
[0.004]***
ERS x reserves
-0.413 0.254
-0.007
0.001
[0.179]**
[
0.170]
[0.025]
[
0.024]
KA Openness
0.042
-0.012 0.008
-0.004
[0.
032]
[0.030]
[0.
007]
[0.004]
KAOPEN x reserves
0.
223
0.051 0.
029
0.019
[0.
178]
[0.165]
[0.
038]
[0.024]
Net FDI inflows/GDP
0.327
0.347
0.25
-0.041
-0.088
-0.033
[0.274] [0.
280] [0.
272] [0.
041] [0.
064] [0.
042]
Net portfolio inflows/GDP
1.48
1.414 1.
364 0.
052 0.
046 0.
054
[0.493]*** [0.
508]*** [0.
494]***
[0.069]
[0.108]
[0.071]
Net 'other' inflows/GDP
0.376
0.38
0.418
-0.028
-0.014
-0.028
[0.116]*** [0.
116]*** [0.
112]***
[0.016]*
[0.025]
[0.016]*
Short-term Debt
-0.042 0.042 0.042
0.006
0.004
0.007
(as % of total external debt)
[0.063]
[0.063]
[0.062]
[0.008]
[0.013]
[0.008]
Total debt service
0.264
0.232
0.213
0.02
0.081
0.02
(as % of GNI)
[0.140]*
[0.138]*
[0.136]
[0.020]
[0.031]***
[0.021]
Observations
309 309
309
310
310
310
Adjusted R-squared
0.31 0.
26 0.
25 0.
63 0.
29 0.
63
Robust regressions are implemented. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dummy for Sub-Saharan economies is included in the
regressions for output and inflation volatility, so are the dummies for Latin America and Caribbean and East Europe and Central Asia in the regression for the
level of inflation.

38

Table 3-2: Determinants of Volatilities of Investment and Real Exchange Rates: Emerging market economies (EMG)
Relative Income
Relative Income, sq.
Change in US real interest rate
Volatility of TOT*OPN
Inflation volatility
(Infl. vol. differentials in
(4)-(6))
Fiscal Procyclicality
Trade openness
Currency Crisis
Private credit creation
Total Reserve (as % of GDP)
Monetary Independence (MI)
MI x reserves
[0.
Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)

(1) (2
0.237
[0.254] [0.
-0.625
[0.557] [0.
-0.1
[0.218] [0.
-0.098
[0.056]* [0.
0.143 0.151

Investment volatility
) (3
0.119
272] [0.
-0.36
604] [0.
-0.07
232] [0.
-0.022 -0.09
059]

[0.028]*** [
0.017
[0.010]
0.038 0.
[0.012]***
0.025
[0.024] [0.
-0.374
[0.192]*
-0.286
[0.060]***
1.867
306]***
0.127 0.121
[0.032]***
-0.818 183]***
-

) (4
0.193 255] [0.
-0.452 0.
561] [0.
-0.134
212]
[0.055] [0.
0.142 0.05

0.029]*** [
0.014
[0.011]

0.027]*** [
0.02
[0.010]*

033 0.
[0.013]**
0.004
025] [0.
-1.045
[0.211]***
-0.365
[0.066]***
2.095
[0.353]***

034 0.
[0.012]*** [0.
0.033
024]
0.368
[0.118]***
[

Real exchange rate volatility
) (5
) (6
0.045 0.
072 054] [0.
074] [0.
099 0.108 0.
118] [0.
166] [0.

0.021 0.002 0.019
011]* [0.
0.006]*** [
-0.004
[0.005]
011 0.
003]*** [0.
0.035
[0.040] [0.
0.027
0.013]**
-0.068
[0.064]
-0.039 -0.037
[0.007]***
-0.012 [0.037]
-

016] [0.
0.038 0.051
0.008]*** [
-0.004
[0.006]
013 0.
003]*** [0.
0.052
058] [0.
0.042
[0.018]**
-0.123
[0.096]

)
0.073
050]
176
112]

010]*
0.005]***
-0.006
[0.004]
009
002]***
0.001
023]

[0.030]***
[0.006]***
0.583
0.006
[0.173]***
[0.033]
0.065
0.026
0.001
-0.009
[0.034]*
[0.029]
[0.009]
[0.006]
KAOPEN x reserves
0.414
-0.138
-0.013
0.011
[0.175]**
[0.144]
[0.047]
[0.028]
Net FDI inflows/GDP
-0.216 0.
237 0.433
-0.054
-0.114 0.
024
[0.373] [0.
422] [0.
384] [0.
081] [0.
117] [0.
077]
Net portfolio inflows/GDP
0.76
1.34
0.736
-0.043
-0.149
-0.018
[0.488]
[0.543]**
[0.497] [
0.102] [
0.147] [
0.097]
Net 'other' inflows/GDP
0.586
0.637
0.6
-0.078
-0.08
-0.056
[0.131]*** [
0.139]*** [
0.127]*** [
0.027]***
[0.038]**
[0.025]**
Short-term Debt
-0.102
-0.07
-0.113 0.
014 0.002 0.
009
(as % of total external debt)
[0.067]
[0.072]
[0.066]*
[0.013]
[0.017]
[0.011]
Total debt service
0.172 0.
277 0.
182 0.
027 0.
034 0.
032
(as % of GNI)
[0.155]
[0.165]*
[0.151]
[0.038]
[0.052]
[0.035]
Observations
149 149
149
151
151
151
Adjusted R-squared
0.62 0.
49 0.
49 0.
68 0.
39 0.
69
Robust regressions are implemented. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dummy for Sub-Saharan economies is included in
the regressions for output and inflation volatility, so are the dummies for Latin America and Caribbean and East Europe and Central Asia in the regression for
the level of inflation.
ERS x reserves
[0.
KA Openness

39

Table 4: Policy Combinations and Implications on
Volatilities of Investment (var(I)) and the Real Exchange Rate (var(q))

Closed Economy
Policy Goals

(a) Lower var(I) and
Lower var(q)
High IR
Lower MI
Higher ERS
(Middle ERS if IR is very high)
(Higher KAOPEN
or middle if IR is very high)

(b) Lower var(I) and
Not too high var(q)
Low IR
Higher MI

(c) Lower var(I) and
Lower var(q)
High IR
Lower MI
Higher ERS
(Higher KAOPEN )

(d) Not too high var(I) and
Lower var (q)
High IR
Middle MI
Higher ERS
(Middle KAOPEN)

Lower ERS
(Higher KAOPEN)

Open Economy
Policy Goals

40

5-yr standard dev. of per capita output growth
0
.02
.04
.06
.08

Figure 1: Output Volatility, 1972 – 2006

Output Volatility: Industrial vs. Asia vs. Non-Asian LDC

1972-76

1977-81

1982-86

1987-91

1992-96 1997-2001 2002-06

Industrial Countries
Non-EMG Asia

EMG Asia
Non-Asian LDC

Notes: Output volatility is measured by five-year standard deviations of the growth rate
of per capita output. The data for per capita output are extracted from the PWT database.
Appendix 2 shows the economies included as “EMG Asia” or emerging market
economies in Asia.
Figure 2: The Trilemma
Closed Financial Markets
and Pegged Exchange Rate
e.g. Bretton Woods system

Exchange Rate
Stability

Monetary
Independence

Floating
Exchange Rate

Financial Integration

41

Monetary Union or
Currency Board
e.g. Euro system

Figure 3: Development of the Trilemma Configurations Over Time

(a) Industrialized Countries
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

Mon. Indep., Exch. R. Stability, and KA Open., IDC

1970

1980

1990
Year

Mon. Indep., IDC
KAOPEN, IDC

(b) Emerging market economies

2000

2010

Exchr. Stab., IDC

(c)

Non-Emerging Market Developing Countries
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

Mon. Indep., Exch. R. Stability, and KA Open., non-EMG LDC

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

Mon. Indep., Exch. R. Stability, and KA Open., EMG

1970

1980

1990
Year

Mon. Indep., EMG
KAOPEN, EMG

2000

2010

1970

Exchr. Stab., EMG

1980

1990
Year

Mon. Indep., non-EMG LDC
KAOPEN, non-EMG LDC

42

2000

2010

Exchr. Stab., non-EMG LDC

Figure 4: Regional Comparison of the Development of the Trilemma Configurations

(a) Emerging Market Economies (EMG) in Asia

(c) Latin American Countries

Mon. Indep., Exch. R. Stab., & KA Open., Emerging Asia

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

Mon. Indep., Exch. R. Stability, and KA Open., Latin America

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

Mon. Indep., Emerging Asia
KAOPEN, Emerging Asia

(b) Non-EMG, Developing Asia

2010

1970

Exchr. Stab., Emerging Asia

1980

1990
Year

Mon. Indep., Latin America
KAOPEN, Latin America

(d)

2000

2010

Exchr. Stab., Latin America

Less Developed Countries (LDC) excluding Asia

MI, ERS, & KAOPEN, Non-EMG, Developing Asia
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1

MI, ERS, KAOPEN, Developing Countries excluding Asia

1970

1980

1990
Year

2000

2010

1970

Mon. Indep., Non-EMG, Developing AsiaExchr. Stab., Non-EMG, Developing Asia
KAOPEN, Non-EMG, Developing Asia

1980

1990
Year

Mon. Indep., EMG excl. Asia
KAOPEN, EMG excl. Asia

43

2000

2010

Exchr. Stab., EMG excl. Asia

Figure 5: The “Diamond Charts”: Variation of the Trilemma and IR Configurations Across Different Country Groups
Industrialized Countries

Emerging Asian Economies

Non-EMG, Developing Asia

Monetary Independence

Monetary Independence

Monetary Independence

Financial Integration
(Up to 2007)

Exchange Rate Stability

.2
.4

1971-80

.6

1981-90
1991-2000
2001-08

.8

Financial Integration
(Up to 2007)

Exchange Rate Stability

.2

Financial Integration
(Up to 2007)

.2

.4

1971-80

.4

1971-80

.6

1981-90
1991-2000
2001-08

.6

1981-90
1991-2000
2001-08

.8

.8

1

1

1

International Reserves/GDP

International Reserves/GDP

International Reserves/GDP

Center is at 0

Center is at 0

Financial Integration
(Up to 2007)

Center is at 0

Non-Asian LDC

Emerging Latin America

Monetary Independence

Monetary Independence

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

Financial Integration
(Up to 2007)

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

.4

1971-80

.4

1971-80

.6

1981-90
1991-2000
2001-08

.6

1981-90
1991-2000
2001-08

.8

Exchange Rate Stability

.8

1

1

International Reserves/GDP

International Reserves/GDP

Center is at 0

Center is at 0

44

Figure 6: Interactive Effects of Exchange Rate Stability and IR Holding

(a) Asian EMGs
1.2

1992-96 (red-x) vs. 2002-06 (black-cicrcle)
-2% pt.
-1% pt.

1

-0.5% pt.

IR holding (% of GDP)
.4
.6
.8

Malaysia

.2

Taiwan
Malaysia
Thailand
Korea, Rep.
Philippines
India
Indonesia
Philippines
Cambodia
+0.5% pt.

.2

-7% pt.

-0.5% pt.

+0.5% pt.

0

.2

.8

1

-3% pt.

-4% pt.

-5% pt.

-6% pt.

-7% pt.

Jordan
Slovak Republic
Jordan
Morocco
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Mauritius
Mauritius
Israel
Russia
Nigeria
HungaryCzech Republic
Lithuania
Tunisia
Poland
SlovakHungary
Republic
Morocco
Bulgaria
Turkey Zimbabwe
Ghana Kenya
Israel
Tunisia
Poland Slovenia
South Lithuania
Africa
Nigeria
Kenya
Turkey
Russia
South
Africa
Zimbabwe
+1% pt.
+0.5% pt.

Argentina
Ecuador

+1% pt.

-2% pt.
-1% pt.

Botswana

.2

Venezuela, RB

.4
.6
Exchange Rate Stability

1

Botswana

0

Jamaica
Chile
Peru
Argentina
Colombia Peru
Colombia
Jamaica
Ecuador
Mexico
Brazil
Trinidad and Tobago
Mexico

0

Brazil

.8

1992-96 (red-x) vs. 2002-06 (black-cicrcle)
1.2

-6% pt.

1

-5% pt.

IR holding (% of GDP)
.4
.6
.8

-4% pt.

Vietnam

China
Vietnam
Korea, Rep.
IndiaIndonesia
+1% pt.

Other EMGs

1
.2

Venezuela, RB

Thailand
Cambodia

(c)

Trinidad and Tobago
Chile

Hong Kong
China

.4
.6
Exchange Rate Stability

IR holding (% of GDP)
.4
.6
.8

-3% pt.

Hong Kong

Taiwan

0
1.2

-2% pt.
-1% pt.

-7% pt.

-6% pt.

Singapore

1992-96 (red-x) vs. 2002-06 (black-cicrcle)
-0.5% pt.

-5% pt.

Singapore

0

(b) Latin American EMGs

-4% pt.

-3% pt.

0

45

.2

.4
.6
Exchange Rate Stability

Bulgaria
Egypt
Egypt

Ghana
Cote d'Ivoire
Cote d'Ivoire

.8

1

Figure 7: Regional Comparison of Trade Openness and Exchange Rate Stability
(a) Ratio of Trade Openness ((EX+IM)/Y)
to Investment Rate (% of GDP): 1990 - 2006

(c) Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)
1990 - 2006
1.00

6.00

0.90

5.00

0.80
0.70

4.00
0.60
0.50

3.00

0.40

2.00

0.30
0.20

1.00
0.10
0.00

0.00
LDC
Average

Non-EMG
Asia

Asian EMG

LATAM

LATAM EMG

E.&C.
Europe

Middle-East

LDC
Average

SubSaharan Afr.

Non-EMG
Asia

(b) Int'l Reserves as % of GDP
1990 - 2006

Asian EMG

LATAM

LATAM EMG

E.&C.
Europe

Middle-East Sub-Saharan
Afr.

(d) Monetary Independence (MI)
1990 - 2006
1.00

0.30
0.90
0.80

0.25

0.70
0.20
0.60
0.50

0.15

0.40
0.10

0.30
0.20

0.05
0.10
0.00

0.00

LDC
Average

Non-EMG
Asia

Asian EMG

LATAM

LATAM EMG

E.&C.
Europe

Middle-East Sub-Saharan
Afr.

LDC
Average

46

Non-EMG
Asia

Asian EMG

LATAM

LATAM EMG

E.&C.
Europe

Middle-East Sub-Saharan
Afr.

Figure 8: Regional Comparison of Investment Volatility and Real Exchange Rate Volatility

5-yr standard dev. of growth rate of investment
0
.1
.2
.3
.4

(a) Investment Volatility

1972-76

1977-81

1982-86

1987-91

Industrial Countries
Non-EMG Asia

1992-96 1997-2001 2002-06
EMG Asia
Non-Asian LDC

0

5-yr standard dev. of rate of real depreciation
.02
.04
.06
.08

(b) Real Exchange Rate Volatility

1972-76

1977-81

1982-86

1987-91

Industrial Countries
Non-EMG Asia

47

1992-96 1997-2001 2002-06
EMG Asia
Non-Asian LDC

Figure 9: The Impacts of the Trilemma Configurations on Investment Volatility and Real Exchange Rate Volatility

(a) Developing Asia

1992-1996

1997-2001

Effect of MI

2002-06

1992-1996

Effect of ERS

1997-2001

Effect of MI

Effect of KAOPEN

2002-06

.03

Effect on Real Exchange Rate Volatility

-.02

-.01

0

.01

.02

.03
.02
.01
0
-.01
-.02

1997-2001

Effect of MI
Effect of KAOPEN

2002-06
Effect of ERS

.03
.02
.01
0
Effect of KAOPEN

(b) Non-Asian Developing Economies

1992-1996

1992-1996

1997-2001

Effect of MI

1997-2001

Effect of MI

Effect of KAOPEN

Effect on Investment Volatility

-.01
1992-1996

Effect of ERS

2002-06
Effect of ERS

Effect of KAOPEN

48

Effect on Real Exchange Rate Volatility

-.02

-.02

-.01

-.01

0

0

.01

.01

.02

.02

.03

Effect on Investment Volatility

.03

Effect on Real Exchange Rate Volatility

-.02

-.02

-.01

0

.01

.02

.03

Effect on Investment Volatility

(c) Latin American Countries

2002-06
Effect of ERS

1992-1996

1997-2001

Effect of MI
Effect of KAOPEN

2002-06
Effect of ERS

Figure 10:Contributions of Trilemma Policies to the Volatilities of Output, Investment, and the Real Exchange Rates

(a) Country groups (x = the average ratio of trade openness to the investment rate as of 2002-2006)
Emerging Market Economies in Asia (4.83) Non-Asian

Developing Countries (3.50)

EMG in LA

2 Investment volatility

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

1 Output volatility

Asian EMG

.2

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Exchange Rate Stability

Financial Openness

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

Asian EMG, 02-06
.8

LDC, 2002-06

2 Investment volatility

EMG in LA

Exchange Rate Stability

Financial Openness

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

.4

.6

Non-Asian LDC, 02-06

.8

LDC, 2001-06

LDC, 2002-06
1

1

Intl Reserve

Intl Reserve

Intl Reserve

49

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Monetary Independence

1

Center is at 0

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr
ile
m

Tr
ile
m

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct

ua
l
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ac
t

Tr
ile
m

1 Output volatility

Monetary Independence

.8

Center is at 0

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr

2 Investment volatility

Non-Asian LDC

Monetary Independence

Financial Openness

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr

Tr

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

-.05

0

.05

.1

.15

-.03-.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06
Ef
fe
ct

Ac
tu
al
Tr

ile
m

m
a-

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr
ile
m

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

1 Output volatility

Coutries in Latin America (2.37)

Non-Asian LDC

-.03-.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06

Asian EMG

EMG

Center is at 0

Figure 10: continued

(b) Asian countries (x = the average ratio of trade openness to the investment rate as of 2002-2006)
China (1.54)

Indonesia (2.56)

1 Output volatility

2 Investment volatility

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

.04 .06
.02
0

China

.2

2 Investment volatility

Financial Openness

.2

Intl Reserve

Center is at 0

1 Output volatility

Philippines

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
m

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct

m
aEf
fe
ct

Tr
ile

Ac

tu
al

Tr
ile
m

Tr
ile

Tr
ile
m

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
m

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr
ile
m

Tr
ile
m

Ac

tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct

-.04 -.02

-.04 -.02

0

0

.02

.04

.06

.02 .04 .06 .08

.08

Thailand

2 Investment volatility

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Thailand

Monetary Independence

Monetary Independence

Exchange Rate Stability

Financial Openness

.4

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

.4

.6

.6

Philippines, 02-06

Thailand, 02-06

.8

.8

LDC, 2002-06

LDC, 2002-06

1

Intl Reserve

1

Center is at 0

Intl Reserve

50

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr
LDC, 2002-06

1

Thailand (5.84)

Philippines

Center is at 0

Malaysia, 2002-06
.8

LDC, 2002-06
Center is at 0

Exchange Rate Stability

.6

Indonesia, 2002-06
1

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

.2

.4

.8

Intl Reserve

.2

Financial Openness

.6

Philipp ines (5.27)

Financial Openness

Tr

Tr

Exchange Rate Stability

LDC, 2002-06
1

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Malaysia

China, 2002-06
.8

2 Investment volatility

2 Investment volatility

Monetary Independence

.4

.6

1 Output volatility

1 Output volatility

Indonesia

Exchange Rate Stability

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Monetary Independence

.4

Center is at 0

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

-.04 -.02

1 Output volatility

Monetary Independence

Financial Openness

Tr

Tr

Tr

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr

Tr

Tr

Ac
t

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

ile
ua
m
l
m
aEf
fe
ct

-.04 -.02

-.04 -.02

0

0

.02

.02

.04

.04

.06

.06

.08

Malaysia

.08

Indonesia

.08

China

Malaysia (8.93)

Intl Reserve

Figure 10: continued

(b) Latin American countries (x = the average ratio of trade openness to the investment rate as of 2002-2006)
Argentina (2.49)

Brazil (1.79)
Brazil

Chile
.06
.04
.02
0

2 Investment volatility

Financial Openness

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

Center is at 0

Mexico (2.41)

Center is at 0

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Venezuela

1 Output volatility

Mexico

2 Investment volatility

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Financial Openness

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

Financial Openness

.2

LDC, 2002-06

Venezuela, 02-06
.8

LDC, 2002-06

LDC, 2001-06

1

Center is at 0

Intl Reserve

51

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct

.6

Peru, 2002-06
.8

1

Exchange Rate Stability

.4

.6

Mexico, 2002-06
.8

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Monetary Independence

.4

.6

2 Investment volatility

Venezuela

Monetary Independence

.4

m

Tr
ile
m

1 Output volatility

Peru

Monetary Independence

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct

m
aEf
fe
ct

tu
al

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr
ile

Tr
ile
m

m

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct

m
aEf
fe
ct

tu
al

-.05 0

.05 .1 .15 .2 .25

-.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12

Tr
ile

Ac

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
m

Ac
tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr
ile
m

Tr
ile
m

.08
.06
.04
.02

Intl Reserve

Venezuela (2.10)

Peru

0

tu
al
m
aEf
fe
ct

LDC, 2002-06
1

Peru (2.14)

-.04 -.02

Ac

Chile, 2002-06
.8

Intl Reserve

Mexico

Tr
ile
m

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct
.6

LDC, 2002-06
1

Exchange Rate Stability

Exchange Rate Stability

Brazil, 2002-06
.8

Intl Reserve

Intl Reserve

.2

.6

1

Center is at 0

Financial Openness

.4

LDC, 2002-06

.2

Tr

Tr

Chile

Argentina, 2002-06
.8

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Monetary Independence

.4

.6

Financial Openness

2 Investment volatility

Tr
ile

Exchange Rate Stability

.4

2 Investment volatility

1 Output volatility

Monetary Independence

.2

1 Output volatility

Tr

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Brazil

Argentina

Center is at 0

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

-.04 -.02

1 Output volatility

Monetary Independence

Financial Openness

Tr

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr

Tr

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Ac

2 Investment volatility

Tr
ile
m

1 Output volatility

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct
Tr

Tr

Tr

Ac
t

Ac
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

ile
ua
m
l
m
aEf
fe
ct

-.04 -.02

-.04 -.02

0

0

.02 .04 .06 .08

.02 .04 .06 .08

.08

Argentina

Chile (3.15)

1

Center is at 0

Intl Reserve

Figure 10: continued

(c) Other developing economies
Ca meroon (2.20)

Egypt (2.49)

(3.53)

Egypt

Gabon

.1
.05
0

Financial Openness

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

Jordan (6.21)

Intl Reserve

Center is at 0

ua
l
Ac
t

Tr
ile
m

m
a-

Ef
fe
ct

ct

ua
l

Intl Reserve

Tanzania

(2.37)

.1

-.03-.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06

Tanzania

.06
.04
.02
0

1 Output volatility

Jordan

2 Investment volatility

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

-.02
Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ef
fe

Ac
t

Tr
ile
m

LDC, 2002-06
1

.08

.15
.1
.05
0

m
a-

ct

Gabon, 2002-06
.8

Poland

-.05

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Ef
fe

.6

Poland (3.69)

Jordan

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

m
a-

.4

LDC, 2002-06
Center is at 0

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

1 Output volatility

Poland

Monetary Independence

Financial Openness

.4

.2

Exchange Rate Stability

Financial Openness

.2

.6

Tanzania, 2002-06

Poland, 2002-06
.8

LDC, 2002-06

.8

LDC, 2002-06

1

LDC, 2002-06

1

Center is at 0

Intl Reserve

52

Exchange Rate Stability

.4

.6

Jordan, 2002-06
.8

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Monetary Independence

.4

.6

2 Investment volatility

Tanzania

Monetary Independence

Exchange Rate Stability

Exchange Rate Stability

.2

1

Intl Reserve

Intl Reserve

Financial Openness

Egypt, 2002-06

LDC, 2002-06

Center is at 0

ua
l

Gabon

.8

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Monetary Independence

.6

1

.2

2 Investment volatility

.4

Cameroon, 02-06

Financial Openness

1 Output volatility

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

Exchange Rate Stability

.8

2 Investment volatility

Tr
ile
m

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Egypt

.6

1 Output volatility

Ac
t

ua
l

Ef
fe
ct

Ac
t

Tr
ile
m

2 Investment volatility

Monetary Independence

.4

Center is at 0

m
a-

ua
l

ct

-.05

Cameroon

.2

Ef
fe

Ac
t

Tr
ile
m

1 Output volatility

Monetary Independence

Financial Openness

m
a-

ct

ua
l

Ef
fe

Tr
ile
m

m
a-

Ac
t

ua
l

Ef
fe
ct

Ac
t

3 Real Exch. Rate vol.

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

2 Investment volatility

Ac
Tr
tu
ile
al
m
m
aEf
fe
ct

1 Output volatility

m
a-

ct

Tr
ile
m

Tr
ile
m

Ac
t

m
a-

Ef
fe

ua
l

ct
Ef
fe

m
a-

Tr
ile
m

Ac
t

ua
l

-.03-.02-.01 0 .01.02.03.04.05.06

.15

-.03-.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06

Cameroon

Gabon

1

Center is at 0

Intl Reserve

