                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MONETARY POLICY AND UNEMPLOYMENT

                                                Jordi Galí

                                         Working Paper 15871
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15871


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2010




This paper has been prepared for the Handbook of Monetary Economics, edited by B. Friedman and
M. Woodford. Many of the insights contained in the present paper are based on earlier joint work with
Olivier Blanchard, who sparked my interest in the subject. I also thank the editors, Jan Eeckhout, Chris
Pissarides, Carlos Thomas, and participants at the CREI Faculty Lunch and the Conference on "Key
Development in Monetary Economics," for helpful comments at different stages of this project. Tomaz
Cajner and Lien Laureys provided excellent research assistance. I acknowledge financial support from
the European Research Council, the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación and the Government of Catalonia.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jordi Galí. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Unemployment
Jordi Galí
NBER Working Paper No. 15871
April 2010
JEL No. E32,E52

                                           ABSTRACT

Much recent research has focused on the development and analysis of extensions of the New Keynesian
framework that model labor market frictions and unemployment explicitly. The present paper describes
some of the essential ingredients and properties of those models, and their implications for monetary
policy.


Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w15871
1        Introduction

The existence of involuntary unemployment has long been recognized as one
the main ills of modern industrialized economies. And the rise in unem-
ployment that invariably accompanies all economic downturns is, arguably,
one of the main reasons why cyclical fluctuations are generally viewed as
undesirable.
        Despite the central role of unemployment in the policy debate, that
variable has been—at least until recently—conspicuously absent from the new
generation of models that have become the workhorse for the analysis of
monetary policy, inflation and the business cycle, and which are generally
referred to as New Keynesian.1 That absence may be justified on the grounds
that explaining unemployment and its variations has never been the focus of
that literature, so there was no need to model that phenomenon explicitly.
But this could be interpreted as suggesting that there is no independent
role for unemployment—as distinguished, say, from measures of output or
employment—as a determinant of inflation (or other macro variables) or as
a variable that central banks should be concerned about and even respond
to in a systematic way. In other words, under the previous view, unem-
ployment and the frictions underlying it are not essential for understanding
fluctuations in nominal and real variables, nor a key ingredient in the design
of monetary policy.2
    1
     The reader can find a textbook exposition of the New Keynesian model in Walsh
(2003), Woodford (2003), and Galí (2008). An early version and analysis of the baseline
New Keynesian model can be found in Yun (1996), who used a discrete-time version of
the staggered price-setting model originally developed in Calvo (1983). King and Wolman
(1996) provided a detailed analysis of the steady state and dynamic properties of the
model. Goodfriend and King (1997), Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) and Clarida, Galí
and Gertler (1999) were among the first to conduct a normative policy analysis using that
framework.
   2
     The term "unemployment" cannot be found in the index of Walsh (2003) or Woodford


                                           1
    On the other hand, understanding the determinants of unemployment
and the nature of its fluctuations has been at the heart of a parallel liter-
ature, one that has built on search and matching models in the Diamond-
Mortensen-Pissarides tradition.3 Since the influential work of Hall (2005)
and Shimer (2005), pointing to the diﬃculties of a calibrated version of such
a model to account for the size of observed fluctuations in unemployment
and other labor market variables, that literature has taken a more quantita-
tive turn and sparked the interest of mainstream macroeconomists. Yet, and
at least until recently, the models used in that literature have been purely
real, and hence they had nothing to say about the role of monetary policy,
either as a source of unemployment fluctuations, or as a tool to stabilize
those fluctuations.4
    Over the past few years, however, a growing number of researchers have
turned their attention towards the development and analysis of frameworks
that combine elements from the two traditions described above. The typical
framework in this literature combines the nominal rigidities and consequent
monetary non-neutralities of New Keynesian models with the real frictions
in labor markets that are characteristic of the search and matching models.
To the extent of my knowledge, Chéron and Langot (2000) were the first to
bring together nominal rigidities and labor market frictions, showing how
the resulting framework could generate both a Beveridge curve (a negative
(2003), two textbooks providing a modern treatment of monetary economics. In Galí
(2008) I briefly mention "unemployment" in the concluding chapte, but only in reference
to the recent extensions of the New Keynesian model discussed in the present paper.
   3
     Early contributions to the current vintage of search and matching models include
Diamond (1982 a,b), Mortensen (1982 a,b) and Pissarides (1984). See Pissarides (2000)
for a comprehensive exposition of the search and matching approach.
   4
     Incidentally, it is worth pointing out that standard RBC models share the shortcom-
ings of both paradigms: they neither can explain involuntary unemployment nor have any
role for monetary policy.



                                           2
correlation between vacancies and unemployment) and a Phillips curve (a
negative correlation between inflation and unemployment) in the presence
of both technology and monetary shocks. Subsequently, Walsh (2003, 2005)
and Trigari (2009) analyzed the impact of embedding labor market frictions
into the basic New Keynesian model with sticky prices but flexible wages,
with a focus on the size and persistence of the eﬀects of monetary policy
shocks.
    More recent contributions have extended that work in two dimensions.
First, they have relaxed the assumption of flexible wages, and introduced
diﬀerent forms of nominal and real wage rigidity. The work of Trigari (2006)
and Christoﬀel and Linzert (2005) fall into that category. Secondly, the focus
of analysis has gradually turned to normative issues, and more specifically, to
the implications of labor market frictions and unemployment for the design
of monetary policy. Thus, the work of Blanchard and Galí (2010) (in a
model with real wage rigidities) and Thomas (2008) (under nominal wage
rigidities) provides an explicit analysis of the optimal monetary policy in
the context of a simple New Keynesian model with labor market frictions.5
As argued below, and perhaps not surprisingly, those two extensions are
not unrelated: the presence of wage rigidities has important implications,
not only for the macroeconomic eﬀects of diﬀerent shocks, but also for the
relative desirability of alternative policies.
    While still in its infancy, the abovementioned literature has already pro-
vided some insights of interest and has laid the ground for a possible "evolu-
tion" of the estimated DSGE models currently used for policy analysis, one
that would introduce labor market frictions and unemployment explicitly in
   5
     See also the analysis in Arseneau and Chugh (2008) in a model with flexible prices
and quadratic costs of nominal wage adjustment.



                                          3
the full-fledged monetary models of the kind originally developed by Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003, 2008).
The recent work of Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008) provides an excellent
illustration of the progress being made in that direction.
   The objective of the present paper is twofold. First, to describe some of
the essential ingredients of a model that combines labor market frictions and
nominal rigidities. And, secondly, to illustrate how such a model can be used
to address questions of interest pertaining to the interaction between labor
market frictions and nominal rigidities. Two broad questions are emphasized
in the analysis below:

   • What is the role of labor market frictions in shaping the economy’s
      response to aggregate shocks?

   • What are the implications of those frictions for the design of monetary
      policy? In particular, should central banks pay attention to unemploy-
      ment when setting interest rates?

   In order to address those questions, I develop an extension of the New
Keynesian model that allows for labor market frictions and unemployment.
The model is highly stylized, combining elements found in existing papers,
but abstracting from ingredients that (in my view) are not essential given
the purpose at hand. Relative to the relevant literature, the main novelty
of the framework developed here lies in the introduction of variable labor
market participation. That feature is meant to overcome the surprising
contrast between the importance given by the New Keynesian literature to
the elasticity of labor supply (e.g. as a determinant of the persistence of the
eﬀects of monetary policy shocks) and the assumption of a fully inelastic


                                      4
labor supply found almost invariably in existing models with labor market
frictions. In the latter, changes in unemployment match one-for-one those in
employment (with the opposite sign), so there is no information contained in
measures of unemployment that is not revealed by observing employment.
   Several lessons emerge from the analysis below, which are summarized
next in the form of bullet points.

   • Quantitatively realistic labor market frictions are likely to have, by
     themselves, a limited eﬀect on the economy’s equilibrium dynamics.
     Instead, their main role is "to make room" for wage rigidities, with the
     latter leading to ineﬃcient responses to shocks and significant trade-
     oﬀs for monetary policy.

   • When combined with a realistic Taylor-type rule, the introduction of
     price rigidities in a model with labor market frictions has a limited
     impact on the economy’s equilibrium response to real shocks (though,
     of course, it is suﬃcient to make monetary policy non-neutral).

   • If the conditions that guarantee the eﬃciency of the steady state are
     assumed, the optimal policy under flexible wages (i.e. wages subject to
     period-by-period Nash bargaining) is one of strict inflation targeting,
     which requires that the price level be stabilized at all times. If, instead,
     nominal wages are bargained over and readjusted infrequently, the
     optimal policy involves moderate deviations from price stability and
     can be approximated well by a simple interest rate rule that responds
     to price inflation with a coeﬃcient of about 15.

   • Deviations in the unemployment rate from its eﬃcient level are gen-
     erally a source of welfare losses above and beyond those generated by

                                       5
      fluctuations in the output or employment gaps. An optimized simple
      interest rate rule calls for a systematic (though relatively weak) stabi-
      lizing policy response to ineﬃcient fluctuations in unemployment.


    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents some evidence on
the cyclical behavior of labor market variables and inflation, as well as a
simple structural interpretation of their fluctuations. Section 3 develops a
baseline model with labor market frictions and price rigidities, allowing for
two alternative wage-setting environments (flexible and sticky wages). Sec-
tion 4 discusses the properties of a calibrated version of the model, focusing
on the implied responses to monetary and technology shocks. Section 5
presents the welfare criterion associated with the model under the assump-
tion of an eﬃcient steady state, and discusses the responses to a technology
shock under the optimal monetary policy and the optimal simple rule. Sec-
tion 6 discusses possible model extensions. Section 7 concludes. References
and discussion of the relevant literature can generally be found at the end
of each section.


2    Evidence on the Cyclical Behavior of Labor Mar-
     ket Variables and Inflation

This section summarizes the cyclical properties of employment, the labor
force, the unemployment rate, the real wage and inflation in the postwar U.S.
economy. I use quarterly data corresponding to the sample period 1948Q1-
2008Q4 and drawn from the HAVER database. GDP is taken to be the
benchmark cyclical indicator. As a wage measure I use hourly compensation
in the nonfarm business sector. The GDP deflator is the price level used to
compute inflation and the real wage. Employment, the labor force, and GDP

                                      6
are normalized by working age population and, together with the real wage,
are expressed in natural logarithms. All variables are detrended using a
band-pass filter that seeks to preserve fluctuations with a periodicity between
6 and 32 quarters.
    The first panel of Table 1 reports two key unconditional second moments
for the cyclical component of each variable: its standard deviation relative
to GDP and its correlation with GDP. Many of the facts reported here are
well known but are summarized here as a reminder. Thus, note that employ-
ment is substantially more volatile than the labor force, with unemployment
lying somewhere in between. The real wage is also shown to be substantially
less volatile than GDP. Turning to the correlation with GDP, we see that
both employment and the labor force are procyclical, though the latter only
moderately so (their respective correlations are 083 and 030). The unem-
ployment rate is highly countercyclical, with a correlation with GDP close
to −09. Price inflation is mildly procyclical, but the real wage is essentially
acyclical.
    In addition to the unconditional statistics just summarized, Table 1 also
reports conditional statistics based on a decomposition of each variable into
"technology-driven" and "demand-driven" components. The decomposition
is based on a partially-identified VAR with five variables: (log) labor pro-
ductivity, (log) employment, the unemployment rate, price inflation and the
average price markup. The latter is computed as the diﬀerence between
(log) labor productivity and the (log) real wage.6 Following the strategy
proposed in Galí (1999), I identify technology shocks as the only source of
   6
     The baseline results discussed below are based on a specification of the VAR with
(log) employment in first diﬀerences and the unemployment rate detrended using a second
order polynomial of time. The main findings are robust to an alternative specification with
employment detrended in log-levels.



                                            7
the unit root in labor productivity. The structural VAR contains four addi-
tional shocks that are left unidentified, and referred to loosely as "demand"
shocks. I define the "demand" component of each variable of interest as the
sum of its components associated with each of those four shocks.7
    The second and third panels in Table 1 report some statistics of inter-
est for the demand and technology components of a number of variables,
computed after detrending the estimated components with a band-pass fil-
ter analogous to the one applied earlier to the raw data. Note that the
conditional second moments associated with the demand-driven component
are very similar to the unconditional second moments. This is not surpris-
ing once one realizes that non-technology shocks account for the bulk of
the volatility of the cyclical component of all variables (statistics not shown
here). The only exception lies in the strong negative correlation between
the real wage and GDP conditional on demand shocks, which contrasts with
the near zero unconditional correlation between the same variables.
    The conditional statistics associated with the technology-driven compo-
nents are shown in the third panel of Table 1. Note that the labor force is now
largely acyclical and the real wage mildly procyclical, both of which contrast
with the corresponding unconditional statistics. Also, while the technology
components of employment and the unemployment rate are shown to be pro-
cyclical and countercyclical, as measured by the corresponding correlation
with GDP, a look at the estimated dynamic responses of those variables
to a technology shock reveals a more complex pattern. Figure 1 displays
the estimated responses to a favorable technology shock, i.e. one which is
shown to increase output and labor productivity permanently. Note that
   7
     The reader is referred to Galí (1999) for a detailed description of the econometric
approach.



                                           8
output hardly changes in the short run, with its response building up only
gradually over time. On the other hand, employment declines on impact in
response to that shock, and only gradually reverts back to its initial level.
A similar result can be found in Galí (1999), Basu, Fernald and Kimball
(2006), Francis and Ramey (2005), and Galí and Rabanal (2004), among
others, using alternative VAR specifications (and with a focus on hours
rather than employment).8 The previous authors have argued that such
estimated responses to a technology shock are at odds with the predictions
of a standard calibrated real business cycle model, which would call for a
simultaneous upward adjustment of output and employment in response to
a technology improvement. The existence of short-run demand constraints,
possibly resulting from the interaction of nominal rigidities and a not-fully-
accommodating monetary policy, has been posited as an explanation for
that evidence.
    Figure 1 also provides evidence on the response of variables other than
output and employment to a positive technology shock. In particular we see
that the labor force declines slightly but permanently after that shock. That
decline in the labor force can only oﬀset partially the larger fall the large drop
in employment, thus leading to a persistent increase in the unemployment
rate, which is only reverted after six quarters. Similar evidence of a short
run rise in unemployment in response to a positive supply shock can also be
found Blanchard and Quah (1989) and, more recently, by Barnichon (2008).
The latter author argues that such evidence implies a rejection of a central
prediction of the standard search and matching model, though it can be
   8
     The previous evidence is not uncontroversial. For a critical perspective on that evi-
dence see Christiano, Eichenbaum and Vigfusson (2003) and Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan
(2008).




                                            9
accounted for once that model is extended to allow for nominal rigidities
and a suitable monetary policy rule.

        Next I explore whether a model that combines nominal rigidities and
labor market frictions can account for diﬀerent aspects of the evidence just
described.


3        A Model with Nominal Rigidities and Labor
         Market Frictions
3.1       Households

I assume a large number of identical households. Each household is made
up of a continuum of members represented by the unit interval. There is
assumed to be full consumption risk sharing within each household.9 The
household seeks to maximize the objective function
                                        ∞
                                        X
                                   0            (   )                            (1)
                                        =0

                                                          ³R              1
                                                                              ´ 
                                                             1                 −1
where  ∈ [0 1] is the discount factor,  ≡                0    ()1−       is an index
of the quantities consumed of the diﬀerent types of final goods, and  is an
index of the total eﬀort or time that household members allocate to labor
market activities. More specifically, I define  as

                                      =  +                                         (2)

where  and  denote, respectively, the fraction of household members
who are employed and unemployed (and looking for a job).10 Parameter  ∈
    9
     Merz (1995) was the first to adopt a the assumption of a representative "large" house-
hold with a conventional utility function in the context of a search model.
  10
     I focus on variations in labor input at the extensive margin, and abstract from possible
variations over time in hours per worker (or eﬀort per worker). Even though the latter


                                               10
[0 1] represents the marginal disutility generated by an unemployed member
relative to an employed one. Non-participation in the labor market generates
no disutility to the household. Note that the labor force (or participation
rate) is given by  +  ≡  . The following constraints must be satisfied
for all :  () ≥ 0, all  ∈ [0 1], 0 ≤  +  ≤ 1,  ≥ 0 and  ≥ 0.
    The household’s period utility is assumed to take the form
                                                    
                          (   ) ≡ log  −      1+                            (3)
                                                   1+ 
and where the disutility implied by labor market activities can be interpreted
as resulting from foregone leisure and/or consumption of home produced
goods. Note that by setting  = 0 the resulting utility function specializes
to one commonly used in monetary models of the business cycle. That
specification is consistent with a balanced growth path and involves a direct
parametrization of the Frisch labor supply elasticity, which is given by 1.
On the other hand, if  = 0 is assumed, we can interpret the term  +
as the sum of the disutilities of labor market activities of all household
members, with work and unemployment generating, respectively, individual
disutilities of  and  (with no disutility generated by non-participation).11
Note also that the chosen specification diﬀers from the one generally used in
the search and matching literature, where the marginal rate of substitution
is assumed to be constant, thus implying a fully inelastic labor supply above
a certain threshold wage.
    Employment evolves over time according to

                               = (1 − )−1 +  0                               (4)
display non trivial cyclical movements in the data, its introduction seems unnecessary
to convey the basic points made below. See Trigari (2009) and Thomas (2008), among
others, for examples of related models that allow for variation in (disutility-generating)
hours per worker.
  11
     See, e.g., Shimer (2009).


                                           11
where  is a constant separation rate,  is the job finding rate, and 0 is
the fraction of household members who are unemployed (and looking for a
job) at the beginning of period ̇. Note that  = (1 −  )0 .12
       The household faces a sequence of budget constraints given by
            Z 1                                 Z 1
                 () () +   ≤ −1 +      () () + Π
              0                                     0

where  () is the price of good ,  () is the nominal wage paid by firm
,  represents purchases of one-period bonds (at a price  ), and Π is a
lump-sum component of income (which may include, among other items, div-
idends from ownership of firms or lump-sum taxes). The above sequence of
period budget constraints is supplemented with a solvency condition which
prevents the household from engaging in Ponzi schemes.
       Optimal demand for each good takes the familiar form:
                                     µ       ¶
                                        () −
                             () =                                              (5)
                                        
               ³R                 ´ 1
                  1                1−
where  ≡        0    ()1−      denotes the price index for final goods. Note
also that (5) implies that total consumption expenditures can be written as
R1
 0  () ()  =   .

       The intertemporal optimality condition is given by
                                      ½            ¾
                                          
                             =                                                 (6)
                                        +1 +1

       In the model with frictionless, perfectly competitive labor markets the
household would determine how much labor to supply, taking as given the
  12
     Note that (4) implies that current hires become productive in the same period. This
is the timing assumed in Blanchard and Galí (2009) and consistent with the bulk of
the business cycle literature, where employment is assumed to be a non-predetermined
variable. In contrast, most search and matching models assume it takes one period for a
new hire to become productive, thus making employment predetermined, and preventing
it from responding contemporaneously to shocks.


                                           12
(single) market wage. The wage would adjust so that all the labor supplied
is employed, implying the absence of involuntary unemployment. Thus,
we would have  =  for all , and under the assumed preferences, an
intratemporal optimality condition would hold, equating the real wage to
the marginal rate of substitution,   =   , and implicitly deter-
mining the quantity of labor supplied. The present model departs from that
Walrasian benchmark in an important respect: the wage does not "automat-
ically" adjust to guarantee that all the labor supplied is employed. Instead,
the wage is bargained bilaterally between individual workers and firms in
order to split the surplus generated by existing employment relations. Em-
ployment is then the result of the aggregation of firms’ hiring decisions,
given the wage protocol. In other words, employment is demand deter-
mined, with the households’ participation decision influencing employment
only indirectly, through its impact on wages and on hiring costs.

3.2   Firms

As in much of the literature on nominal rigidities and labor market frictions,
I assume a model with a two-sector structure. Firms in the final goods sector
do not use labor as an input, but are subject to nominal rigidities in the
form of restrictions to the frequency of their price-setting decisions. On
the other hand, firms in the intermediate goods sector take the price of
the good they produce as given, use labor as an input (subject to hiring
costs), and engage in wage bargaining with its workers. That modelling
strategy, originally proposed in Walsh (2005), has the advantage of getting
around the diﬃculties associated with having price setting decisions and




                                     13
wage bargaining concentrated in the same firms.13

3.2.1      Final Goods

I assume a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms indexed by  ∈
[0 1], each producing a diﬀerentiated final good. All firms have access to an
identical technology
                                      () =  ()

where  () is the quantity of the (single) intermediate good used by firm 
as an input.
       Under flexible prices each firm would set the price of its good optimally
each period, subject to a demand schedule with constant price elasticity .14
Profit maximization thus implies the familiar price-setting condition:

                                 () = M (1 −  )

                                                                   
where  is the price of the intermediate good, M ≡             −1   is the optimal or
desired (gross) markup and  is a subsidy on the purchases of intermediate
goods. Note that (1 −  ) is the nominal marginal cost facing the final
goods firm. Since all firms choose the same price it follows that

                                   = M (1 −  )

for all .
       Instead of flexible prices, I assume in much of what follows a price-setting
environment as in Calvo (1983), with each firm being able to adjust its price
each period only with probability 1 −  . That probability is independent
  13
     See Kuester (2007) and Thomas (2008b) for an analysis of a version of the model
where price setters are subject to labor market frictions.
  14
     As discussed below, this requires that the demand of final goods coming from inter-
mediate goods firms (in order to pay for their hiring costs), has the same price elasticity
as the demand originating in households.


                                            14
across firms and independent of the time elapsed since the last price adjust-
ment. Thus, parameter  ∈ [0 1] also represents the fraction of firms that
keep their prices unchanged in any given period and can thus be interpreted
as an index of price rigidities.
       All firms adjusting their price in any given period choose the same price,
denoted by ∗ , since they face an identical problem. The (log-linearized)
optimal price setting condition in this environment is given by15
                                           ∞
                                           X
                   ∗ =  + (1 −  )     ( ) ( {+ } −  )                (7)
                                           =0

where lower case letters denote the logs of the original variables,  ≡
log M . Thus, firms that adjust their price in any given period, choose
a (log) price that is equal to the desired (log) markup over a weighted aver-
age of current and (expected) future (log) marginal costs, with the weights
being a function of both the discount factor  and the Calvo parameter  .
       By combining (7) with the (log-linearized) law of motion for the aggre-
gate price level given by16

                               =  −1 + (1 −  )∗                              (8)

one can derive the inflation equation

                                =  { +1 } −  
                                                        b                            (9)

where   ≡  − −1 is price inflation, 
                                           b ≡  −  =  − ( −  ) − 
denotes the deviation of the (log) average price markup from its desired (and
                                     (1− )(1− )
steady state) value, and  ≡                      .   Equation (9) makes clear that
  15
    See, e.g. Galí (2008, chapter 3), for details of the derivation.
  16
    Equation (8) can be derived by log-linearizing the expression for the aggregate price
level  around a zero inflation steady state, and using the fact that a fraction 1 −  of
firms set the same price ∗ , while the price index for the remaining fraction that keep
their price unchanged is −1 , since they are drawn randomly from the universe of firms.


                                            15
whatever is the influence of labor market frictions and wage-setting practices
on the dynamics of price inflation it must necessarily work through their
impact on firms’ markups, since variations in price inflation are the result
of misalignments between current and desired price markups.

3.2.2    Intermediate Goods

The intermediate good is produced by a continuum of identical, perfectly
competitive firms, represented by the unit interval and indexed by  ∈ [0 1].
All such firms have access to a production function

                                  () =   ()1−

Variable  represents the state of technology, which is assumed to be com-
mon across firms and to vary exogenously over time. More precisely, I
assume that  ≡ log  follows an (1) process with autoregressive coef-
ficient  and variance  2 .
    Employment at firm  evolves according to

                          () = (1 − )−1 () +  ()               (10)

where  ∈ (0 1) is an exogenous separation rate, and  () represents the
measure of workers hired by firm  in period . Note that new hires start
working in the period they are hired. That timing assumption, which follows
Blanchard and Galí (2009), deviates from the standard one in the search
and matching literature (which requires a one period lag before a hired
worker becomes productive), but is consistent with conventional business
cycle models, where employment is not a predetermined variable.

    Labor Market Frictions. Following Blanchard and Galí (2009), I
introduce labor market frictions in the form of a cost per hire, represented

                                          16
by  and defined in terms of the bundle of final goods. That cost is assumed
to be exogenous to each individual firm.
    Though  is taken as given by each individual firm, it is natural to think
of it as depending on aggregate factors. One natural such determinant is
the degree of tightness in the labor market, which can be approximated by
the job finding rate  ≡  0 , i.e. the ratio of aggregate hires,  ≡
R1
 0  (), to the size of the unemployment pool at the beginning of the

period, 0 . More specifically, I assume17

                                     = ( )

                                          = Γ

    Relation to the matching function approach. The above formulation is
equivalent to the matching function approach adopted by the search liter-
ature. Under the latter, firms and workers match according to a function
 (  0 ) where  represents the number of aggregate vacancies, and where
a firm can post vacancies at a unit cost Γ. Under the assumption of homo-
geneity of degree one in the matching function, the fraction of posted vacan-
cies that get filled within the period is given by  (  0 ) ≡ ( 0 ),
where 0  0. On the other hand, the job finding rate is given by  =
 (  0 )0 ≡ ( 0 ) where 0  0. It follows that a fraction (−1 ( ))
of vacancies posted are filled with the resulting cost per hire being given by
 = Γ(−1 ( )), which is increasing in  . In particular, under the as-
sumption of a Cobb-Douglas matching function  (  0 ) =   01− we
  17
     Instead, Blanchard and Galí (2009) assume a hiring cost of the form  Γ . Though
at the possible cost of less realism, that formulation has the advantage of preserving the
homogeneity of the eﬃciency conditions with respect to the technology shock  , leading
to an constrained-eﬃcient allocations with a constant employment, which is a convenient
benchmark.



                                           17
                  1−
have  = Γ   , which coincides with the above specification of the cost
                        1−
function, for  ≡         .

       In the presence of labor market frictions, wages (and, as a result, employ-
ment) may diﬀer across firms, since they cannot be automatically arbitraged
out by workers switching from low to high wage firms. I make this explicit
by using the subindex  to refer to the wage and other variables that are
potentially firm-specific. Given a wage  (), the optimal hiring policy of
firm  is described by the condition

                                   ()
                 () =              +  − (1 − )  {Λ+1 +1 }            (11)
                                   

where    () ≡ (  ) (1−)  ()− is the marginal revenue prod-
uct of labor (expressed in terms of final goods) and Λ+ ≡   ( + ) is
the stochastic discount factor for -period ahead (real) payoﬀs.18 In words,
each period the firm hires workers up to the point where the marginal rev-
enue product of labor equals the cost of a marginal worker. The latter,
represented by the right hand side of (11), has three components: (i) the
real wage  () , (ii) the hiring cost  , and (iii) the discounted savings
in future hiring costs that result from having to hire (1 − ) fewer workers
the following period. Equivalently, and solving (11) forward, we have:

                      (∞                      µ                         ¶)
                       X                                       + ()
             =             Λ+ (1 − )   + () −
                                                                +
                        =0

i.e. the hiring cost must equate the (expected) surplus generated by the
(marginal) worker.19
  18
    Note that intermediate good firms are perfectly competitive and thus take the price
 asgiven.
  19
    Implicitly it is assumed that the firm is always doing some positive hiring. This will
be the case if exogenous separations are large enough and shocks are small enough.



                                            18
       For notational convenience it is useful to define the net hiring cost as
 ≡  − (1 − ) {Λ+1 +1 }. Thus, one can rewrite (11) more com-
pactly as:
                                                    ()
                                  () =              +                         (12)
                                                    
       The previous optimality condition can be used to derive an expression
for the (log) average price markup in the final goods sector, which was
                                                            R1
shown above to be the driving force of inflation. Using  ' 0  () and
      R1
 ' 0  () as approximate measures of (log) aggregate employment
and the (log) average nominal wage around a symmetric steady state, log-
linearization of (12) and subsequent integration over all firms yields the
following expression for the average markup in the final goods sector:20

                         b = ( −  
                                                      b  + Φ b ]
                                       b ) − [(1 − Φ)                               (13)

                                                                          
where   ≡  − is the average (log) real wage, and Φ ≡             ( )+   measures
the importance of (non-wage) hiring costs relative to the wage. Also, note
for future reference that

               b =        1               (1 − )
                                    b −                   +1 } − b )
                                                       ( {b                         (14)
                       1 − (1 − )       1 − (1 − )
              b and where  denotes the real return on a riskless one-period
where b =  
bond.     21


       Finally, note that (12) also implies

                         ( () −  ) = −(1 − Φ) ( () −   )                   (15)
                                    
  20
     Under the assumption that  , ,  
                                               and 
                                                      have well defined steady states, the
previous equation will also hold in log-levels (with an added constant term), and hence
will be consistent with non-stationary technology.
  21
     The price of a one-period riskless real bond is given by exp{− } =  {Λ+1 } .
Log-linearizing around a steady state we have
                                                     +1 }
                                  ≡  −  ' − {
where  ≡ − log  and +1 ≡ log Λ+1 .


                                              19
i.e. the relative demand for labor by any given firm depends exclusively on its
relative wage, with the corresponding elasticity being given by −(1 − Φ).
Note that this is a consequence of the hiring cost being common to all firms
and independent of each firm’s hiring and employment levels.22

3.2.3    A Brief Detour: Labor Market Frictions and Inflation Dy-
         namics

Empirical assessments of the price setting block of the New Keynesian model
have often focused on inflation equation (9) and made use of the fact that, in
the absence of labor market frictions, the average price markup (or, equiv-
alently, the real marginal cost, with the sign reversed) is given by

                              b = ( −  
                                           b ) − 
                                                   b

                                       
                                    = −b

where b ≡ 
             b  − (b    b ) is the (log) labor income share, expressed as a
                     − 
deviation from its mean. The latter variable is readily available for most
industrialized countries and can thus be used to construct a measure of
the average markup, which can in turn serve as the basis for any empirical
evaluation of (9).23
    The analysis above implies that in the presence of labor market frictions

                    b = ( −  
                                                 b  + Φ b ]
                                  b ) − [(1 − Φ) 

                              − Φ (b − 
                          = −b              b)
  22
     The assumption of a decreasing returns technology is required in order for wage diﬀer-
entials across firm to be consistent with equilibrium, given the assumption of price taking
behavior (otherwise only the firm with the lowest wage would not be priced out of the
market). As an alternative, Thomas (2008) assumes a constant returns technology, but
combines it with the assumption of firm-specific convex vacancy posting costs, in the form
of management utility losses.
  23
     See Galí and Gertler (1999), Galí, Gertler and López-Salido (2001) and Sbordone
(2002) for early applications of that approach.


                                            20
   Thus, the resulting empirical inflation equation may be written as
                                                    ³                 ´
                        =    { +1 } +             b    b)
                                                     b + Φ ( −         (16)

                                        b it follows that in the presence of
   Given (11) and the fact that b =  
labor market frictions the measure of the average markup takes the form of
a "corrected" labor income share, where the correction involves information
on the current and future job finding rate.
   In a recent paper, Krause, López-Salido and Lubik (2008) revisit the
empirical evidence on inflation dynamics using an equation similar to (16),
together with data on the job finding rate to construct a modified markup se-
ries. They conclude that the impact of labor market frictions on the driving
variable of inflation is rather limited. To some extent this is something
one could anticipate for, as discussed below, under a realistic calibration
                    
of hiring costs,        = (0045)(1 − (1 − )) ' 0006, implying too small a
coeﬃcient Φ to make a significant diﬀerence in the markup measure, at least
in the absence of implausibly large fluctuations in net hiring costs relative
to wages.

3.3   Monetary Policy

Under the model’s baseline specification, monetary policy is assumed to be
described by a simple Taylor-type interest rate rule represented by

                                  =  +    +  b +              (17)

where  ≡ − log  is the yield on a one-period nominally riskless bond,
 ≡ − log  is the household’s discount rate, and  is an exogenous policy
shifter, which is assumed to follow an (1) process with autoregressive
coeﬃcient  and variance  2 .

                                              21
    Following Taylor (1993, 1999), I take a properly calibrated version of the
previous rule as a rough approximation to actual monetary policy in the U.S.
Much of the recent literature on nominal rigidities and labor market frictions
has also adopted an interest rate rule similar to (17), even though some
details may diﬀer across papers.24 Even though (17) is used as a baseline
specification of monetary policy, I also consider alternative specifications of
the policy rule when I turn to the normative analysis in Section 6.

    Next I turn to a description of wage determination.

3.4    Labor Market Frictions and Wage Determination

I consider two alternative assumptions regarding wage setting: flexible wages
and sticky wages. Under flexible wages, all wages are renegotiated and (po-
tentially) adjusted every period. Under sticky wages only a constant fraction
of firms can adjust their nominal wages in any given period. In both cases,
the wage is determined according to a Nash bargaining protocol, with con-
stant shares of the total surplus associated with each existing employment
relation accruing to the worker (or his household) and the firm, respectively.
    In contrast with the existing monetary models with labor market fric-
tions, the framework below lies in its explicit (albeit stylized) modelling
of the participation decision. This is possible through the introduction of a
(utility) cost to labor market participation, which the household must trade-
oﬀ against the probability and benefits resulting from becoming employed.25
  24
     Thus, Walsh (2005), Faia (2008) and Trigari (2009) include the lagged nominal rate
in the rule as a source of inertia, but impose that the shock be serially uncorrelated. In
addition, Walsh (2005) also assumes no systematic response to output, whereas Faia (2008)
also includes unemployment as an argument of the rule. Chéron and Langot (2000) and
Walsh (2003) are an exception in that they assume an exogenous process for the money
supply, a less appealing specification from the point of view of realism.
  25
     My approach here generalizes the one used by Shimer (2008) in the context of a real
search and matching model.


                                           22
       Next I show, for both the flexible and sticky wage environments, how the
surplus is split between households and firms as a function of the wage. In
all cases, workers are assumed to act in a way consistent with maximization
of the utility of their household, as specified in (1) and (3) (as opposed to
maximization of their hypothetical "individual" utility).

3.4.1      The Case of Flexible Wages

Under this scenario each firm negotiates every period with its workers over
their individual compensation. The value accruing to the representative
household from a member employed at firm , expressed in terms of final
goods, is given by:

                      ()             ©      ¡                        ¢ª
         V () =                                      
                            −   +  Λ+1 (1 − )V+1         
                                                            () + V+1
                      

where   ≡  
                    is the household’s marginal rate of substitution be-

tween consumption and labor market eﬀort (or, equivalently, the marginal
disutility of labor market eﬀort, expressed in terms of the final goods bun-
dle), and V is the value generated by a member who is unemployed at the
beginning of period .26 The latter is given by
           Z 1
               ()                     ¡           ©        
                                                                    ª¢
   V =             V () + (1 −  ) −  +  Λ+1 V+1
             0   

       The value associated with non-participation is normalized to zero. Under
the assumption of an interior allocation with positive non-participation, the
household must be indiﬀerent between sending an additional member to the
labor market or not. Thus, it must be the case that V = 0 for all . The
  26
    Note that in defining below the surplus relative to the value of an unemployed person
at the begining of theperiod I am implicitly assuming that if no wage agreement is reached
the worker always has a chance to join the pool of the unemployed and look for a job in
the same period.



                                           23
latter condition in turn implies:
                                            Z    1
                                                    () 
                            =                         S ()                 (18)
                                   1 −     0         
where S () ≡ V () − V () = V () denotes the surplus accruing to the
household from an established employment relation at firm .27
       Thus we have:
                           ()                     ©               ª
              S () =                                       
                                 −   + (1 − )  Λ+1 S+1 ()              (19)
                           
       On the other hand, the surplus from an existing employment relation
accruing to firm  is given by
                                    ()             ©               ª
         S () =    () −                               
                                          + (1 − )  Λ+1 S+1 ()             (20)
                                    
       Note that under the maintained assumption that the firm is maximizing
profits, it follows from (11) and (20) that S () =  for all  ∈ [0 1]
and . In words, the surplus that a profit maximizing firm gets from an
existing employment relation equals the hiring cost (which is also the cost
of replacing a current worker by a new one, and thus what a firm "saves"
from maintaining an existing relation).

       The reservation wage for a worker employed at firm  is the minimum
wage consistent with a non-negative surplus. It is given by
                                             ©               ª
                  Ω                                  
                    () =   − (1 − )  Λ+1 S+1 ()


       The corresponding reservation wage for the firm, i.e. the wage consistent
with a non-negative surplus for the firm is:
                                                  ©               ª
                Ω () =    () + (1 − )  Λ+1 S+1
                                                           
                                                               ()
  27
    Note that under the assumption that  = 0, there would be no cost associated with
remaining unemployed so, to the extent the surplus from employment S () was positive,
there would be full participation, so that  = 1 −  for all .


                                            24
   The bargaining set at firm  in period  is defined by the range of
wage levels consistent with a non-negative surplus for both the firm and
                                                £              ¤
the worker, and thus corresponds to the interval Ω       
                                                   () Ω () . Note that

the size of the bargaining set is given by

                    Ω () − Ω                
                                () = S () + S ()

                                      ≥ 

   In other words, the presence of labor market frictions in the form of hiring
costs guarantees the existence, in equilibrium, of a non-trivial bargaining set
and, as a consequence, room for bargaining between firms and workers. As
emphasized by Hall (2005) any wage that lies within the bargaining set
is consistent with a privately eﬃcient employment relation, i.e. one that
neither the worker nor the firm has an incentive to terminate.
   Until the work of Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005), the search and match-
ing literature has generally relied on the assumption of period-by-period Nash
bargaining between workers and firms as a "selection rule" to determine the
prevailing wage. This has also been the case for the more recent vintage
of models with sticky prices, when no wage rigidities are assumed (see, e.g.
Walsh (2003, 2005) and Trigari (2005)). In what follows, I take the assump-
tion of period-by-period Nash bargaining as the one defining the flexible
wage economy, leaving a discussion of alternative for the next subsection.
   Period-by-period Nash bargaining implies that the firm and each of its
workers determine the wage in period  by solving the problem

                           max S ()1− S ()
                            ()

subject to (19) and (20), and where  ∈ (0 1) denotes the relative bargaining
power of firms vis a vis workers.

                                      25
      The solution to that problem implies the following constant share rule:

                                 S () = (1 − ) S ()

      The associated (Nash) wage is thus given by

                      ()
                               =  Ω                
                                     () + (1 − ) Ω ()
                      
                               =    + (1 − )    ()            (21)

      Using (12) to substitute for    () we confirm that the wage is
common to all firms and, as a result, so will be employment, the hiring
rate, and the marginal revenue product. Thus, we can henceforth omit the
 index in what follows and write the Nash wage as

                           
                              =    + (1 − )                    (22)
                           

which combined with (11) (evaluated at the symmetric equilibrium) implies

               − (1 − )  {Λ+1 +1 } =  (   −   )       (23)

      Finally, note that under Nash bargaining the participation condition (18)
can be rewritten as28

                                                       
                               = (1 − )                          (24)
                                                     1 − 

3.4.2      The Case of Sticky Wages

The flexibility of wages implied by the assumption of period-by-period Nash
bargaining made in the previous subsection stands in conflict with the em-
pirical evidence. More specifically, equation (22) implies that the nominal
wage of all workers should experience continuous adjustments in response
 28
      As before, (24) is only needed when   0, so that  6=  .


                                             26
to changes in the price level, consumption, employment, productivity and
any other variable that may aﬀect the marginal rate of substitution or the
marginal revenue product of firms. By contrast, the evidence based on ob-
servation of individual wages point to substantial nominal wage rigidities.
Thus, Taylor’s (1999) survey of the evidence concludes that the average fre-
quency of wage changes is about one year. Evidence of similar (and even
stronger) nominal wage rigidities can be found in more recent studies using
U.S. micro data (e.g. Barattieri, Basu and Gottschalk (2009)) as well as
micro data and surveys from many European countries (European Central
Bank (2009).
   Motivated by that evidence, and by the diﬃculties of calibrated search
and matching models with flexible wages to account for the observed volatil-
ity of unemployment or the "excess smoothness" of the real wage relative
to labor productivity and GDP, many researchers have introduced diﬀerent
forms of wage rigidities in models with labor market frictions. As argued
by Hall (2005), those frictions "make room" for such rigid wages, since they
imply a non-trivial wage bargaining set consistent with privately eﬃcient
employment relations. In Hall’s words, that property "...provides a full an-
swer to the condemnation of sticky wage models in Robert Barro (1977), for
invoking an ineﬃciency that intelligent actors could easily avoid."
   Perhaps not surprisingly given the indeterminacy inherent to the exis-
tence of a bargaining set, the range of proposals to model wage rigidities in
the literature is broad. Thus, some authors introduce real wage rigidities (in
either real or monetary models) by postulating an "ad-hoc" real wage sched-
ule which implies (potentially) continuous adjustment of all wages, though
one that is smoother than that implied by period-by-period Nash bargaining
(see, e.g. Hall (2005), Blanchard and Galí (2007, 2010), and Christoﬀel and

                                     27
Linzert (2005)). An alternative approach to modelling wage rigidities as-
sumes staggered wage setting, so that only a fraction of workers are allowed
to bargain over and adjust their wage in any given period. In that case, each
individual wage remains unchanged for several periods, either in real terms
(Gertler and Trigari (2009)) or, more realistically, in nominal terms (as in
Bodart et al. (2006), Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008) and Thomas (2008)).
      Here I follow the last group of authors and introduce wage rigidities in
the form of staggered nominal wage setting à la Calvo. More specifically, I
assume that the nominal wages paid by a given firm to its employees are
renegotiated (and likely reset) with probability 1 −  each period, indepen-
dently of the time elapsed since the last adjustment at that firm. The newly
set wage is determined through Nash bargaining between each individual
worker and the firm. Once the nominal wage is set, it remains unchanged
until a new opportunity for resetting the wage arises. As a result, in any
given period the wage (both real and nominal) will generally deviate from
the flexible Nash wage derived in the previous subsection. Yet, and to the
extent that shocks are not too large, the wage will remain within the rel-
evant bargaining set and will thus be privately eﬃcient to maintain the
corresponding employment relation.
      Most importantly, I assume that workers hired between renegotiation
periods are paid the average wage prevailing at the firm. Thus, the average
wage will have an influence on the firm’s hiring and employment levels. Yet,
I assume that the number of workers is large enough that neither the firm
nor the worker bargaining over the wage internalize the impact that their
choice will have on the average wage. In a symmetric equilibrium all workers
will get the same wage, which ex-post will be equal to the average.29 It is
 29
      This assumption simplifies the subsequent analysis considerably.


                                            28
important to stress that the previous assumption is not an innocuous one.
If new hires could negotiate their wage freely at the time of being hired,
the existence of long spells with unchanged nominal wages for incumbent
workers would have no direct impact on the hiring decisions and, as a result,
on output and employment, as emphasized by and Pissarides (2009). The
empirical evidence on the relevance of wage stickiness for new hires remains
controversial. Some authors have provided evidence pointing to greater wage
flexibility for new hires (see. e.g. Haefke et al. (2008), and the references
in Pissarides (2009)), while others reject the existence of any significant
diﬀerences between new hires and incumbent workers (e.g. Gertler and
Trigari (2009) and Galuscak et al. (2008)).30
       An immediate consequence of the staggering assumption is that wages
will generally diﬀer across firms, and so will employment and output. That
dispersion in the allocation of workers across otherwise identical firms, cou-
pled with the assumption of decreasing returns, is ineﬃcient from a social
viewpoint, a point further discussed below in the context of the normative
analysis of the model.31
       Next I derive the basic equations describing the surpluses accruing to
households and firms from existing employment relations, as a preliminary
step to the analysis of wage determination as the outcome of a Nash bargain.
            
       Let V+| denote the value accruing to a household in period  +  from
the employment of a member at a firm that last reset its wage in period .
  30
     See Section 6 for a brief discussion of an extension by Brodart et al. (2007) allowing
for diﬀerential flexibility between incumbents and new hires.
  31
     The ineﬃciencies resulting from staggered nominal wage setting were already stressed
in Erceg et al. (2000), in the context of a model without labor market frictions. Wage
staggering in Thomas (2008) leads to an aggregate ineﬃciency as a result of the convexity
of vacancy posting costs at the level of each firm. Here the ineﬃciency results from the
presence of decreasing returns to labor.




                                            29
Under the assumption made above we have:
            ∗                n          h                                                        io
                                                                                           
V+| =         − + ++ Λ+++1 (1 − )( V++1| + (1 −  )V++1|++1 ) + ++1
            +
                                                                       (25)
for  = 0 1 2 3 where ∗ denotes the nominal wage newly set in period
.32 Note that the last term on the right hand side of (25) reflects the fact
that the continuation value depends on whether wages are readjusted or not
in the following period.
       On the other hand, the value accruing to a household in period  from
a member who is unemployed (but part of the labor force) at the beginning
of period  is given by:
           Z 1µ          ¶
                  ()                        ¡                           ¢
  V =                   V () + (1 −  ) −  +  {Λ+1 +1
                                                                        
                                                                           }
             0     
       Again, optimal participation implies V = 0 for all . As a result
            ∗                     n                                                 o
                                                                        
S+| =         − + +(1−)+ Λ+++1 ( S++1| + (1 −  )S++1|++1 )
            +
                                                                        (26)
and                                      Z     1µ            ¶
                                                   ()
                      =                                     S ()           (27)
                             1 −         0         
       Iterating (26) forward and evaluating the resulting expression at  = 0
one can determine the household surplus from an employment relation at a
firm whose wages are currently being reset:
             (∞                          µ ∗                ¶)
               X                           
                                            
   S| =        ((1 − ) ) Λ+         −  +
                                           +
               =0
                                 (∞                                      )
                                   X
                                                             
           +(1 −  )(1 − )         ((1 − ) ) Λ++1 S++1|++1 (28)
                                        =0
  32
    Note that even though newly set wages can in principle diﬀer across workers and firms,
ex-post all individual wages set in any given period will be identical. That justifies the
omission of firm or worker indexes in ∗


                                             30
   On the other hand, the period  +  surplus accruing to a firm that last
renegotiated its wages in period , resulting from a marginal employment
relation, is given by
                         ∗            n                                                 o
                                                                           
S+| =   +| −        +(1−)+ Λ+++1 ( S++1| + (1 −  )S++1|++1 )
                         +
                                                                        (29)
                                                
                                               +             −
for  = 0 1 2 3 , where   +| ≡   + (1 −)+ +|   is the firm’s
marginal revenue product of labor, and +| its employment level.
   Note, for future reference, that when combined with the optimal choice
of employment by the firm at each point in time (as described by (11)), (29)
implies:


                                     
                                    S+| = +

for all  and . In words, the surplus accruing to the firm is always equal to
the current hiring cost, independently of how long the wage has remained
unchanged.
   Iterating (29) forward and evaluating the resulting expression at  = 0
yields
                (∞                       µ                      ¶)
                 X                                          ∗
                                
   S|    =       ((1 − ) ) Λ+   +| −
                                                           +
                 =0
                                  (∞                                       )
                                   X
             +(1 −  )(1 − )       ((1 − ) ) Λ++1 S++1|++1
                                                                
                                                                           (30)
                                      =0
   In the present environment, the Nash bargained wage at a firm that
resets nominal wages in period  is given by the solution to
                                     1−    
                              max
                                ∗
                                  (S| ) (S| )
                               

subject to (28) and (30). The implied sharing rule is given by
                                                
                                S| = (1 − ) S|                            (31)

                                         31
which combined with (28) and (30) requires that the nominal wage newly
set in period  satisfy the condition:
                (∞                         µ ∗            ¶)
                  X                          
                    ((1 − ) ) Λ+       − Ω
                                                    +|    =0             (32)
                                            +
                   =0

where
                   Ω
                    +| ≡   + + (1 − )   +|                 (33)

can be interpreted as the -period ahead target real wage. Note that the
expression for the latter corresponds to that of the relevant Nash wage under
flexible wages, as derived in the previous subsection (see equation (21)).
   Log-linearizing the wage setting rule (32) around a zero inflation steady
state we obtain:
                                  ∞
                                  X
     ∗   = (1 − (1 − ) )    ((1 − ) )  {
                                                        +| + + }      (34)
                                   =0

where            
        +| ≡ log Ω+| . In words, the nominal wage set through Nash

bargaining corresponds to a weighted average of the current and expected
future target nominal wages relevant to the firm that is resetting wages. The
weights decline geometrically with the horizon, at a rate which is a function
of the degree of wage stickiness and the separation rate, since both those
factors determine the expected duration of the newly set wage.
   Next I rewrite the above expression in terms of average target wages.
Log-linearizing (33) around a symmetric steady state we have

    b 
                + + b
      +| = Υ (b                          + + + −  
                         + ) + (1 − Υ) (−b                b+| )       (35)

              
where Υ ≡       .   Let  
                                denote the (log) average target wage, defined as
the current target wage for a (hypothetical) firm whose employment matched
average employment. Formally,

                b 
                         + b
                   ≡ Υ (b                       +  −  
                                ) + (1 − Υ) (−b            b )           (36)

                                         32
                                   b 
       Note that one can interpret     as the Nash bargained wage that would
be observed in a flexible wage environment, conditional on the levels of con-
sumption and (average) marginal revenue product generated by the equilib-
rium allocation under sticky wages.
       Combining (35) and (36) with (15)

                   b 
                            b 
                     +| = 
                                                      ∗
                               + + (1 − Υ)(1 − Φ) ( − + )                    (37)

       Substituting (37) into (34), and after some algebraic manipulation we
can derive the diﬀerence equation

                                1 − (1 − )
∗ = (1−)  {+1
                    ∗
                        }−                             
                                                    −b
                                                 (b       )+(1−(1−)  ) 
                              1 − (1 − Υ)(1 − Φ)
                                                                        (38)
                                                            R1
       The law of motion for the (log) average wage  ≡ 0  () is given
by
                             =  −1 + (1 −  )∗                             (39)

       Combining (38) and (39), one can derive the following wage inflation
equation:
                                      
                       = (1 − ) { +1 } −  (b    b 
                                                     −   )                      (40)
                (1−(1−) )(1− )
where  ≡       (1−(1−Υ)(1−Φ)) .    Note that the driving variable behind fluc-
tuations in wage inflation is the wage gap   − 
                                                   , defined as the deviation

between the average wage and the average target wage.33
       Finally, and as shown in Appendix 4, the optimal participation condition
(27) can be approximated around the zero inflation steady state as follows:

                                        1
                           + b
                          b      =       b + b − Ξ 
                                                                                  (41)
                                       1−
  33
     Thomas (2008) derives a similar representation for wage inflation, in the context of
a slightly diﬀerent model with eﬃcient hours choice, convex vacancy posting costs, and
constant returns.


                                           33
            ( )         
where Ξ ≡   (1−) (1− )(1−(1−) ) .   Note that under flexible wages  = 0,
implying Ξ = 0. The left hand side of (41) measures the cost of labor market
participation (through joining the pool of unemployed at the beginning of the
period), while the right hand is the expected reward from that participation,
both expressed as log deviations from their steady state values. That reward
is increasing in the job finding rate and in the size of current hiring costs
(since workers with newly set wages will generate a surplus proportional to
that variable), and decreasing in wage inflation (since the latter is positively
related to the gap between the newly set wage and the average wage, with
the latter being the one that is relevant to the participation decision).

   Sustainability of the fixed wage. Both the firm and the worker will find
it eﬃcient to maintain an existing employment relation as long as their
respective surpluses are positive. Thus, for a worker and firm that last reset
the wage in period , this will be the case as long as the nominal wage ∗
remains within the bargaining set bounded by the reservation wages of the
firm and the worker.
   Formally, we require

                                ∗ ∈ [ +|   +| ]

where
              ³                     n                                                 o´
                                                                        
 +| ≡ +  + − (1 − )+ Λ+++1 ( S++1| + (1 −  )S++1|++1 )

and
                       ¡                                                  ¢
       +| ≡ +         +| + (1 − ) + {Λ+++1 ++1 }

   Note that in the zero inflation steady state we have  ∗ =  ( + (1 −
) ), so that the newly set wage lies within the bargaining set. Thus, the

                                            34
probability that the wage of any firm remains within that set outside the
steady state will be larger the more stable are prices and consumption, em-
ployment, unemployment and technology (the variables underlying  
and   +| ). This will be the case, in turn, if shocks are "suﬃciently
small," an assumption that I maintain in what follows. Notice, however, that
given the Calvo structure, which implies that there are some wages that re-
mained unchanged for arbitrarily long periods, it will be unavoidable that
a small fraction of firms violate that condition in finite time (which would
call for terminating the relationship or, more plausibly, violating the ex-
ogenous Calvo constraint on the timing of wage adjustments). Gertler and
Trigari (2009) and Thomas (2009) conduct simulations of related models
and conclude that, for plausible calibrations of the wage rigidity parameter
and shocks of empirically plausible size, the typical wage has a very small
probability of falling outside the bargaining set before it gets to be read-
justed. On those grounds, and following the literature, in my analysis I
ignore that possibility, thus assuming that no wage ever hits the boundaries
of the bargaining set.34

3.4.3    Relation to the New Keynesian Wage Inflation Equation.

Equation (40) has a structure analogous to the wage inflation equation that
arises in the New Keynesian model with staggered nominal wage setting,
as originally developed by Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000; EHL, hence-
forth). In the latter, each household is specialized in supplying a diﬀer-
entiated type of labor service, whose demand has a constant elasticity  .
In any given period it is allowed to reset the corresponding nominal wage
  34
     See Galí and van Rens (2009) for a model in which wages are adjusted only when they
hit the boundaries of the bargaining set.



                                          35
unilaterally with a constant probability 1 −  . The implied (log-linearized)
optimal wage setting rule in the EHL model takes the form
                                       ∞
                                       X
             ∗      
                   =  + (1 −  )    ( )  {+| + + }         (42)
                                         =0

where  ≡ log −1 is the desired (log) wage markup of the real wage over
the marginal rate of substitution (i.e. the one prevailing in the absence of
wage rigidities). The previous optimal wage setting rule can be contrasted
with (34), the one prevailing under staggered wage setting with Nash bar-
gaining.
       The wage inflation equation that results from combining the log-linearized
optimal wage setting rule (42) with a law of motion for the average wage
identical to (39) can be written as

                                    
                            =  { +1 } −  (b     d )
                                                      −                   (43)

where  is the average (log) marginal rate of substitution between con-
sumption and hours, and  is a coeﬃcient that is inversely related to the
degree of wage stickiness  . In particular, under the specification of pref-
                                                    d = b
erences used in the model above with  = 0, we have    + b
                                                                and
 ≡ (1 −  )(1 −  )( (1 +  )).35
       Three main diﬀerences with respect to (40)) are worth pointing out.
First, the "eﬀective" discount factor is smaller in the model with frictions,
since it incorporates the probability of termination of each relationship (and
thus of the associated wage), whereas in the EHL model the wage applies to
the same group of workers throughout its duration, not to a specific relation
that may be subject to termination. Secondly, the implicit target wage in the
  35
     See Galí (2009) for a discussion of the relation between the New Keynesian Wage
inflation equation and the original Phillips curve.


                                          36
EHL model is given by the average marginal rate of substitution (augmented
with a constant desired wage markup), whereas in the model with frictions
the target wage is also a function of the marginal revenue product of labor,
since that variable also influences the total surplus to be split through the
wage negotiation. Finally, the diﬀerence in the coeﬃcient on the wage gap
between the two formulations captures the diﬀerent adjustments needed to
express the wage inflation equation in terms of average variables: the average
marginal rate of substitution in the EHL model, and the average marginal
revenue product of labor in the present model. Note that under the special
parameter configuration  = 0 and  = 1, the form of the wage inflation
equation of the present model matches exactly that of the EHL model.

3.5    Aggregate Demand and Output

Under the assumption that hiring costs take the form of a bundle of fi-
nal goods given by the same CES function as the one defining the con-
sumption index, the demand for each final good will be given by  () =
³       ´                            R1
   () −
          ( +   ), where  ≡ 0  ()  denotes aggregate hires.
Thus, the implied constancy of the price elasticity of demand justifying the
                                  
constant desired markup M ≡     −1assumed above.
                                             ³R          1
                                                             ´ 
                                                1             −1
    Letting aggregate output be given by  ≡ 0  ()1−       it can be
easily checked that the aggregate goods market clearing condition may be
written as
                               =  +                              (44)

    Hence, aggregate demand has two components. The first component
is consumption, which evolves according to the Euler equation (6). The
second component is the demand for final goods originating in firms’ hiring
activities.

                                       37
   Turning to the supply side, one can derive the following aggregate rela-
tion between final goods and intermediate input
                                Z 1
                        ≡          () 
                                 0
                                    Z 1µ        ¶
                                           () −
                           =                                       (45)
                                     0     
                      R1³      ´−
where the term  ≡ 0  ()
                            
                                    ≥ 1 captures the ineﬃciency resulting
from dispersion in the quantities produced and consumed of the diﬀerent
final goods, which is itself a consequence of the price dispersion caused by
staggered price setting.
   On the other hand, the total supply of intermediate goods is given by
                          Z 1
                   =         () 
                            0
                                     Z 1µ       ¶
                               1−         () 1−
                      =                                         (46)
                                      0    
                          R1³       ´1−
where the term  ≡ 1 0  () 
                                          ≥ 1 captures the ineﬃciency
resulting from dispersion in the allocation of labor across firms due to the
staggering of wages, combined with the assumption of decreasing returns
(  0).
   As shown in Appendix 1, in a neighborhood of the zero inflation steady
state we have  ' 1 and  ' 1 up to a first order approximation. Thus,
combining (45) and (46) we obtain the approximate aggregate production
relation:
                                =  1−                           (47)




   For the sake of convenience, Appendix 3 collects all the model’s (log)
linearized equilibrium conditions, as derived in the previous sections. Next

                                    38
I use those equilibrium conditions to characterize the behavior of a calibrated
version of my model economy.


4     Equilibrium Dynamics: The Eﬀects of Mone-
      tary Policy and Technology Shocks

This section presents the equilibrium responses of several variables of inter-
est to the model’s exogenous shocks—monetary policy and technology—and
discusses how those responses are aﬀected by nominal rigidities and labor
market frictions. As a preliminary step I discuss the model’s steady state,
which is partly the basis for the calibration.

4.1   Steady State and Calibration

The model’s steady state is independent of the degree of price and wage
rigidities, and of the monetary policy rule. For simplicity, I assume a steady
state with zero inflation and no secular growth. I normalize the level of
technology in the steady state to be  = 1. Notice that in that steady state
there are no relative price distortions so  =  = 1 Thus, the goods
market clearing condition, evaluated at the steady state, can be written as

                             1− =  +  Γ                            (48)

    Evaluating (23) at the steady state we have
                                   µ                      ¶
                                       1−       −    
            (1 − (1 − )) Γ =                  −                   (49)
                                     M (1 −  )
    Finally, the steady state participation condition requires

                      (1 − ) = (1 − ) Γ1+                       (50)

    The remaining steady state conditions include:

                               = (1 − )                              (51)

                                      39
                                     =  +                                   (52)

       In order to calibrate the model I adopt the following strategy. First, I pin
down the steady state employment rate, participation rate and job finding
rate using observed average values in the postwar U.S. economy. This leads
to the choice of  = 059 and  = 062, which in turn imply  = 003 .
Note that the implied unemployment rate as a fraction of the labor force—
the conventional definition—is then close to five percent. (003062 ' 0048).
Following Blanchard and Galí (2010), I set the steady state value for the
(quarterly) job finding rate  to 07. The implied separation rate is thus
 = (1 − ) ' 012. Following convention I set  = 13 and  =
099. Parameter  is the inverse of the Frisch labor supply elasticity, a
more controversial parameter due to the conflict between micro and macro
evidence. I set  = 5 in the baseline calibration, which corresponds to a
Frisch elasticity of 02.
       The baseline values for the parameters determining the degree of price
and wage stickiness are set to imply average durations of one year in both
cases, i.e.  = 075 and  = 075. This is roughly consistent with micro-
economic evidence on wage and price setting.36
       Using the equivalence with the matching function approach discussed
above and using estimates of the latter I set  = 1. I also assume M (1− ) =
1, so that the subsidy fully oﬀsets the distortionary eﬀects of final goods firms
market power, one of the conditions for an eﬃcient steady state. Following
Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) and Shimer (2009), who rely on the evidence
reported in Silva and Toledo (2009), I take the average cost of hiring a worker
to be 45% of the quarterly wage, i.e.  = 0045 ( ). Accordingly, the
  36
    See, e.g. Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Basu and Gottschalk (2009) for recent
U.S. micro evidence on price and wage rigidities, respectively.


                                         40
share of hiring costs in GDP is Θ =   = (0045)  , where   is
the labor income share. Setting the latter to 23 we have Θ = 00014,
i.e. slightly above one-tenth of a percentage point of GDP. It follows that
Γ =  = Θ(   ) = 002 .
       This leaves me with three free (though related) parameters, the firm’s
share in the Nash bargain (), the weight of unemployment in the the disu-
tility of labor market eﬀort (), and the parameter scaling that disutility
(). Given the value for one of these parameters, I can determine the re-
maining two by combining (48), (50) and (49). Given the choice of  = 1
above, perhaps a natural benchmark setting for  is 05, which—as shown
below—would be the value consistent with an eﬃcient steady state and is
often assumed in the literature. Yet, that configuration implies  = 0041, a
weight on unemployment which is arguably unrealistically small if one takes
into consideration not only the time allocated to job search activities by
the unemployed, but also the psychological costs of unemployment.37 Thus,
and as an alternative parameter configuration I choose  = 005, which is
associated with  = 082, possibly a more plausible value. As discussed
below, the choice of a value in that range has significantly diﬀerent, and
more plausible, implications for the economy’s response to a monetary pol-
icy shock. The implied settings for  corresponding to the two calibrations
are 155 and 123, respectively.
  37
     Thus, if the disutility of the unemployed (relative to the nonparticipant) results exclu-
sively from the time allocated to job search activities and we take the standard workweek
for the employed to be of 40 hours, that calibration would that the unemployed 16 hours a
week are allocated to job search activities. This is somewhat below the 25 hours per week
of job search observed in time use surveys, as discussed in Krueger and Mueller (2008).
The latter paper also provides survey-based evidence of subjective well-being, showing
that unemployed individuals in the U.S. report considerably lower life satisfaction than
than the employed. Under literal interpretation of the model that evidence would call for
a  value above unity.



                                             41
   Finally, I calibrate the coeﬃcients in the interest rate rule in a way
consistent with the specification in Taylor (1993), i.e. I set  = 15 and
 = 054 = 00125 (the latter adjustment being justified by Taylor’s use
of annualized inflation rate vs. quarter-to-quarter inflation here). That cal-
ibration is generally viewed a reasonable approximation to monetary policy
in U.S., at least over the past three decades.

4.2   The Eﬀects of Monetary Policy and Technology Shocks

Figure 2a displays the dynamic responses of six macro variables (output,
unemployment, employment, labor force, inflation and the real wage) to an
exogenous monetary policy shock, under the baseline assumption of  = 05,
which is consistent with an eﬃcient steady state. More specifically, dis-
turbance  in the interest rate rule is assumed to rise by 025 percentage
points, and to die out gradually according to an AR(1) process with an au-
toregressive coeﬃcient  = 05. Note that, in the absence of an endogenous
component in the rule, such an experiment would be associated with a one
percentage point increase in the (annualized) interest rate,
   Though the estimated VAR model discussed in section 2 did not specif-
ically seek to identify monetary shocks, to the extent that those shocks and
other demand shocks generate similar patterns among the variables consid-
ered, we can use the estimated conditional moments associated with demand
shocks as a rough benchmark when evaluating the model’s response to a
monetary policy shock.
   Figure 2a shows that both output and employment decline in response
to the tightening of monetary policy, due to the contraction in consumption
(not shown) resulting from the interest rate hike. Note also that the labor
force increases by nearly 5 percent, driving up the unemployment rate by


                                     42
about 5 percentage points. In light of the evidence presented in section 2,
both responses seem implausibly large and, in the case of the labor force,
it appears to go in the wrong direction. Note also that price inflation is
procyclical, in a way consistent with the evidence. The procyclical response
of the real wage is, on the other hand, at odds with the estimated negative
correlation with output conditional on demand shocks.
   Figure 2b displays the corresponding responses to a technology shock.
The latter takes the form of a one percent increase in  , which dies out
gradually according to an AR(1) process with an autoregressive coeﬃcient
of 09. Note that, in a way consistent with the estimated impulse responses
shown in Figure 1, output rises and inflation declines, as one would expect
from a positive technology shock. Note also that the real wage rises grad-
ually in the short run, a natural consequence of the existence of nominal
wage rigidities. Furthermore, and in contrast with the standard search and
matching model, employment declines and unemployment increases in re-
sponse to the same positive technology shock. This is consistent with the
evidence presented in Section 2 and in the literature referred therein. As
was the case with monetary shocks, however, the rise in unemployment is
largely driven by the increase in the labor force, which is far more volatile
than employment and comoves negatively with the latter variable. This is
in contrast with an estimated correlation (conditional on demand shocks)
between the labor force and employment of 085.
   A possible reason for the unrealistically large fluctuations in the labor
force and unemployment shown in Figures 2a and 2b is the low value of
parameter  (about 004) associated with the calibration underlying those
figures. Such a low value penalizes little fluctuations in those variables,
given employment. Figures 3a and 3b show the model’s implied responses

                                     43
to monetary and technology shocks under the alternative calibration, with
 = 082 and  = 005. As the figures make clear, now the labor force
experiences much smaller variations, and comoves positively with employ-
ment. The latter’s movements are the dominant force behind the variations
in unemployment, in a way consistent with the evidence. The response of
the remaining variables is not qualitatively aﬀected. Thus, the only variable
whose response is at odds with the evidence in section 2 is the real wage,
which responds procyclically to a monetary shock in the model, while dis-
playing a negative correlation with output conditional on "demand" shocks
in the data. That discrepancy could be due, however, to the presence of
shocks other than technology shocks or monetary shocks (e.g. fiscal policy
or labor supply shocks) that may be responsible for the negative correla-
tion picked up by the partially identified VAR discussed in section 2. Given
the previous findings, and unless otherwise noted, I stick to this alternative
calibration in the remainder of the paper.

4.3   The Role of Labor Market Frictions

In order to ascertain the role played by the presence of labor market frictions
in shaping the economy’s response to diﬀerent shocks, I compare the model’s
implied responses to those shocks in the presence or not of such frictions. A
perfectly competitive labor market is assumed in the case of no frictions. In
both cases I maintain the assumption of flexible wages, i.e. period-by-period
Nash bargaining.
   Figures 4a and 4b display the economy’s response to a monetary policy
and a technology shock, respectively. Note that, in most cases the diﬀerence
is quantitatively very small. Qualitatively, the only significant diﬀerence
lies in the non-zero unemployment response to either shock in the presence


                                      44
of frictions, whereas in their absence a perfectly competitive labor market
guarantees that there is no unemployment, implying that its response to
shocks is flat at zero, as shown in the figure. The variations in unemployment
generated by the introduction of frictions are, however, very small for both
shocks. This result is reminiscent of the so-called Shimer puzzle, i.e. the
finding of too small a volatility of unemployment implied by a calibrated
(real) search and matching framework with flexible wages and driven by
technology shocks (Shimer (2005)).
       The finding of a small role of labor market frictions in the response
to monetary policy shocks contrasts somewhat with the conclusions from
a related analysis in Walsh (2005). More precisely, Walsh shows that the
introduction of labor market frictions has consequences on the pattern of
the response of output and inflation to a monetary policy shock roughly
equivalent to a substantial increase in the degree of price rigidities38 in an
otherwise standard New Keynesian model with Walrasian labor markets. In
practice, it leads to a significantly more sluggish response of inflation and a
larger and more persistent response of output. A possible explanation for
the discrepancy between Walsh’s results and those found here lies in the
fact that his model with labor market frictions assumes a constant marginal
disutility from work, whereas his New Keynesian model introduces (with no
apparent justification) a diﬀerent utility function with an increasing mar-
ginal disutility of work. The latter feature will generally make wages and
hence marginal costs more sensitive to variations in activity, thus leading to
a larger response of prices in the short run, and a more dampened output
response.39
  38
     Corresponding to a increase in the Calvo parameter  from 05 to 085, which is
equivalent to raising the average duration of prices from two to more than six quarters.
  39
     A similar discrepancy arises vis a vis Trigari (2009) in her comparison of the responses


                                             45
4.4    The Role of Price Stickiness

How does the introduction of sticky prices aﬀect, qualitatively and quan-
titatively, the response of unemployment and other variables to aggregate
shocks? In order to address this question I analyze the response to mone-
tary and technology shocks of two versions of the model economy developed
above, with the only diﬀerence among them is the presence or not of stag-
gered price setting in the final goods sector. In both cases I maintain the
assumption of full wage flexibility.
    Figures 5a and 5b display the corresponding impulse response functions.
First, and not surprisingly, we see that the introduction of price stickiness
has a significant impact on the economy’s response to a monetary policy
shock (Figure 5a). Thus, under flexible prices no real variable is aﬀected
by the shock, and only inflation declines in response to the tightening of
policy. In contrast, once a realistic degree of price stickiness is allowed for,
the model implies a decline in output, employment and the labor force, with
a rise in the unemployment rate (after a tiny one period decline). Inflation
and the real wage also decline, as expected.
    The impact of price stickiness on the response to a positive technology
shock (Figure 5b) appears to be much more limited. In particular, the
eﬀect on the size of the output response—more muted under sticky prices—
is hardly discernible. The diﬀerence is suﬃcient, however, to account for
a sign reversal in the response of employment, from positive to negative,
though quantitatively the size of the employment adjustment is very small
of a search model and a New Keynesian model to a monetary policy shock. Thus, in
Trigari’s search model labor adjustment takes place along two margins, hours per worker
and employment, whereas in her New Keynesian model only hours per worker are allowed
to vary. As argued by Trigari herself, that diﬀerence makes the elasticity of marginal cost
to output larger in the New Keynesian model, which accounts for the weaker and less
persistent response of output in the latter case.


                                            46
in both cases. Combined with a small influence (in the same direction) on
the response of the labor force, the impact of price stickiness on the response
of unemployment to the technology shock is almost negligible.40 The only
sizable impact of price stickiness appears to be on the response of the real
wage, which declines considerably as a result of the large rise in the markup
of final goods firms that results from their failure to lower prices to match
the decline in the price of intermediate goods. This is reflected in a muted
rise in the marginal revenue product of intermediate goods firms and, as a
result, on the wage.

4.5      The Role of Wage Stickiness

Finally, I turn to an examination of the role played by wage stickiness in
shaping the responses of the economy with labor market frictions to mon-
etary and technology shocks. Figures 6a and 6b display, respectively, the
simulated responses to those shocks. For each type of shock, responses un-
der two alternative calibrations are displayed. The solid line corresponds to
an economy with flexible prices ( = 0), whereas the starred line assumes
 = 075, implying an average duration of wages of one year. In both cases
prices are assumed to be sticky.
       As Figure 6a makes clear, the presence of sticky wages strengthens sub-
stantially the eﬀects of a monetary policy shock on economic activity. In
particular, the decline in output and employment is roughly twice as large
as in the case of flexible wages. Since the response of the labor force is
hardly aﬀected, the resulting increase in unemployment is also much larger.
  40
     See Andrés et al. (2006) for a similar exercise in a model with endogenous capital
accumulation, price indexation, endogenous match destruction. Their findings point to
a stronger role for price rigidities in accounting for the volatility of vacancies relative to
unemployment, but no so much for the volatility of unemployment itself, which goes down
slightly when stronger price rigidities are assumed.


                                             47
In addition, and not surprisingly, we see how the average real wage shows a
much smoother response in the presence of staggered contracts, leading to
less downward pressure on marginal costs and, as a result, a smaller decline
in inflation.
    The impact of wage stickiness on the responses to a technology shock is
also substantial, as shown in Figure 6b. In particular, the negative response
of employment is now larger, and that of the labor force (slightly) smaller.
This is suﬃcient for the response of the unemployment rate to switch its sign,
and thus to rise in response to a positive technology shock. Once again, that
implication contrasts with the prediction of real models with labor market
frictions (e.g. Shimer (2005)), but is consistent with the evidence presented
in Section 2.
    Note also that the introduction of sticky wages dampens the response of
the real wage even further in the short run, driving closer to the near-zero
short run response uncovered by the empirical evidence in Section 2.
    As discussed above, the presence of labor market frictions, by itself, does
not appear to have much impact on the economy’s response to shocks. The
indirect impact is, however, more substantial to the extent that it justifies
the presence of sticky wages in equilibrium.

    Having looked at some of the positive predictions of the model under
alternative sets of assumptions, I turn next to its normative implications.


5    Labor Market Frictions, Nominal Rigidities and
     Monetary Policy Design

I start this section by describing the constrained-eﬃcient allocation, and
then turn my attention to the optimal design of monetary policy in the


                                      48
presence of labor market frictions and nominal rigidities. Ultimately, the
purpose of the analysis is to shed light on how the existence of unemployment
and wage rigidities should influence the conduct of monetary policy.

5.1   The Social Planner’s Problem

The social planner maximizes the representative household’s utility
                       X∞      µ                    ¶
                                              1+
                    0         log  −      
                       =0
                                         1+ 

subject to the resource constraint

                           + Γ  =  1−

and the definitions

                          =  + 

                          =  − (1 − )−1
                                   
                          =
                               (1 −  )
   In contrast with firms and households, the social planner internalizes the
impact of its hiring and participation decisions on the job finding rate 
and, hence, of the hiring cost. The optimality conditions characterizing the
resulting constrained-eﬃcient allocation are given by

           =    − (1 + ) ( − (1 − ) {Λ+1 +1 })       (53)

and
                                            
                            =                                   (54)
                                          1 − 
where    ≡ (1 − ) − is the marginal product of labor and, as
above,   ≡  
                     is the marginal disutility of labor market eﬀort,

expressed in terms of the final consumption bundle.

                                     49
5.1.1   The Eﬃcient Steady State

Evaluated at the steady state, the previous two eﬃciency conditions take
the form:

             (1 + )(1 − (1 − )) Γ = (1 − ) − −               (55)

                         (1 − ) = Γ1+                           (56)

   By comparing (55)-(56) with the corresponding steady state conditions
of the decentralized economy (49)-(50), it is easy to see that the latter’s
steady state will be eﬃcient whenever

                                 M (1 −  )                             (57)

and
                                (1 + ) = 1                             (58)

   In words, condition (57) requires that the subsidy on the purchases of
intermediate goods should exactly oﬀset the impact of firms’ market power,
as reflected in the desired gross markup M . Condition (58) is a version of
the Hosios condition similar to the one derived in Blanchard and Galí (2010).
It involves an inverse relation between firms’ relative bargaining power, ,
and the elasticity of hiring costs, . That inverse relation captures the neg-
ative externality (in the form of larger hiring costs) caused by firms’ hiring
decisions, and the positive externality resulting from higher participation
(in the form of reduced hiring costs). The stronger are these externalities
(corresponding to a larger ), the lower is the relative bargaining power of
firms (the smaller ) consistent with an eﬃcient allocation, since the implied
higher wages would induce fewer hires and more participation.



                                     50
5.2      Optimal Monetary Policy

For simplicity, and throughout this section, I maintain the assumption of a
constrained-eﬃcient steady state, i.e. conditions (57) and (58) are assumed
to hold. The assumption of an eﬃcient steady state is often made in the
literature on optimal monetary policy, for in that case the latter focuses
exclusively on oﬀsetting (or at least alleviating) the consequences of ineﬃ-
cient fluctuations in response to shocks.41 Like before, I consider the two
scenarios of flexible and sticky wages in turn.

5.2.1      The Case of Flexible Wages

Under the assumption of period-by-period Nash bargaining of wages ana-
lyzed in Section 4.1, it is easy to check that the optimal monetary policy
corresponds to a strategy of strict inflation targeting, i.e. full stabilization
of the price level. To see this, note from (9) that under that policy the
markup of final goods firms will remain constant and equal to the desired
level, i.e.   = M (1 −  ), for all . Combined with assumption (57), it
follows that    =    = (1−) − for all  Thus, and imposing
(58), one can easily check that equilibrium conditions (23) and (24) match
exactly the eﬃciency conditions (53) and (54). In other words, the resulting
equilibrium allocation is eﬃcient.
       Intuitively, under assumptions (57) and (58), the equilibrium of an econ-
omy in which both prices and (Nash bargained) wages are flexible involves
a constrained-eﬃcient allocation. Under flexible wages, a monetary policy
that succeeds in fully stabilizing the price level replicates that natural alloca-
tion, and is thus optimal. That policy can be implemented with the assumed
  41
    See Woodford (2003) and Galí (2008) for a discussion of these issues in the context of
the New Keynesian model without frictions.



                                           51
interest rate rule by choosing an arbitrarily large coeﬃcient  . That envi-
ronment is thus characterized by what Blanchard and Galí (2007) refer to
as "the divine coincidence," i.e. the absence of a trade-oﬀ between inflation
stabilization and the attainment of an eﬃcient allocation: one implies the
other.
   The previous finding hinges on the eﬃciency of the flexible price equilib-
rium allocation, guaranteed by assumptions (57)-(58). Faia (2009) analyzes
the optimal policy in a related model (i.e. one with labor market frictions,
sticky prices, and flexible wages), while relaxing the assumption of eﬃciency
of the flexible price allocation. She shows that in that case it is optimal for
the central bank to deviate from a policy of strict inflation targeting, though
the size of the deviations implied by her calibrated model are quantitatively
small.

5.2.2    The Case of Sticky Wages

As is well know from the analysis of Erceg et al. (2001) and others, when
both prices and wages are sticky it is generally be impossible for the central
bank to replicate the constrained-eﬃcient equilibrium allocation, which un-
der assumptions (57)-(58) corresponds to the equilibrium allocation in the
absence of nominal rigidities (the natural allocation, for short), as discussed
above. The intuition behind that result is straightforward: in response to
real shocks the real wage will generally adjust in the equilibrium with flexible
prices and wages, and that adjustment will be necessary to support the re-
sulting (constrained-eﬃcient) allocation. Of course, any adjustment of the
real wage requires some variation in either the price level or the nominal
wage. But in the presence of sticky prices and wages such variations will
occur only in response to deviations of average price markups and/or aver-


                                      52
age real wages from their natural counterparts (see equations (9) and (40)),
from which it follows that the natural (and eﬃcient, under my assumptions)
allocation will not be attainable.
      In order to determine the optimal policy in that context I start by deriv-
ing a second order approximation to the representative household’s utility
losses caused by deviations from the constrained eﬃcient allocation due to
the presence of nominal rigidities. In so doing I restrict myself to the case
of small fluctuations around the eﬃcient steady state. As derived in Appen-
dix 4, the loss function takes the following form (expressed in terms of the
consumption-equivalent loss, as a fraction of GDP):


        ∞
                    Ã                                                           µ                    ¶2 !
   1 X                    2 (1 − Φ)2 (1 − )  2 (1 + )(1 − Ω)                     (1 − )
L ≡ 0                   ( ) +               (  ) +                           e +           e
                                                                                                  
   2   =0
                                  ∗               (1 − )                            
                                                                                 (59)
where e ≡  −  and 
                         e ≡  −  are, respectively, the output and
unemployment gaps relative to their natural counterparts (where the latter
are defined as their equilibrium values under flexible prices and wages);
∗ ≡ (1− )(1− ) is inversely related to the degree of wage rigidities
                                    (1+)
 ; and 1 − Ω ≡            = 1−            is the steady state gap between the
marginal rate of substitution and the marginal product of labor resulting
from the existence of labor market frictions. Note that in the absence of
labor market frictions and under flexible wages ∗ → ∞, Ω = 0,  = 0 and
 = 1 , so the previous loss function collapses to the one familiar from
the basic New Keynesian model.42
      The presence of labor market frictions has two implications for the wel-
fare criterion. First, to the extent that they are accompanied by staggered
 42
      See the expression in p. 81 in Galí (2008), under  = 1.



                                             53
nominal wage setting, fluctuations in wage inflation will generate welfare
losses due to the implied dispersion in wages and the resulting losses from
an ineﬃcient allocation of labor across firms.43 Note that here the size of
the welfare losses resulting from any given departure from wage stability
is (i) increasing in 1 − Φ (which measures the weight of wages in the total
cost of employing a new worker), (ii) decreasing in the degree of diminish-
ing returns to labor  (for the latter dampens the extent of employment
dispersion caused by any given level of wage dispersion) and (iii) increasing
in the degree of wage stickiness  (which determines the degree of wage
dispersion caused by a given deviation from zero wage inflation).
    Secondly, and to the extent that   0, the welfare criterion above
points to a specific role for unemployment gap fluctuations as a source of
welfare losses, beyond that associated with variations in the output gap
(or the employment gap, which by construction is proportional to output
gap). That role is related to the fact that unemployment is a component of
eﬀective labor market eﬀort, and that fluctuations in the latter (relative to its
eﬃcient benchmark) generate disutility. The importance of unemployment
fluctuations is thus increasing in  and  , which determine the weight of
unemployment in the total disutility from market eﬀort.
    The equilibrium allocation under the optimal monetary policy can be
determined by minimizing (59) subject to the log-linearized equilibrium con-
ditions listed in Appendix 2 (excluding the Taylor rule). Figure 7.displays
the equilibrium responses to a technology shock of the same variables con-
sidered earlier, under the optimal policy. For the sake of comparison it also
   43
      By contrast, in the monopoly union model of Erceg et al. (2000) the welfare losses
from wage inflation are a consequence of the distorted allocation of employment across
labor types within each firm, resulting from dispersion in their wages caused by staggered
wage setting.



                                           54
displays the corresponding responses under the Taylor rule used above. The
simulation is based on a calibration with stickiness in both prices and wages.
Note that the optimal response implies some deviation from price stability.
In particular it requires a temporary decline in inflation, which makes it
possible for the real wage to adjust upward with a smaller upward adjust-
ment of nominal wages.44 It also allows for a stronger accommodation of
the increase in productivity, as reflected in the larger positive response of
output. In accordance, employment is allowed to rise, and unemployment
to decline. Note also that the optimal policy is associated with a smaller
decline in inflation than the Taylor rule. Despite the greater price stability,
the cumulative response of the real wage is stronger under the optimal pol-
icy, which requires positive wage inflation (not shown) in contrast with the
wage deflation associated with the equilibrium under the Taylor rule.

      Is there a simple interest rate rule that the central bank could follow
that would improve on the assumed Taylor rule? In order to answer that
question I compute the optimal rule among the class of interest rate rules
of the form:
                          =  +    +  b +   
                                                           +  

where I have added wage inflation and the unemployment rate as arguments,
relative to the conventional Taylor rule. The coeﬃcients that minimize the
households welfare loss, determined by iterating over all possible configura-
tions, are  = 151,  = −010,  = 001 and  = −0025. Figure 8
summarizes the dynamic response of the economy under that optimal sim-
ple rule, and compares it to the corresponding responses under the fully
optimal policy. As the figure makes clear the diﬀerences between the two
 44
      See Thomas (2008) for a related result in the context of a similar model.



                                             55
are practically negligible. Note that relative to the standard Taylor rule,
the optimized simple rule calls for further accommodation of supply-driven
output variation and also puts some weight on stabilization of unemploy-
ment. Interestingly, the optimal coeﬃcient on price inflation is very close
to 15, the value often assumed in standard calibrations of the Taylor rule
(following Taylor (1993)). Perhaps more surprisingly, the weight on wage
inflation is close to zero. This is in contrast with the findings in Erceg et al.
(2000), where stabilization of wage inflation emerges as a highly desirable
policy from a welfare viewpoint.45 On the other hand, the desirability of
a systematic policy response to unemployment fluctuations is in line with
the findings on optimal simple rules in Blanchard and Galí (2009) and Faia
(2009).
    Given the relatively small values of the coeﬃcients on variables other
than price inflation in the optimized interest rate rule, a rule of the form
 =  + 15  leads to technology shock responses (not shown) that are
similar to those generated by the optimized one. That rule can be interpreted
as capturing the notion of flexible inflation targeting, whereby central banks
seek to attain a pre-specified inflation target only gradually ("in the medium
term," using the language of the ECB), as opposed to the strict inflation
targeting that is optimal in environments in which price stickiness is the
only nominal distortion.
    The previous findings are consistent, at least in a qualitative sense, with
the existing literature on optimal monetary policy in environments with la-
bor market frictions and wage rigidities, despite the diﬀerences in modelling
  45
     The structure of the present model and the associated ineﬃciencies resulting from
wage dispersion lead to a coeﬃcient on wage volatility in the loss function that is about
one-third the size of the coeﬃcient on price inflation. That ranking is reversed for standard
calibrations of the Erceg et al (2000) model.



                                             56
details. This is the case, in particular, for Blanchard and Galí (2010) (in
a model with real wage rigidities) and Thomas (2008) (in a model with
staggered nominal wage setting like the present one).


6    Possible Extensions

As argued in the introduction, it is not the goal of the present paper to oﬀer
an exhaustive analysis of existing models of monetary policy and unem-
ployment. Instead, I have developed and analyzed a relatively streamlined
model, but one which in my view contains the key ingredients to illustrate
the consequences of the coexistence of nominal rigidities and labor market
frictions. The model is, however, suﬃciently flexible to be able to accom-
modate many extensions that can already be found in the literature. A list
of some of those extensions, with a brief description of ways to introduce
them, but without any further analysis, follows.

    Real wage rigidities and wage indexation. As emphasized by Blan-
chard and Galí (2007, 2009) the presence of real wage rigidities may have
implications for the optimal design of monetary policy that are likely to
diﬀer from the ones generated by a model with nominal wage rigidities only
(like the one emphasized here). Among other things, in the presence of
real wage rigidities, the policymaker cannot use price inflation to facilitate
the adjustment of real wages. A simple way to introduce real wage rigidities
would be to allow for (possibly partial) wage indexation to contemporaneous
wage inflation between wage renegotiations. Formally, one can assume:

                     +|| = +−1| (+ +−1 )

for  = 1 2 3 and | = ∗ , and where +|| is the nominal wage in
period + for an employment relationship whose wage was last renegotiated

                                     57
in period . Note that parameter  ∈ [0 1] measures the degree of indexation.
An alternative specification, often used in the New Keynesian literature (e.g.
Smets and Wouters (2007)) and adopted by Gertler, Sala and Trigari (2008),
assumes instead indexation to past inflation. Formally,

                    +|| = +−1| (+−1 +−2 )

for  = 1 2 3 In the latter case, even with full indexation, price inflation
can still be used to speed up the adjustment of real wage to shocks that
warrant such an adjustment, due to the lags in indexation.

   Greater wage flexibility for new hires. As discussed above, a num-
ber of authors (Haefke et al. (2007), Pissarides (2008), Carneiro et al.
(2008)) have argued that while the wages of incumbent workers display some
clear rigidities, the latter may not have allocative consequences (to the ex-
tent they remain within the bargaining set) since the wage that determines
hiring decision is the wage of new hires, which is likely to be more flexible,
according to some evidence Even though that evidence remains controver-
sial and has been disputed in some quarters (see references above), it may
be of interest to see how such diﬀerential flexibility can be introduced in the
model, and to explore its positive and normative implications. A tractable
and flexible way of introducing that feature, proposed in Bodart et al (2006),
involves the assumption that new hires at a firm are paid either the aver-
age wage (with probability ) or a freely negotiated wage (with probability
1 − ). Parameter  is thus an index of the degree of relative wage flexibility
for new hires. That assumption would require a change in the equation de-
scribing the value of unemployment, since the probability of bargaining over
wage at the time of being hired would now be 1 −  , instead of 1 −  .
One could then quantify the extent to which the responses to shocks and

                                       58
the optimal policy vary with .

       Smaller wealth eﬀects. The analysis above has relied on a specifi-
cation of utility with wealth eﬀects of labor supply that are likely to be
implausible large. That could explain the unusual unrealistic behavior of
the labor force under some of the calibrations discussed above. One way to
get around that problem is to assume the following alternative specification
of the utility function, originally proposed in Galí (2010):46

                                                      
                         (   ) ≡ Θ log  −      1+
                                                     1+ 

where Θ ≡    ,   is aggregate consumption (taken as given by each
individual household), and

                                                  1−
                                     = −1 

and  ∈ [0 1]. In that case the marginal rate of substitution between con-
sumption and market eﬀort is given (in logs) by

                                     =  + 

where  = (1 − ) + −1 . Thus, changes in consumption will have an
arbitrarily small eﬀect on the short-run supply for market eﬀort, if  is close
to unity. Given that the gap between  and  is stationary (even when 
displays a linear trend or a unit root), the previous specification of utility
will still be consistent with a balanced growth path.

       Other demand shocks. The analysis of optimal monetary policy above
assumes the economy faces only a technology shock (naturally, the mone-
tary policy shock is turned oﬀ for the purposes of that exercise). How the
  46
     See Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008) for an alternative specification of utility in the same
spirit.


                                            59
policy implications may vary once a shock other than technology is intro-
duced seems worthy of investigation. In particular, it may be the case that
in that scenario the optimal policy will attach a greater weight to output
stabilization.47


7         Conclusions

Over the past few years a growing number of researchers have turned their
attention towards the development and analysis of extensions of the New
Keynesian framework that model unemployment explicitly. The present
paper has described some of the essential ingredients and properties of those
models, and their implications for monetary policy.
         The analysis of a calibrated version of the model developed here suggests
that labor market frictions are unlikely, either by themselves or through
their interaction with sticky prices, to have large eﬀects on the equilibrium
response to shocks, in an economy with nominal rigidities and a monetary
policy described by a simple Taylor type rule. In that respect, perhaps the
most important contribution of those frictions lies in their ability to reconcile
the presence of wage rigidities with privately eﬃcient employment relations.
The presence of those nominal wage rigidities has, on the other hand, impor-
tant consequences for the economy ’s response to shocks as well as for the
optimal design of monetary policy. Thus, in the model developed above, the
optimal policy allows for significant deviations from price stability, in order
to facilitate the adjustment of real wages to real shocks. Furthermore, the
outcome of that policy can be approximated by means of a simple interest
rate rule that responds to both price inflation and the unemployment rate.
    47
    Sveen and Weinke (2008) make a forceful case for the importance of demand shocks
in accounting for labor market dynamics.


                                          60
   References

   Andrés, Javier, Rafael Domenech, and Javier Ferri (2006): “Price Rigid-
ity and the Volatility of Vacancies and Unemployment,” mimeo, Universidad
de Valencia.
   Arseneau, David M. and Sanjay K. Chugh (2008): "Optimal Fiscal and
Monetary Policy with Costly Wage Bargaining," Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics 55 (8), 1401-1414.
   Barnichon, Régis (2008): "Productivity, Aggregate Demand and Unem-
ployment Fluctuations," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-47,
Federal Reserve Board.
   Barattieri, Alessandro, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk (2009): "Some
Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Wages," Boston College, mimeo.
   Barro, Robert J. (1977): "Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and
Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 3(3), 305-316.
   Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball (2006): “Are Technol-
ogy Improvements Contractionary?,” American Economic Review, vol. 96,
no. 5, 1418-1448.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2007): “Real Wage Rigidities and
the New Keynesian Model,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, sup-
plement to volume 39, no. 1, 35-66.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2010): “Labor Markets and Mon-
etary Policy: A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment,” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Danny Quah (1989): "The Dynamic Eﬀects of
Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances," American Economic Review
79(4), 655-673.



                                      61
   Bodart, Vincent, Gregory de Walque, Olivier Pierrard, Henri Sneessens,
and Raf Wouters (2006): "Nominal Wage Rigidities in a New Keynesian
Model with Frictional Unemployment," mimeo.
   Calvo, Guillermo (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing
Framework,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
   Carneiro, Anabela, Paulo Guimaraes and Pedro Portugal (2008): "Real
wages and the business cycle: Accounting for worker and firm heterogene-
ity," mimeo.
   Chari, V.V., Parick J. Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan (2008): "Are Struc-
tural VARs with Long-Run Restrictions Useful in Developing Business Cycle
Theory?," Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (8), 1337-1352.
   Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson
(2003): "What Happens after a Technology Shock?" NBER WP# 9819.
   Christoﬀel, Kai, and Tobias Linzert (2005): “The Role of Real Wage
Rigidities and Labor Market Frictions for Unemployment and Inflation Dy-
namics,” Discussion Paper 556, European Central Bank.
   Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999): “The Science
of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic
Literature, vol. 37, 1661-1707.
   Diamond, Peter A. (1982a): "Aggregate Demand Management in Search
Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy 90, 881-894.
   Diamond, Peter A. (1982b): "Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in
Search Equilibrium," Review of Economic Studies 49, 217-227.
   Dickens, William T., Lorenz Goette, Erica L. Groshen, Steinar Holden,
Julian Messina, Mark E. Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, and Melanie E. Ward
(2007): "How Wages Change: Micro Evidence from the International Wage
Flexibility Project," Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2), 195-214.

                                    62
   Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000):
“Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics vol. 46, no. 2, 281-314.
   European Central Bank (2009): "Wage Dynamics in Europe: Final Re-
port of the Wage Dynamics Network" at http://www.ecb.int/home/html/researcher_wdn.en.html
   Faia, Ester (2008): "Optimal Monetary Policy Rules in a Model with
Labor Market Frictions," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32(5),
1600-1621.
   Faia, Ester (2009): "Ramsey Monetary Policy with Labor Market Fric-
tions," Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 570-581.
   Francis, Neville, and Valerie Ramey (2005): “Is the Technology-Driven
Real Business Cycle Hypothesis Dead? Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations
Revisited,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52, issue 8,1379-1399.
   Galí, Jordi (1999): “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle:
Do Technology Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?,” American Eco-
nomic Review, vol. 89, no. 1, 249-271.
   Galí, Jordi and Pau Rabanal (2004): “Technology Shocks and Aggregate
Fluctuations: How Well Does the RBC Model Fit Postwar U.S. Data?,”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, 225-288.
   Galí, Jordi and Mark Gertler (1999): “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural
Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44, no. 2,
195-222.
   Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, David López-Salido (2001): “European Infla-
tion Dynamics,” European Economic Review vol. 45, no. 7, 1237-1270.
   Galí, Jordi (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle.
An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University
Press (Princeton, NJ).

                                    63
   Galí, Jordi (2010): "The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve," unpub-
lished manuscript.
   Galí, Jordi and Thijs van Rens (2009): "The Vanishing Procyclicality of
Labor Productivity," unpublished manuscript.
   Galuscak, Kamil, Alan Murphy, Daphne Nicolitsas, Frank Smets, Pawel
Strzelecki, and Matija Vodopivec (2008): "The Determination of Wages of
Newly Hired Workers: Survey Evidence on Internal vs. External Factors,"
mimeo.
   Gertler, Mark, Luca Sala, and Antonella Trigari (2008): "An Estimated
Monetary DSGE Model with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage
Setting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40(8), 1713-1764.
   Gertler, Mark, and Antonella Trigari (2009), “Unemployment Fluctua-
tions with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy
117 (1), 38-86.
   Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King (1997): "The New Neoclassical
Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy," NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
231-282.
   Haefke, Christian, Marcus Sonntag, and Thijs van Rens (2008): "Wage
Rigidity and Job Creation," unpublished manuscript.
   Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii (2008): "The Cyclical Behavior
of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited," American Eco-
nomic Review 98(4), 1692-1706.
   Hall, Robert (2005): "Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage
Stickiness," American Economic Review vol. 95, no. 1, 50-64.
   Jaimovich, Nir and Segio Rebelo (2009): "Can News about the Future
Drive the Business Cycle?," American Economics Review 99 (4), 1097-1118.
   Krause, Michael, Thomas Lubik (2007): "The (Ir)relevance of Real Wage

                                   64
rigidities in the New Keynesian Model with Search Frictions," Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 54, no.3, 706-727.
   Krause, Michael, David López-Salido, and Thomas A. Lubik (2008): "In-
flation Dynamics with Search Frictions: A Structural Econometric Analy-
sis," Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (5), 892-916.
   Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas Mueller (2008): "The Lot of the Unem-
ployed: A Time Use Perspective," IZA Discussion Paper no. 3490.
   Kuester, Keith (2007): "Real Price and Wage Rigidities in a Model with
Matching Frictions," European Central Bank Working Paper Series no. 720.
   Merz, Monica (1995), “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business
Cycle”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 269-300
   Mortensen, Dale T. (1982a): "The Matching Process as a Noncoopera-
tive/Bargaining Game," in J. McCall (ed.), The economics of Information
and Uncertainty, University of Chicago Press (Chicago, IL), 233-254.
   Mortensen, Dale T. (1982b): "Property Rights and Eﬃciency in Mating,
Racing and Related Games," American Economic Review 72, 968-979.
   Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2008): Five Facts About Prices: A
Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4),
1415-1464.
   Pissarides, Christopher (1984): "Search Intensity, Job advertising and
Eﬃciency," Journal of Labor Economics 2, 128-143.
   Pissarides, Christopher (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, MIT
Press.
   Pissarides, Christopher (2009): "The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle:
Is Wage Stickiness the Answer?," Econometrica 77 (5), 1339-1369.
   Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1999): “Interest Rate Rules
in an Estimated Sticky Price Model,” in J.B. Taylor ed., Monetary Policy

                                   65
Rules, University of Chicago Press.
   Sbordone, Argia (2002): “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: Testing Models
of Pricing Behavior,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 45, no. 2, 265-
292.
   Shimer, Robert (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unem-
ployment and Vacancies,” American Economic Review vol. 95, no. 1, 25-49.
   Shimer, Robert (2009): Labor Markets and Business Cycles, Princeton
University Press (Princeton, NJ), forthcoming.
   Silva, José and Manuel Toledo (2009): "Labor Turnover Costs and the
Cyclical Behavior of Vacancies and Unemployment," Macroeconomic Dy-
namics 13 (Supplement 1), 76-96.
   Sveen, Tommy and Lutz Weinke (2008): "New Keynesian Perspectives
on Labor Market Dynamics," Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (5), 921-
930.
   Taylor, John B. (1993): “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,”
Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
   Taylor, John B. (1999): “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macro-
economics,” in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford eds., Handbook of Macroeco-
nomics, chapter 15, 1341-1397, Elsevier, New York.
   Taylor, John B. (1999): “An Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy
Rules,” in J.B. Taylor ed., Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago
Press.
   Thomas, Carlos (2008a): "Search and Matching Frictions and Optimal
Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (5), 936-956.
   Thomas, Carlos (2008b): "Search Frictions, Real Rigidities and Inflation
Dynamics," Banco de España, working paper 2008-06
   Trigari, Antonella (2006): “The Role of Search Frictions and Bargaining

                                      66
in Inflation Dynamics,” mimeo.
   Trigari, Antonella (2009): "Equilibrium Unemployment, Job Flows, and
Inflation Dynamics," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41 (1), 1-33.
   Walsh, Carl (2003a): Monetary Theory and Policy, MIT Press (Cam-
bridge, MA).
   Walsh, Carl (2003b): “Labor Market Search and Monetary Shocks”, in S.
Altug, J. Chadha and C. Nolan (eds.) Elements of Dynamic Macroeconomic
Analysis, Cambridge University Press (Cambridge, UK), 451-486.
   Walsh, Carl (2005): “Labor Market Search, Sticky Prices, and Interest
Rate Rules”, Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 829-849
   Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory
of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press.
   Yun, Tack (1996): “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity,
and Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.




                                   67
                                                                 Figure 1. Estimated Effects of Technology Shocks

                                                                output                                                                                 unemployment
1.2                                                                                                            0.20
                                                                                                               0.15
1.0
                                                                                                               0.10
0.8
                                                                                                               0.05
0.6                                                                                                            -0.00

                                                                                                               -0.05
0.4
                                                                                                               -0.10
0.2
                                                                                                               -0.15

0.0                                                                                                            -0.20
        0       1       2       3       4       5       6         7      8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15               0   1       2   3   4   5     6   7   8    9   10   11   12   13   14   15



                                                        employment                                                                                      labor force
-0.00                                                                                                          -0.00
-0.05                                                                                                          -0.05

-0.10                                                                                                          -0.10

-0.15                                                                                                          -0.15
-0.20                                                                                                          -0.20

-0.25                                                                                                          -0.25
-0.30                                                                                                          -0.30

-0.35                                                                                                          -0.35
-0.40                                                                                                          -0.40
            0       1       2       3       4       5       6     7      8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15               0   1       2   3   4   5     6   7   8    9   10   11   12   13   14   15



                                                            inflation                                                                                   real w age
-0.02                                                                                                          0.5

-0.04                                                                                                          0.4

-0.06                                                                                                          0.3

-0.08
 0 08                                                                                                          02
                                                                                                               0.2

-0.10                                                                                                          0.1

-0.12                                                                                                          0.0

-0.14                                                                                                          -0.1
            0       1       2       3       4       5       6     7      8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15           0       1   2       3   4   5     6   7   8    9   10   11   12   13   14   15
Figure 2a. The Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks: Sticky Wages (ξ=0.5)
                   Output                               Unemployment Rate
  0.5                                          5



    0                                          0



  -0.5                                        -5
         2   4      6          8   10   12          2   4      6     8      10   12

                 Employment                                 Labor Force
  0.5                                          4

                                               2
    0
                                               0

  -0.5                                        -2
         2   4      6          8   10   12          2   4      6     8      10   12

                   Inflation                                Real wage
    0                                          0



  -0.1
   01                                        -0.1
                                              01



  -0.2                                       -0.2
         2   4      6          8   10   12          2   4      6     8      10   12
Figure 2b. The Effects of Technology Shocks: Sticky Wages (ξ=0.5)
                  Output                              Unemployment Rate
   1                                         4

 0.8
                                             3
 0.6
                                             2
 0.4

 0.2                                         1
        2   4      6          8   10   12         2   4      6      8     10   12

                Employment                                Labor Force
-0.05                                        4

 -0.1
                                             3
-0.15
                                             2
 -0.2

-0.25                                        1
        2   4      6          8   10   12         2   4      6      8     10   12

                  Inflation                               Real wage
   0                                        0.8

 -0.1
                                            0.6
 -0.2
                                            0.4
 -0.3

 -0.4                                       0.2
        2   4      6          8   10   12         2   4      6      8     10   12
Figure 3a. The Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks: Sticky Wages (ξ=0.05)

                   Output                                Unemployment Rate
  0.1                                         0.3

    0                                         0.2

  -0.1                                        0.1

  -0.2                                          0

  -0.3                                        -0.1
         2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10   12

                 Employment                                  Labor Force
  0.2                                           0

    0                                         -0.1

  -0.2                                        -0.2

  -0.4                                        -0.3

  -0.6                                        -0.4
         2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10   12

                   Inflation                                 Real wage
    0                                           0

 -0.02
  0.02                                       -0.05
                                              0.05

 -0.04                                        -0.1

 -0.06                                       -0.15

 -0.08                                        -0.2
         2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10   12
Figure 3b. The Effects of Technology Shocks: Sticky Wages (ξ=0.05)
                  Output                                Unemployment Rate
   1                                        0 25
                                            0.25

  0.8                                        0.2

  0.6                                       0.15

  0.4                                        0.1

  0.2                                       0.05
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10   12

                Employment                                  Labor Force
   0                                           0

 -0.1
                                            -0.05
 -0.2

 -0.3                                        -0.1
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10   12

                  Inflation                                 Real wage
   0                                         0.5

 -0.1
                                             0.4
 -0.2
                                             0.3
 -0.3

 -0.4                                        0.2
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10   12
            Figure 4a. The Role of Labor Market Frictions
                     Flexible Wages, Monetary Policy Shock

                     Output                                Unemployment Rate
   0                                           0.05

-0.05

 -0.1                                             0

-0.15

 -0.2
  02                                           -0.05
                                                0 05
        2      4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8       10       12

                   Employment                                  Labor Force
   0                                              0

-0.05                                           -0.1

 -0.1                                           -0.2

-0.15                                           -0.3

 -0.2                                           -0.4
        2      4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8       10       12

                     Inflation                                 Real wage
   0                                              0

-0.05
                                                -0.5
 -0.1
                                                  -1
                                                   1                       no frictions
-0.15
                                                                           frictions
 -0.2                                           -1.5
        2      4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8       10       12
            Figure 4b. The Role of Labor Market Frictions
                         Flexible Wages, Technology Shock
                   Output                                Unemployment Rate
   1                                         0.01

 0.8                                            0
                                             -0
                                              0.01
                                                01
 0.6
                                             -0.02
 0.4                                         -0.03
 0.2                                         -0.04
        2    4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6        8      10      12

                 Employment                                  Labor Force
   0                                         -0.02

-0.02
 0 02                                        -0.04
                                              0 04

-0.04                                        -0.06

-0.06                                        -0.08

-0.08                                         -0.1
        2    4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6        8      10      12

                   Inflation                                 Real wage
   0                                          0.8
                                                                             no frictions
 -0.1                                         0.6
                                                                             frictions
 -0.2                                         0.4

 -0.3                                         0.2

 -0.4                                           0
        2    4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6        8      10      12
            Figure 5a. The Role of Price Stickiness
                  Flexible Wages, Monetary Policy Shock
                  Output                                Unemployment Rate
0.05                                        0.05
   0
-0.05
 0 05
                                               0
 -0.1
-0.15
 -0 2
 -0.2                                       -0 05
                                            -0.05
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10         12

                Employment                                  Labor Force
 0.1                                         0.1
                                               0
   0
                                             -0.1
                                             -0.2
 -0.1
                                             -0 3
                                             -0.3
 -0.2                                        -0.4
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10         12

                  Inflation                                 Real wage
   0

 -0.1                                          0

 -0.2                                        -0.5

 -0.3                                          -1                           f lex p
                                                                            sticky p
 -0.4                                        -1.5
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6      8     10         12
                Figure 5b. The Role of Price Stickiness
                        Flexible Wages, Technology Shock
                  O t t
                  Output                                  U
                                                          Unemployment
                                                               l     tRRate
                                                                         t
 1.5                                             0

                                  f lex p     -0.01
   1                              sticky p
                                              -0.02
 0.5
                                              -0.03

   0                                          -0.04
        2   4      6          8   10     12           2   4      6        8   10   12

                Employment                                    Labor Force
0.05                                           0.1

                                              0 05
                                              0.05

   0                                             0

                                              -0.05

-0.05                                          -0.1
        2   4      6          8   10     12           2   4      6        8   10   12

                  Inflation                                   Real wage
   0                                             1

 -0.1

 -0.2                                          0.5

 -0.3

 -0.4                                            0
        2   4      6          8   10     12           2   4      6        8   10   12
                Figure 6a. The Role of Wage Stickiness
                           Sticky Prices, Monetary Policy Shock
                  Output                                        Unemployment Rate
                                                 0.2
   0
                                                 0.1
 -0.1

 -0.2                                              0


                                                 -0.1
        2   4     6           8   10    12              2   4        6           8   10      12

                Employment                                         Labor Force
                                                   0
   0
                                                 -0.1

 -0.2                                            -0.2

                                                 -0.3
 -0.4
                                                 -0.4
        2   4     6           8   10    12              2   4        6           8   10      12

                  Inflation                                         Real wage
   0                                               0

-0.05
                                                 -0.5
 -0.1
                                                  -1
-0.15                                                                                 f lex w
                                                                                      sticky w
 -0.2                                            -1.5
        2   4     6           8   10    12              2   4        6           8   10      12
                Figure 6b. The Role of Wage Stickiness
                           Sticky Prices, Technology Shock
                  O t t
                  Output                                 Unemployment Rate
   1                                          0.3

 0.8                                          0.2

 0.6                                          0.1

 0.4                                            0

 0.2                                          -0.1
        2   4      6          8   10   12            2   4      6        8   10     12

                Employment                                   Labor Force
                                                0
-0.05
 -0.1
-0.15                                        -0.05
 -0.2
-0.25
 0.25
                                              -0.1
        2   4      6          8   10   12            2   4      6        8   10     12

                  Inflation                                  Real wage
   0                                          0.8
                                                                              f lex w
 -0.1                                         0.6                             sticky w

 -0.2                                         0.4

 -0.3                                         0.2

 -0.4                                           0
        2   4      6          8   10   12            2   4      6        8   10     12
       Figure 7. Monetary Policy Design: Optimal vs. Taylor
                 Sticky Prices and Wages, Technology Shock
                  Output                                Unemployment Rate
1.5                                          0.2

                                             0.1
  1
                                               0
0.5
                                             -0.1

  0                                          -0
                                              0.2
                                                2
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6        8   10    12

                Employment                                  Labor Force
0.1                                          0.1

  0                                         0.05

-0.1                                           0

-0.2                                        -0.05

-0.3                                         -0.1
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6        8   10    12

                  Inflation                                 Real wage
04
0.4                                          08
                                             0.8
                                                                            Taylor
0.2                                                                         Optimal
                                             0.6
  0
                                             04
                                             0.4
-0.2

-0.4                                         0.2
        2   4      6          8   10   12           2   4      6        8   10    12
Figure 8. Monetary Policy Design: Optimal vs. Optimal Simple
                  Sticky Prices and Wages, Technology Shock
                    Output                                       Unemployment Rate
   1.5                                                  2


     1                                                  0


   0.5                                                  -2


     0                                                  -4
                                                         4
          2   4      6          8      10         12         2   4      6      8     10   12

                  Employment                                         Labor Force
  0.15                                                  2

   0.1
                                                        0
  0.05
                                                        -2
     0

  -0.05                                                 -4
          2   4      6          8      10         12         2   4      6      8     10   12

                    Inflation                                        Real wage
  0 05
  0.05                                                 08
                                                       0.8

     0
                                                       0.6
  -0.05
                                                       0.4
   -0.1                             Optimal
                                    Opt. Simple
  -0.15                                                0.2
          2   4      6          8      10         12         2   4      6      8     10   12
