NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING AND UNDERSTANDING SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING
John F. Helliwell
Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh
Working Paper 15887
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15887

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

This paper includes material presented to, and benefits from discussions at, the OECD symposium
on ‘Measuring Subjective Well-Being: An Opportunity for National Statistical Offices?’, Florence,
July 2009. We are grateful to other presenters and participants for their insights and advice, to the
Gallup Organization for access to the data from the Gallup World Poll, and to the Statistics Canada
Research Data Centre at UBC for access to the full data files for GSS17. We are also grateful for the
research collaboration of Shun Wang, Haifang Huang and Anthony Harris, and for the financial support
of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (including a Junior Fellowship Award for C.P.B.-L.)
and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by John F. Helliwell and Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring and Understanding Subjective Well-Being
John F. Helliwell and Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh
NBER Working Paper No. 15887
April 2010
JEL No. A13,I3,J1,P51,P52
ABSTRACT
Increasing attention is being paid in academic, policy, and public arenas to subjective measures of
well-being. This promising trend represents a shift towards measuring positive outcomes in psychology
and greater realism in the study of economic behaviour. After a general review of past and potential
uses for subjective well-being data, and a discussion of why some economists have previously been
sceptical of SWB data, we present global and Canadian examples from our own research to illustrate
what can be learned. Differences in subjective well-being will be shown to be large and sustained across
individuals, communities, provinces and nations. Although the patterns of subjective well-being are
very different across Canada than across the world, we show that in both cases the differences can
be fairly well accounted for by the same set of life circumstances. Our examples of policy-relevant
research findings include new accountings of the differences in individual-level SWB assessments
around the world and across Canada. These highlight the importance of social factors whose role has
otherwise been hard to quantify in income-equivalent terms.
John F. Helliwell
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca
Christopher P. Barrington-Leigh
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
http://wellbeing.econ.ubc.ca

Introduction
In this paper our primary purpose is to convince economists that subjective well-being
(SWB) data, and the analysis that flows from them, enable previously non-comparable
social aspects of life to be assessed consistently with economic outcomes, thereby
increasing the relevant domain of economic and social analysis. After a general review of
past and potential uses for subjective well-being data, and a discussion of why some
economists have previously been sceptical of SWB data, we present global and Canadian
examples from our own research to illustrate what can be learned. Differences in
subjective well-being will be shown to be large and sustained across individuals,
communities, provinces and nations. Although the patterns of subjective well-being are
very different across Canada than across the world, we show that in both cases the
differences can be fairly well accounted for by the same set of life circumstances. Finally
we discuss policy uses for different types of subjective well-being data and offer specific
examples to show how the results can and have been used in both macroeconomic and
microeconomic policy environments. In our conclusion, we argue that subjective wellbeing data can be used as proxy measures for experienced utility, and hence can reveal
preferences in places and circumstances where more conventional revealed preference
analysis is not possible. Finally, an appendix summarizes the key measures of subjective
well-being that are most relevant for broad-scale collection and analysis.

Background
In several disciplines, and by several different pathways, measures of subjective wellbeing are playing increasingly important roles in applied research. Within psychology
and medicine, where subjective reports of pain and illness have been central to diagnosis
and treatment for many decades, the expanding role for overall measures of subjective
well-being illustrates a greater interest in the determinants and consequences of positive
states of mind. This change has been sparked by research showing that the effects of
positive mental states are often more important than the absence of negative states in the
prediction of subsequent morbidity and mortality. For example, Cohen et al (2003) found
a strong dose-response relation between a subject’s positive emotions and the symptoms
resulting from experimental exposure to common cold germs, while the corresponding
relation for the absence of negative emotions was small and insignificant. Similarly, the
nun study (Danner, Snowdon and Friesen 2001) divided the autobiographies of novitiates
into quartiles according to their reflection of positive and negative emotions, with the two
types accounted for separately. Several decades later, when the nuns were in their 70s,
those in the lower half of the positivity scale had mortality rates 2.5 times as high as those
in the top quartile. There was no corresponding relation for the presence or absence of
negative emotions. These and other findings showing the independent importance of
positive emotions was reflected in the title chosen for the first major interdisciplinary
survey of the emerging science of well-being: Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic
Psychology (Kahneman, Diener and Schwarz 1999). Given the previous dominance of
the study of negative emotions within psychology, it is perhaps not surprising that there is

1

now a flourishing sub-discipline in positive psychology, including many clinical and
popular applications.
Within philosophy, economics, and political science, there has traditionally been a more
balanced consideration of positive and negative measures of well-being. Bentham and
Edgeworth treated pleasure and pain symmetrically, and defined utility as an integral of
momentary measures. Aristotle and other ancient philosophers put stock instead in how
people would evaluate their lives as a whole (Annas 1993). The choice between
aggregating current moods and asking for overall evaluations is not just a matter of taste,
because measures of mood and life evaluations differ systematically, in ways that
confirm the information content of both.
Modern scholars, whether experimentalists or analysts of subjective survey data, have
found systematic differences between Benthamite aggregations of moment-by-moment
assessments and retrospective evaluations based on memory. In particular, retrospective
evaluations of experiences as diverse as a colonoscopy (Redelmeier and Kahneman 1996)
or a mid-term break (Wirtz et al 2003) were systematically different from the aggregated
samplings of moment-by-moment experiences. Given these differences, Kahneman
(Kahneman, Wakker & Sarin 1997) was inclined to take a Benthamite tack, arguing that
the integrals of momentary experiences were a more authentic measure of utility, so that
in the case of divergence between them and remembered assessments the latter should be
regarded as mistakes. He even proposed (Kahneman 1999) referring to the summation of
momentary assessments as objective happiness, “because it is constructed according to an
objective rule, even though it is ultimately based on subjective reports..” (Kahneman &
Riis 2005, p.291).
A substantial difference between remembered and experienced well-being comes about
because it is memories rather than the average of momentary reports that are found to
influence subsequent decisions about medical treatments and holiday plans. Helliwell
(2008) argued that this difference provides a primary reason for preferring the
remembered to the experienced measure in cases where the two differ. In addition to this
conceptual preference, the cost/benefit balance in favour of the remembered over the
currently measured is improved further by their relative ease of collection. Remembered
evaluations can be assessed at low marginal cost in the context of regular surveys that in
turn can provide contextual information important for analysis. These measures can thus
be collected in the very large samples required for meaningful disaggregation by location,
time and population sub-group, something that is never likely to be feasible for the more
expensive and invasive momentary assessments.
There is a related distinction between measures of mood (measures of positive and
negative affect) and life evaluations. Life evaluations rely more on cognitive assessments
of life as a whole, and thus rely on remembered experiences and assessments of current
prospects, as well as being influenced by one’s current emotional state. Emotions may be
assessed either moment by moment, or, more usually, on a remembered basis at the end
of an assessment period. One fundamental difference between measures of mood and life
evaluations is that the latter depend much more, as Aristotle predicted, on the
2

circumstances of people’s lives (see, especially, chapters 1 and 10 in Diener, Helliwell,
and Kahneman, eds. 2010). This increases the reliability of life satisfaction relative to
measures of mood as indicators of overall well-being (Diener et al 2009, pp. 84-93).
More recent research has downplayed the ‘either-or’ nature of the preference for
remembered versus experienced measures of well-being, arguing instead that both have
roles to play and that overall understanding is improved by using multiple measures
(Diener, Helliwell and Kahneman, eds. 2010, pp. x-xi). Moods change more frequently
than do life assessments, and hence are more likely to have interesting diurnal and daily
patterns. Measures of life satisfaction, on the other hand, are more reflective of overall
and continuing life circumstances, and are hence more suited to capture longer term and
international differences in policies and institutions.

Why are some economists sceptical of subjective well-being?
While economists have been fairly even-handed about their treatment of positive and
negative outcomes, they have often been sceptical of subjective variables in general, and
perhaps especially measures of subjective well-being. When we have over the years
presented results of our research, we hear many of the same questions. Answers to most
of these questions about the reliability and validity of different measures of subjective
well-being may be found in Diener et al (2009). We shall note here just one or two
examples, to provide a bridge to our empirical analysis of international and interprovincial differences in subjective well-being.
Perhaps the most frequently used dismissive reference by economists is to the Brickman
et al (1978) paper on lottery winners and accident victims. This paper is often treated as
confirmation of a version of adaptation or set-point theory in which changes in a person’s
life circumstances may influence their subjective life evaluations for some period, after
which their adaptive powers and instincts will return them to a set point determined by
their underlying personalities. If this interpretation were correct, it would provide a
sufficient reason for avoiding the use of life evaluations as proxy measures of utility.
However, the Brickman et al (1978) accident victims reported overall happiness 22%
lower than that of the controls, while the lottery winners were 5% happier. Because of the
small sample sizes (22 lottery winners, 22 controls and 31 accident victims), these
differences in mean happiness were significant only for the accident victims. What was
needed was more research, not a rush to accept the idea that adaptation is complete.
Meta-analysis of subsequent cross-sectional studies (Dijkers 1997), and analyses using
panel data (Lucas 2007) confirm that while partial adaptation generally occurs in the case
of spinal cord injuries, the long-term effects on life satisfaction are significant and large,
equal to 1.2 standard deviations for those with the most severe disabilities (Diener et al
2009, p.105). Since the absence of full adaptation has now been accepted, recent attention
has naturally moved on to consider what circumstances and which treatments are likely to
improve the lives of accident victims. For example, recent research has investigated the
determinants of well-being outcomes following cardiovascular accidents, finding that for

3

any degree of accident severity, those individuals who have and can maintain more active
social networks fare better (Haslam et al 2008).
Another group of sceptical questions relates to comparability of subjective evaluations by
those in different circumstances. How can poor people, and especially those in
dysfunctional societies, be happy? If they report high levels of subjective well-being, do
their answers simply reflect their ignorance of how satisfying life really could be? How
can we compare life satisfaction reports from people with different personalities, and
from different cultures? Some versions of these questions underpin scepticism of
subjective life reports, and probably help to explain the preference of Amartya Sen
(1999) and others for relying on external assessments of capabilities and freedom as
measures of individual well-being and of the quality of social development. These are all
reasonable questions, to which research provides increasingly reassuring answers, as
reported in Diener et al (2009), Helliwell et al (2010), and illustrated by our
demonstrations later in this paper in our accounting for cross-national and cross-country
differences in SWB. Although subjective well-being answers are indeed conditioned by
culture, personality, past experience, and knowledge, the newly available data from more
than 140 countries shows that differences of subjective life evaluations among
individuals and across nations are largely explicable by the same life circumstances, and
in similar ways, all over the globe. Material and social aspects of life are both of
fundamental importance in explaining subjective well-being differences within and
among nations. Because international differences in income are even greater than
differences in the social context, they explain a larger fraction of differences in subjective
well-being among countries than among individuals within the same country.

Measuring subjective well-being
Subjective well-being (SWB) measures may be divided into three main categories
requiring independent measurement and explanation: life evaluations, positive emotions
and negative emotions. These three types of measure tap into human experience in
different ways, and tell interestingly different stories.
In particular, life satisfaction is more reflective of the broad and continuing
circumstances of an individual’s life, while emotions are more volatile. As a
consequence, there are, for example, much bigger international differences in life
satisfaction than in emotions (see Diener, Helliwell and Kahneman, eds. P xii), and both
within and across countries life satisfaction is more highly correlated with enduring life
circumstances than are emotions (Krueger and Schkade 2008). On the other hand,
emotions provide a more textured tool for understanding the ups and downs of daily life.
This additional texture comes from the variety of emotional states that can be assessed,
and the frequency with which moods change.
Emotions can be measured as they occur, but are more usually captured by recall. Life
evaluations are the result of a cognitive process taking place, or being updated, at the

4

time the questions are asked. Both types of report are influenced by the method of
reporting.
Affective states, both positive and negative, are most effectively measured in the context
of time-use surveys, while life evaluations can be measured by as little as a single
question added to a variety of mainline surveys (Diener et al 2009, pp. 68-74). To better
understand the linkages between life evaluations and emotions requires more systematic
collection of both types of measure in the same survey.
There is ongoing discussion about trade-offs between single-item and multi-item scales
as measures of life satisfaction. On the one hand, a suite of well-designed questions
tapping into the same space produces a higher signal-to-noise ratio and higher test-retest
scores (e.g. Krueger and Schkade 2008, p.1836). On the other hand, where questionnaire
space is at a premium there is always an implicit trade-off between asking fewer
questions of more respondents and asking a fuller set for a more restricted sample.
Researchers typically argue for a mixed strategy. To get the best of both worlds, and to
build up evidence on the existence and size of such a trade-off, statistical agencies can
include single items and scales on surveys where space permits, with a single item used
where space is at a premium.
On the related question of numerical scales, the goal is to combine ease of response with
enough answer categories to capture the relevant variance. Experiments comparing
different scales have generally concluded that scales with more options, and an odd
number of them, is to be preferred (Diener et al 2009, pp.73-4). This has led to increasing
use of an eleven point scale for measures of life satisfaction and similar life evaluations,
within a scale bounded by zero and 10.
Life assessments and emotional reports have both been subject to validation tests, but of
different types. Emotional reports have a much more complete track record of
psychometric testing (Shiffman, Stone and Huffard 2008), while the validity of life
evaluations has more usually been assessed in terms of their ability to play their hopedfor role as measures of utility, e.g. to provide evaluation of the relative importance of the
factors presumed to underpin a good life (Diener et al 2009, chapter 5). Greater
accumulation of comparable samples, ideally including ones where life assessments and
emotional reports are both included, will permit deeper understanding of the properties
of, and linkages between, different measures of subjective well-being. For example,
Krueger and Schkade (2008) show roughly equal test-retest reliabilities for assessments
of mood and of life satisfaction, but a different structure for their likely determinants,
with life circumstances, e.g. income, having a closer linkage to life satisfaction than to
mood.
Kahneman and colleagues (Kahneman et al, 2004, Kahneman & Krueger 2006, Krueger,
ed. 2009) have proposed a mood-based remembered measure of subjective well-being.
This falls in the middle ground between momentary assessments (Shiffman, Stone and
Hufford 2008) and average assessments of mood or of life as a whole. It provides a
natural extension to regular time use surveys, since it uses a Day Reconstruction Method
5

(DRM) to ask respondents what they were doing, and how they felt, at different times
during the day. Although it has been shown that later recalls differ from in-the-moment
assessments (Stone et al 2002), the mood assessments are matched to the activity reports,
so the overall cost of collection does not differ much from that of a regular time-use
survey. In addition, the simultaneous collection of mood assessments, both positive and
negative, and life evaluations opens the door to better understanding of how these
measures relate to one another. Finally, adding specific well-being measures to time
accounting is a step that any economist familiar with time-use studies would easily
accept, thus providing a natural first step to building a broader role for measuring wellbeing as part of the national accounting system (Krueger, ed. 2009).
While subjective well-being lies at the centre of research, there has also been a parallel
increase in the strength of professional and popular perceptions that GNP is an
inadequate measure of national progress. For example, the Stiglitz-Sen-Fitousi (2009)
report commissioned by French President Sarkozy proposed improvements in GNP
accounting, more widespread collection and use of measures of subjective well-being,
and more systematic attention to long-term sustainability. Other countries and
organizations have already developed indexes designed to measure well-being more
broadly. The most well-known example is the World Development index of the UNDP
(http://www.undp.org/hdr2009.shtml). More recently, the Happy Planet index
(http://www.happyplanetindex.org/) divides the product of a nation’s average life
satisfaction and average life expectancy by a measure of a country’s environmental
footprint to provide a measure of the environmental efficiency of a country’s delivery of
subjective well-being. Taking a different tack, the Legatum Prosperity index
(http://www.prosperity.com) is an equally weighted average of two sets of indicators, one
a set of factors best explaining international differences in subjective life evaluations, and
the other a set of factors explaining GDP per capita. The government of Bhutan, which
has Gross National Happiness as its constitutionally embodied goal, currently measures
its national progress by an equally weighted average of nine component indicators,
including a direct measure of subjective well-being and eight indicator variables
considered likely to support sustainable well-being
(http://www.grossnationalhappiness.com/). There is an unofficial Canadian index of wellbeing (http://www.ciw.ca/en/TheCanadianIndexOfWellbeing.aspx) which is an equally
weighted average of eight sub-indicator variables, none of which include measures of
subjective well-being. However, subjective well-being research has apparently been used
to inform some of the choices of weights (e.g. on inflation and unemployment) in the
sub-indicators.
These and other examples of broader well-being indicators provide evidence of growing
interest in broader measures of well-being, but all suffer from their use of a priori weights
on their various components. Since the levels and rates of growth of the resulting wellbeing indicators are usually heavily dependent on the choice of weights, the resulting
indicators necessarily reflect the preferences of the designer of the index. Direct measures
of subjective well-being offer a way out of this box, since they can be used to provide
direct citizen-based measures of well-being that can in turn be used to estimate weights to
be attached to candidate explanatory variables. Such indices can then be constructed
6

when the component variables are more easily, frequently, or precisely measured than
the directly-assessed well-being. The ability of subjective well-being measures to deliver
on this possibility depends on much broader and systematic collection of subjective wellbeing data, ideally in a range of surveys that collectively provide appropriate measures of
the economic and social life circumstances of the respondents, and of the communities in
which they live.
Most of the discussion about the need for SWB measures relates to life evaluations, since
they have greater claims to be direct measures of overall well-being, and the latter is
increasingly used as an announced goal for public policy. If these measures are
sufficiently reliable, they can be averaged across individuals to provide summary
measures of the perceived quality of life in neighbourhoods, cities, regions and countries,
and across population sub-groups. Where these average measures are already collected
and published, they attract considerable interest, especially among the general public.
Changing the balance of what is measured and reported on a regular basis is likely in turn
to change the nature of policy thinking among both policy-makers and those living with
the policy results.
Creation of a new and somewhat appealing measure of overall well-being creates
opportunities and risks for policy-makers. On the risk side, these new measures create
demands for explanations of movements (even if such movements are within normal
statistical variations), and of divergent levels of well-being among segments of the
population, followed by a demand for policies designed to make life better. On the
opportunity side, the measures offer the possibility of improved understanding of what
makes for better lives, and clearer insights into the links between policies and SWB.
An analogy can be drawn with the development in the middle of the last century of
national accounts of income and expenditure. These accounts did not come with
explanations of the causal linkages, or prescriptions for creating stability and growth.
They were instead seen then, and are still seen, as providing a necessary base on which a
greater understanding of the macro-economy could be built, with the hope that this
enlarged understanding would permit better policies.

Using subjective well-being data for international comparisons
In this and the following section we shall emphasize the measurement and explanation of
differences in average life assessments, first among countries and then among Canadian
regions. There are several reasons for this. First, the aggregation of subjective
assessments over large numbers of respondents (usually several thousand in each subaggregate) permits us to minimize correlations caused by individual personality
differences, making the remaining differences more likely to be due to average
differences in life circumstances. Second, those who have seen earlier comparisons of
international and inter-provincial differences in subjective well-being will have wondered
how it comes to pass that among countries there is a strong positive simple correlation

7

between average life evaluations and average per capita incomes, while across provinces
the simple correlation is negative, sometimes significantly so.
In this section and the one to follow we show that similar models apply to individuals in
both national and international samples, so that we can explain both international and
inter-provincial differences in subjective well-being in terms of different life
circumstances, augmented in the global case by some international differences in the
relative importance that individuals in different nations implicitly attach to different
aspects of life.
We start in this section with international comparisons, making use of data from the first
three waves (2006-2008) of the Gallup World Poll. Some waves include our preferred
measure of life satisfaction, while all waves include an alternative life evaluation,
Cantril’s ‘self-anchoring striving scale’, referred to here as the Cantril ladder. Although
these two alternative measures of subjective well-being have somewhat different
distributions of responses, they provide essentially the same coefficients when applied to
the same samples of data (Helliwell et al 2010). Since the sample of Cantril ladder
responses is much larger, we use them for our analysis here. The question asks
respondents to think of a ladder, with the best possible life represented by 10, and the
worst possible by 0. They are then asked on which step they personally stand at the
present time. We use these evaluations, from more than 150,000 respondents in 125
countries, for the analysis in this section.
International differences in life evaluations are very large. The Cantril ladder responses
average 7.66 for the top four countries (Denmark, Finland, Norway and the Netherlands,
in descending order- Canada is sixth), compared to 3.33 for the bottom four countries
(Togo, Sierra Leone, Zimbabwe and Benin, in ascending order). In proportionate terms,
the differences in average real incomes, at purchasing power parity, are much larger still.
In 2005 the top four countries had real per capita GDP averaging 88% of those in the
United States, compared to 2% for the bottom four countries. But there is clearly much
more at play than per capita incomes, since the countries at the top of the subjective wellbeing ranking are not those with the highest incomes. Average incomes are, nonetheless,
the single most important variable explaining international differences in average life
assessments in the Gallup World Poll. Some have taken this result as support for treating
growth of GDP per capita as the overriding goal, and measure of success, of international
development policies and practices. But the life evaluations provide a much broader and
more complete assessment of the quality of life. Since the additional variance is
explained by the same variables that explain differences among individuals within the
same country, along with other measures of the quality of the national social and
institutional fabric (Helliwell and Huang 2008), there is scope for explaining international
differences in well-being in terms of average values of income and other variables
measured at the individual or household level.
To illustrate the possibilities, we shall use the results of a fairly bare-bones model using
individual data to explain SWB by the log of household income, whether the respondents
had relatives or friends to count on if needed, whether the respondents were satisfied with
8

their freedom to choose what to do with their lives, whether corruption was widespread in
business and government, and whether they had donated money to a charity in the past
month. This is a slightly trimmed-down version of the base model used in Helliwell et al
(2010) to explain global (in Table 10.1, eq 1), regional (Table 10.2) and national (Figure
10.3) samples. Coefficients estimated using global samples of individual data, both with
and without regional dummy variables, were essentially identical to the means of the
distributions of the coefficients estimated in national models. We therefore emphasized
the apparent generality of our results, and concluded that life evaluations could be
compared across cultures, since they were apparently explicable by the same variables.
This remains our view. But now that we wish to see what we can say in quantitative
terms about the sources of international differences in subjective well-being, we need to
consider simultaneously the relevant differences in coefficients as well as the differences
in underlying circumstances. Differences across countries in average measures of
subjective well-being will be due to differences in life circumstances, to differences in the
ways they are evaluated, and to a variety of national-level social and institutional factors.
For our example analysis, we shall compare life evaluations for the OECD and nonOECD countries. Figure 1 shows the average values separately for the respondents in
OECD and non-OECD countries, and for the global sample as a whole. The data show
quite clearly that life evaluations, and average values of all of the model’s variables, are
higher in the OECD sample, but that the differences in average incomes (at purchasing
power, relative to the United States) are much greater than in personal social capital
(friends or relatives to count on) or institutional quality (perceived freedom and
corruption). Average life evaluations, on a 10-point scale, are 6.8 in the OECD compared
to 5.0 in the non-OECD sample (but scaled to the range 0 to 1.0 for presentation in Figure
1).
To use the international differences in selected explanatory variables to explain observed
differences in life evaluations, we estimate a pooled equation to estimate global
parameters and use these to explain the size and significance of the contributions of each
of the independent variables. We do this using the Jann (2008) implementation of the
decomposition method suggested much earlier by Blinder (1973) and Oaxaca (1973) for
explaining wage differentials. Coefficients estimated from the pooled global sample are
used to calculate the contributions of different life circumstances in explaining the overall
difference of means1. The results are shown in Figure 2. Of the total 1.8 points of SWB
difference (on the 10-point scale, hence a difference equal to more than a third of the
average value for non-OECD respondents) to be explained, almost one point is attributed
to the income difference between the two groups of countries. Each of the four social and
institutional variables contributes much smaller, but significant, amounts, totalling about
0.35 points.
The unexplained difference, represented by the coefficient on the OECD dummy variable
in the pooled equation, is 0.5 points. There are a variety of reasons for this gap. One is
that there are many relevant national-level excluded variables. If average institutional
quality is higher in the OECD countries, and if this higher quality is not fully captured by
the freedom and corruption variables, then that would serve to support a positive residual.
9

Higher institutional quality in the OECD is plausible, since achieving pass marks on a
number of institutional benchmarks is a criterion for access to the OECD. Another
possibility is that there are systematic coefficient differences between the OECD and
non-OECD countries, reflecting differences in relative importance of variables in
different cultures, or the possibility that the relative importance of variables might change
as countries and their institutions develop.
Figure 3 shows that there are indeed significant coefficient differences between the two
samples, and that these differences are generally of a sort to explain the residual. The
differences do not relate to log income, for which the coefficient is remarkably similar in
the OECD and non-OECD samples. The coefficient of .46 on the log of household
income implies that a doubling of household income would be associated with life
evaluations higher by 0.32 points. But for the main social and institutional variables count on friends, freedom, and absence of corruption - coefficients are significantly
higher in the OECD countries. Thus, even though all three aspects of society are
perceived by respondents as being inferior in the non-OECD countries, the resulting
SWB consequences are much less when they are evaluated using the non-OECD
coefficients. The differing coefficients on freedom and corruption, taken together, are as
large as the unexplained residual in Figure 2. It has often been argued, e.g. by Maslow
(1943), that once basic needs are met then more attention will be devoted, and more
relative value attached, to other needs. This has been used in support of findings of lower
long-run income-elasticities of SWB at higher levels of income (Di Tella and
MacCulloch 2010). A similar appeal to changing priorities as incomes grow has been
used to explain the environmental Kuznets curve (Arrow et al 1995). Our results also
show higher relative values attached to the non-economic aspects of life at higher average
levels of income and institutions (the OECD definition tends to conflate these), although
in our results this comes not from a declining income effect but from higher coefficients
on other aspects of life. Is this finding replicable in other samples, and in different
models? Is it likely to show up as increasing coefficients on the social context variables
as countries develop? These are research-worthy questions, in our view.

Which Canadians are more satisfied with their lives, and why?
Explaining the international SWB gap was mainly a story about income, primarily
because income differs so much from the richest to the poorest countries. And across
countries, most of the non-economic supports for well-being tend, on average, to be
higher in the richer countries. But when we turn to consider interprovincial differences in
subjective well-being, things are very different. For starters, the cross-province
correlation between average incomes and average life satisfaction is negative rather than
positive. This implies, if similar models are applicable in Canada as in other countries,
that some of the non-economic supports to well-being are higher in the poorer provinces,
by more than enough to offset the SWB effects of lower incomes.
We shall repeat the same sort of decomposition of interprovincial differences that we
performed in the previous section for international differences. We now have the benefit
10

of a survey (cycle 17 of the Canadian General Social Survey) that has the life satisfaction
question along with an extended set of social variables shown by Helliwell and Putnam
(2004) to be highly correlated with differences in SWB. As before, we mainly use a
stripped-down version of a models we have estimated previously using GSS17 and other
Canadian surveys. Barrington-Leigh and Helliwell (2008 and electronic appendix)
provides the fullest description of a variety of models and results. For this paper, to make
it easier for others to replicate and improve our analysis, our estimation employs the
public use micro file (PUMF) version of GSS17. This has meant that we have to ignore
the effects of contextual variables, since their use requires respondents’ locations, which
are not provided in the PUMF. Of the census-tract variables we have included in an
expanded estimate that uses the confidential micro data, the most significant contribution,
which is not large, to explaining Atlantic/BC differences in life satisfaction is the
population density in the respondent’s census tract (i.e. population density has a negative
effect on SWB, so that the lower density in the Altantic provinces helps to account for the
higher SWB there).
For our illustrative example, we compare life satisfaction in the Atlantic provinces with
that in British Columbia. Although this choice of regions does include the highest and
lowest average regional SWL values, the same underlying story falls out if we compare
the Atlantic provinces to any other region of Canada, or to the rest of Canada as a whole.
Figure 4 shows life satisfaction, income, and five key social variables for each of the two
regions. The first thing to note is how small are the regional differences in life
satisfaction, compared to the international differences. The Gallup top four countries had
life evaluations 4.4 points higher than the bottom four, and the average life evaluation in
OECD countries was 1.8 points higher than in non-OECD countries. Between the
Altantic provinces and BC, by contrast, the difference is 0.18 points, an order of
magnitude smaller. But it is nonetheless something worth studying, because to achieve
such an increase in life satisfaction through higher incomes would require them to be
increased by more than half, according the GSS17 and other estimates of the effects of
income on subjective well-being. As for the determinants of subjective well-being, all of
the differences are also smaller than the international ones, but between these Canadian
regions, the non-economic determinants shown here all favour the Atlantic provinces.
Another difference between the regional and the international decompositions is that
there are no significant coefficient differences between the Atlantic provinces and BC2.
Since the basic institutional frameworks are similar in all parts of Canada, we would be
more inclined to expect similar coefficients than in the international case. Figure 5 shows
the contributions of each of the variables to explaining the life satisfaction gap between
the Atlantic provinces and British Columbia. Income, of course, favours BC, and hence
increases the gap remaining to be explained. The other variables, all of which relate to the
extent and ease of social connections, and the extent to which these connections lead to a
greater sense of belonging to the community or province, favour the Atlantic provinces.
The variables selected for this example are illustrative of a number of alternative ways of
measuring the sources and manifestations of social capital. In this setup, the largest
contribution is made by differences in the extent to which people feel they belong to their
local communities, with an important additional effect from a sense of belonging to one’s
11

province. But we also find very large effects from the size and the intensities of the
individual’s networks of both family and friends, shown in our current decomposition by
differences in the frequency of seeing friends, and the extent to which neighbours are
trusted. These social network effects remain important even after including the sense of
belonging to community and province, two social identity variables that serve as
important channels by which social connections support well-being. In our interpretation
of these estimates, the greater sense of community and provincial belonging in the
Atlantic provinces contributes more to average satisfaction with life than is provided in
BC by the higher average incomes there.
Figure 5 shows that while the selected social variables offset more than twice the income
advantage of BC, there is still a residual favouring the Atlantic provinces. This is not due
to significant coefficient differences between Atlantic Canada and British Columbia,
because the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition does not reject cross-regional equality of
coefficients. We considered whether the greater fraction of native-born residents in the
Atlantic Canada might be part of the story, as it always takes time and effort for
newcomers to develop a full range of supporting networks. In the GSS17 sample, the
proportion of foreign-born respondents is .05 in Atlantic Canada, compared to .28 in
British Columbia. We added immigrant status as another variable, and found it took a
negative but weak coefficient, sufficient, if taken at face value, to account for one-quarter
of the remaining unexplained residual of .08. We also considered the effects of differing
average rates of unemployment, since the SWB effects of unemployment have been
found to be substantial. For example, in national estimation using GSS17, being
unemployed is associated with 0.53 lower satisfaction with life, holding income levels
constant. When we included unemployed status as an additional variable, it did not
significantly add to the explanation of the BC-Atlantic difference. This is mainly because
in both regions there are relatively few unemployed, as a share of the population. Using
the national coefficient as a guide, each inter-regional difference of unemployment equal
to 1% of the population (roughly 1.5% of the labour force) would lower the region’s
average life satisfaction by .0053 points (.01*0.53), not enough to show up in the regional
averages. Finally, we expect that some part of the remaining Atlantic advantage may be
due to relative income effects, of the sort found in earlier work by Luttmer (2005) for the
United States, and by Barrington-Leigh and Helliwell (2008) and Helliwell and Huang
(2010) for Canada. It is not possible to take these into account using the PUMF data,
since the most relevant relative incomes relate to those in the same geographic
neighbourhood as the respondent.
In any event, our aim here is not to provide an exhaustive accounting for inter-regional
differences in well-being. What we do hope to have done is to broaden the perceived
validity of subjective well-being measures by showing that they are robustly correlated
with theoretically plausible explanatory variables, whether these differences are measured
across individuals, across communities, or across the world. Furthermore, when the
estimation results are applied to decompose interregional and international differences
they tell plausible and mutually consistent stories.

12

How can SWB data be used to improve the understanding and design of policies?
Measures of subjective well-being offer ways of changing policy-making in several
fundamental ways. First, and most fundamentally, they provide means for comparable
evaluation of diverse features of life long recognized as important, but too often left on
the sidelines when policy decisions are made. Second, research using direct measures of
subjective well-being is already showing the importance of collecting and paying heed to
assessments of life from the whole population, rather than just measuring and repairing
bad situations. Third, subjective well-being research is showing the great importance of
the quality of social identities and social capital as supports for better lives. This should
help to put the ‘social’ back into the social sciences, which have tended in the past half
century to focus on individuals and their relations to impersonal institutions. Fourth, there
is a still-emerging strand of subjective well-being research emphasizing the importance
of generosity and other pro-social behaviour as supports for life satisfaction (Borgonovi
2008). This may help to understand the high SWL in countries and cultures with high
levels of social and environmental supports, where helping others and sharing gains are
more important social norms. Fifth, the well-being consequences are seen to depend as
much on how things are done as on what is done; both the perceived fairness and the
extent of effective participant engagement are important support for procedural utility
(Frey, Benz and Stutzer, 2004).
The primary use of SWB data on life satisfaction is as a research tool to assess the
relative importance of the likely drivers of SWB. For that initial step to be illuminating, it
is necessary to have reasonable proxies or data for the likely drivers of well-being. This is
where the more traditional objective indicators of well-being come into their own as
variables explaining overall life satisfaction, especially if they can be provided in
sufficiently disaggregated form to explain individual-level SWB observations.
The use of SWB data in this way is subject to three main difficulties. Perhaps the most
important is that most surveys in which SWB questions are asked are cross-sectional in
nature, making it difficult to identify an underlying causal structure. Perhaps the best way
of dealing with this is to recognize the existence of two-way relationships, and hence to
treat the results as indicative of a connection, with various experimental methods being
used to quantify more definitive causal channels.
A second difficulty is that life is complicated, with an impressively large number of
plausible explanatory variables, at both individual and societal levels. This suggests that
even strong linkages be treated with humility, and initially treated as symptomatic of a
general line of influence.
Third, the currently available samples are inevitably too small to smooth out all the noise
that creeps into the measurement of any variable, perhaps especially so for self reports.
Self-reports have the advantage of directly measuring what analysts want to know (the
level of life satisfaction) coupled with the difficulty that the answers given depend often
and importantly on where the question is in the survey, how the respondent’s favourite
sports team is doing, and whatever else was going on when the surveyor turned up at the
13

door or on the phone. There are several strategies to reduce these difficulties, including
extensive cognitive testing of alternative wordings and questionnaire layouts,
randomization on a variety of key factors, and building large and repeated samples from
comparable surveys. If the results converge, then the case is strong, and vice versa.
Data on emotions come into their own in the analysis of the daily life course, and,
traditionally, as leading indicators of morbidity and mortality. This separation of the uses
of life evaluations and emotions is too stark, as it is driven by the fact that health surveys
and experiments have traditionally given privilege to measures of affect rather than life
evaluations, while measures of positive and negative affect have been too seldom been
included in large surveys.
If it is possible to identify a fairly tightly estimated model of the determinants of global
SWB, then the relative sizes of the effects can be used to make judgements of the relative
importance of factors, e.g. workplace trust and income (Helliwell and Huang 2010), that
had previously remained as different as chalk and cheese. This is very helpful for
evidence-based policy-making, which usually requires some way of comparing the costs
and benefits of alternative policy options. But of course most of the factors influencing
well-being are themselves not connected in any simple way to conventional policy
instruments. Hence a second level of research is required to determine what methods of
policy design and delivery are most likely to improve the quality of life.
Results from existing well-being research, based on surveys and policy experiments,
show that the ways in which policies are designed and delivered are often more important
than anything else. This in turn suggests opportunities to improve well-being at low cost
by increasing the opportunities for people to be more actively engaged.
Finally, well-being and related psychological research has shown the dominance of social
norms as drivers of behaviour, and adherence to social norms as a strong support for
individual life satisfaction. This has important implications for the design of
environmental policies, especially those intended to reduce global warming, since much
of the required changes in resource use are likely to be driven by changes in social norms.
To illustrate the possibilities more concretely, we shall describe two examples, one micro
and one macro, from among the many described in Diener et al, (2009). The micro
example relates to the evaluation of Canadian policy experiments, while the macro
example uses individual SWB from a sample of countries to estimate trade-offs between
inflation and unemployment.
The Community Employment Innovation Project (CEIP, Gyarmati et al.2008) offered
communities the chance to design and administer programs by which recipients of
employment insurance or income assistance were offered jobs in community
development. Participating communities formed boards to select and manage community
development projects, using both volunteers and employees paid for by CEIP. The
assignment of individual participants either to CEIP employment or to the control group
was random, so that the effects of the intervention could be clearly identified. The labor
market and social capital consequences for the individual participants were then
14

converted to a common basis using weights derived from life satisfaction equations,
making use of survey data obtained from all individual participants at the end of the
project. Without the availability the SWB data and research, there would have been no
clear way to compare and combine labour market and social capital consequences for
individual participants. The study unfortunately did not include life satisfaction
assessment at the beginning of the project, so that standard experimental assessments of
the life satisfaction effects were not possible.
SWB measures were also used to evaluate community-level effects, for which the
experimental method had to be slightly different, as each participating community chose
its own pace and mix of activities, and the selection of comparable control communities
was performed by matching rather than by random assignment. Community-level surveys
were conducted at the beginning and end of the CEIP program, with life satisfaction data
collected only in the final survey. Life satisfaction data were again used to estimate
equations for the likely determinants of well-being, and hence to provide weights for the
cost–benefit analysis of the social capital and other community-level effects. Social
capital effects were estimated to provide a large part of the total benefits (CEIP, Gyarmati
et al.2008). Without the SWB data and results, the community-level social capital effects
could not have been included directly in the cost/benefit results of the CEIP experiments.
An instance of a macroeconomic application of SWB measurements (Di Tella &
MacCulloch 2007) uses a panel of 600,000 individual-level life evaluations (satisfaction
with life, from Eurobarometer surveys 1973-2002 in 16 European countries) to estimate a
trade-off between unemployment and inflation. The authors offer their results as an
alternative to the a priori weights often used (e.g.the so-called ‘misery index’, which has
equal weights attached to a percentage point of unemployment or inflation) in the welfare
assessment of alternative macroeconomic policy trajectories.

Conclusions
In this paper we have tried to make a case for wider collection and use of subjective wellbeing data. After a general review of the past and potential uses for these data, we
presented global and Canadian examples from our own research to illustrate what can be
learned. Differences in subjective well-being were seen to be large and sustained across
individuals, communities, provinces and nations. To a striking extent, we found that these
differences correlated with life circumstances. Differences in life satisfaction among
countries were seen to be ten times as large as those among provinces, as were, on
average, the differences in the main determining variables. The cross-sectional
correlation between per capita incomes and subjective well-being is strongly positive
among nations and weakly negative among provinces. This difference comes about not
because the effects of incomes on life satisfaction differ among countries and provinces,
but because the international distribution of income is much more unequal that that
among provinces. Hence income dominates the explanation of international differences in
life satisfaction. In the interprovincial case, income differences are much smaller, and are
more than offset by the stronger and more supportive social environment in the Atlantic
15

provinces. In the international context, by contrast, many of the poorest countries are also
afflicted with poorer health and weaker supports from family, friends and public
institutions. Overall, we find that the very large differences among countries in average
levels of subjective well-being are mostly explained by similar responses to differing life
circumstances, coupled with what appear to be systematic differences between
individuals in OECD and non-OECD countries in the SWB effects of several noneconomic determinants of life satisfaction. As would be suggested by Maslow’s (1943)
hierarchy of needs, the relative value of the social determinants of SWB (as measured by
compensating differentials) is higher for residents of the generally richer OECD
countries. This result does not appear to be due to a declining partial effect of log income
in the richer countries, but to greater importance of the social variables in the richer
countries. This new pattern of results needs more research to assess its generality and to
assess its likely sources.
As we have tried to show, measures of subjective well-being are changing the social and
policy sciences in several fundamental ways. For economics and economists to contribute
fully in these developments will require a wider focus than is usually taken in economic
research, and a broader set of tools than is currently provided to students of economics.
In recent years, behavioural economics has broadened the empirical foundations of both
micro and macroeconomics, and has opened up models and assumptions to accommodate
findings from psychological research. While changing fundamental assumptions to
accord more closely with reality offers the promise of better predictions, if the more
complicated models can be made tractable, it poses a dilemma for welfare economics. A
behavioural utility function constitutes only half of the foundations of the
microeconomic enterprise; the other half is the utility function that defines welfare.
Behavioural economics findings, often described as "anomalies", show that in some
domains people's choices do not seem to serve their own best interests. In the neoclassical
tradition, there should be no difference between the utility function implied by revealed
preferences and that describing what is best for the individual. But the latter concept of
welfare has not evolved fast enough to keep pace with behavioural findings. What, then,
is to provide the empirical accountability for a definition of a person’s best welfare
interests?
Subjective well-being data offer a promising new version of what might be called
revealed preference of well-being, one designed to take behaviour as it is, while
nonetheless deriving bottom-up measures of experienced utility and its likely
determinants. The critical step is to treat individuals’ subjective assessments of the
overall quality of their lives as fuzzy measures of their experienced utility. The analyst
then faces the job of inferring, from the variety of information available about the
circumstances of individual lives, the relative importance of the variety of economic and
non-economic aspects of life. This method offers even more than the possibility of testing
alternative assumptions or assessments of what produces well-being. As our examples
suggest, it also has the potential to improve the empirical foundations of cost-benefit
analysis by attaching comparable values to many aspects of life that were previously
confined to footnotes because they seemed to defy measurement.
16

Our view, on the basis of more than a decade of research by us, and much more by many
others in a range of disciplines, is that the science of well-being deserves more attention
in all the social and caring sciences, from economics, education, and law to health care,
policing, urban design and energy policy.

17

REFERENCES

Annas, J. (1993) The Morality of Happiness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arrow, K. et al (1995) ‘Economic growth, carrying capacity and the environment’,
Science 268, 520-1.
Barrington-Leigh, C.P. & J.F. Helliwell. (2008) ‘Empathy and emulation: Life
satisfaction and the urban geography of comparison groups’ NBER Working
Paper 14593. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Beck, A.T. (1972) Depression: Causes and Treatment Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Blinder, A.S. (1973) ‘Wage discrimination: Reduced-form and structural estimates’
Journal of Human Resources 8(4), 436-55.
Borgonovi, F. (2008) ‘Doing well by doing good: The relationship between formal
volunteering and self-reported health and happiness’ Social Science and
Medicine, 66(11), 2321-34.
Brickman, P., D. Coates and R. Janoff-Bulman (1978) ‘Lottery winners and accident
victims: Is happiness relative?’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
36(8), 917-27.
Cohen, S., W.J. Doyle, R.B. Turner, C.M. Alper & D.P. Skoner ‘Emotional style and
susceptibility to the common cold’ Psychosomatic Medicine 50, 652-7.
Cohen, S. and S.D. Pressman (2006) ‘Positive Affect and Health’ Current Directions in
Psychological Science 15(2), 22-5.
Danner, D.D., D.A. Snowdon, & W.D. Friesen (2001) ‘Positive emotions in early life
and longevity: Findings from the nun study’ Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 80, 804-13.
Diener, E., R.A. Emmons, R.J. Larsen & S. Griffin (1985) ‘The satisfaction with life
scale’ Journal of Personality Assessment 49, 71-5.
Diener, E., R. Lucas, U. Schimmack & J.F. Helliwell (2009) Well-Being for Public
Policy, New York: Oxford University Press.
Diener, E., J.F. Helliwell, & D. Kahneman, D., eds. (2010) International Differences in
Well-Being. New York: Oxford University Press.
18

Dijkers, M. (1997) ‘Quality of life after spinal cord injury: A meta analysis of the
effects of disablement components’ Spinal Cord 35(12), 829-40.
Di Tella, R. & R.MacCulloch (2007) ‘Happiness, contentment and other emotions for
central bankers’ NBER Working Paper 13622. Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Di Tella, R. & R.MacCulloch (2010) ‘Happiness adaptation to income beyond “basic
needs”’ In E. Diener, J.F. Helliwell and D. Kahneman, eds. International
Differences in Well-Being. New York: Oxford University Press.
Durkheim, E. (1897) Le Suicide . Paris:1e edition. First appeared in English as
Durkheim, Emile (1952) Suicide : A Study in Sociology. Translated by John A.
Spaulding and George Simpson. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Frey, B.S., M. Benz & A. Stutzer (2004) ‘Introducing procedural utility: Not only what but
how matters’ Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 160, 377-401.
Gyarmati, D., de Raaf, S., Palameta, B., Nicholson, C., & Hui, T. (2008). Encouraging Work
and Supporting Communities : Final results of the Community Employment Innovation
Project. Ottawa: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.
Haslam, C., A. Holme, S.A. Haslam, A. Iyer, J. Jetten & W.H. Williams (2008) ‘Maintaining
group memberships: Social identity continuation predicts well-being after a stroke’
Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 18(5/6), 671-91.
Helliwell, J.F. (2008) ‘Life satisfaction and quality of development’ NBER Working
Paper 14507. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Helliwell, J.F., C.P. Barrington-Leigh, A. Harris, & H. Huang (2010) ‘International
evidence on the social context of well-being’ In E. Diener, J.F. Helliwell & D.
Kahneman, eds. International Differences in Well-Being. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Helliwell, J.F. & H. Huang (2008) ‘How’s your government? International evidence
linking good government and well-being’ British Journal of Political Science
38, 595-619.
Helliwell, J.F. & H. Huang (2010) ‘How’s the Job? Well-Being and Social Capital in
the Workplace’ Industrial and Labor Relations Review 63, 205-28.
Helliwell, J.F. & R.D. Putnam (2004) ‘The Social Context of Well-Being’ Phil Trans R.
Soc Lon. B 359: 1435-46. Reprinted in F.A. Huppert, B. Keverne & N. Baylis,
19

eds., The Science of Well-Being. London: Oxford University Press, 2005, 43559.
Helliwell, J.F. & S. Wang (2009) ‘Trust and well-being’ Paper prepared for the 3rd
OECD World Forum on Statistics, Knowledge and Policy, Busan, Korea,
October 27-30, 2009.
Huppert, F.A., N. Baylis & B. Keverne (2005) The Science of Well-Being Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Junn, B. (2008) ‘A Stata implementation of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition’ The
Stata Journal 8, 453-79.
Kahneman, D. (1999) ‘Objective happiness’ In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz,
eds. Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, New York: Russell
Sage.
Kahneman, D., & A.B. Krueger (2006) ‘Developments in the measurement of
subjective well-being’ Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 3-24.
Kahneman, D., & J. Riis (2005) ‘Living, and thinking about it : two perspectives on life’
In F.A. Huppert, N. Baylis and B. Keverne, eds. The Science of Well-Being
Oxford : Oxford University Press.
Kahneman, D. P.P. Wakker, & R. Sarin (1997) ‘Back to Bentham? Exploration of
experienced utility’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 375-405.
Krueger, A.B., ed. (2009) Measuring the Subjective Well-Being of Nations: National
Accounts of Time Use and Well-Being Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Krueger, A.B., D. Kahneman, D. Schkade, N. Schwarz, & A.A. Stone (2009) ‘National
time accounting : The currency of life’ In A.B. Krueger, ed.,(2009, pp. 9-86)
Krueger, A.B. & D. Schkade (2008) ‘The reliability of subjective well-being measures’
Journal of Public Economics 92(8-9), 1833-45.
Luttmer, E.F.P. (2005) ‘Neighbors as negatives : Relative earnings and well-being’
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 963-1002.
Lucas, R.E. (2007) ‘Long-term disability is associated with lasting changes in subjective
well-being: Evidence from two nationally representative longitudinal studies’
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92(4), 717-30.
Maslow, A.H. (1943) ‘A theory of motivation.’ Psychological Review 50, 370-96.

20

Oaxaca, (1973) ‘Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets’ International
Economic Review 14(3), 693-709.
Redelmeier, D. & D. Kahneman (1996) ‘Patient’s memories of painful medical
treatments: real-time and retrospective evaluations of two minimally invasive
procedures’ Pain 116, 3-8.
Sen, A. (1999) Development as Freedom, New York: Knopf.
Shiffman, S., A.A. Stone & M.R. Hufford (2008) ‘Ecological momentary assessment’
Annual Reviews of Clinical Psychology 4, 1-32.
Stone, A.A., S. Schiffman, J.E. Schwartz, J.E. Broderick & M.R. Hufford (2002)
‘Patient non-compliance with paper diaries’ British Medical Journal 324, 11934.
Watson, D., L.A. Clark & A. Tellegen (1988) ‘Development and validation of brief
measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales’ Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063-70.
Wirtz, D., J. Kruger, C.N. Scollon & E. Diener (2003) ‘What to do on spring break? The
role of predicted, on-line and remembered experience in future choice’
Psychological Science, 14, 520-4.

21

Appendix
Subjective well-being measures
Cognitive life evaluations
Satisfaction with life (SWL): This question is typically written: "All things considered, how satisfied are
you with life as a whole these days?" and answered on a 1-to-10 or 0-to-10 numerical scale with verbal
anchoring points ("Completely satisfied", "Completely dissatisfied") at the extremes. Coarser scales may
have the advantage of having verbal descriptions for each possible response, but this seems to be
outweighed by the benefit of having more resolution in an 11-point scale with anchoring descriptions at the
top and bottom.
Cantril ladder: Similar in response format to the 0-to-10 SWL with verbal descriptions at top and bottom,
the Cantril "self-anchoring striving scale" poses a different question: "Please imagine a ladder with steps
numbered zero at the bottom to ten at the top. Suppose we say that the top of the ladder represents the best
possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst possible. If the top step is 10 and the
bottom step is 0, on which step of the ladder do you feel you personally stand at the present time?" For
some waves, the Gallup World Poll contained both the Cantril ladder and an SWL question, on the same 0
to 10 scale. Helliwell et al (2010) fitted the same model to both sets of data and found essentially identical
coefficients, and closer fitting equations if the two measures were averaged.
Satisfaction with life scale (SWLS): Diener et al (1985) argued for the need for a multi-item scale to
measure properly life satisfaction as a cognitive-judgemental process. They developed the five-question
SWLS index as an alternative to single-item measures. Only one of the questions includes the word
"satisfied". The index likely has better statistical properties than a single-item SWL but is, of course,
costlier to include on surveys due to its length.

Measures of affect

Happiness: A typical question gauging happiness is "How happy are you at the moment?" with a
numerical but verbally-described scale for responses. This question accesses the respondent's more
transient affective state, rather than global, longer-term, and more cognitive evaluation of life quality.
Helliwell & Putnam (2004) compare happineess and life satisfaction equations for World values survey
data, and find them to have very similar structures, with slight differences consistent with the less
evaluative nature of the happiness responses.

Self-report depression scales: Some psychometrics for depressive disorders are based on self-report
inventories of questions. The 21-question Beck Depression Inventory (Beck 1972, p. 333) and more
recently versions of the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) with as few as 6 or even 2 questions are
examples.
Positive and negative affect: Rather than treating happiness and unhappiness on a single dimension, series
of questions can be used to gauge the incidence or preponderance of exhibited feelings and behaviours
associated with positive affect and, as an independent construct, negative affect. One standard set of
questions assessing these is the Positive Affect Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS, Watson et al, 1988),

22

consisting of 10 descriptors for positive affect (attentive, interested, alert, excited, enthusiastic, inspired,
proud, determined, strong and active) and 10 descriptors for negative affect (distressed, upset-distressed;
hostile, irritable-angry; scared, afraid-fearful; ashamed, guilty; nervous, and jittery).
Affect balance: A series of multi-item measures of positive and negative affect can be combined in such a
way as to create a single index which indicates the balance between the two.
U-index: Kahneman et al (2006) propose and implement a "U-index", and advocate for it as a measure of
society's well-being. The index is named for "unpleasant" or "undesirable" and is the proportion of time
(aggregated over respondents) in which the highest rated recalled feeling was a negative feeling. This
provides a way to compare and aggregate over individuals with idiosyncratic differences in the magnitude
scales they use to describe their own affect.

1

We use a global (later, national) equation SWB  X    to estimate a set of “nondiscriminatory” (in

the Blinder-Oaxaca parlance) coefficients

*

for use in the decomposition. The mean SWB difference

A and B can then be written in terms of the covariates X A and X B as a component Q
that is “explained” by region differences in X and an “unexplained” component U which captures

between regions

differences in coefficients from estimates carried out separately on each region, as well as differences in
unobserved variables:

SWB  Q  U

Q   E  X A   E  X B    *
U  E  X A    A   *   E  X B    *   B 
2

To ease the interpretation of the figures, the coefficients on the two-region pooled OLS equation for life
satisfaction are .39 (t=10.7) on log household income, .48 (t=3.9) on trust in neighbours, .48 (t=4.0) on
confidence in police, .06 (t=3.3) on the log frequency of seeing friends, 1.16 (t=9.5) on belonging to
community, and .61 (t=5.3) on belonging to province.

23

Figure 1: Comparing life in the OECD and non-OECD countries
Scaled Gallup World Poll

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
OECD
non-OECD
global

0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
SWB

income

count on
friends

freedom

no corrupt

1.40

Figure 2: Why is SWB higher in OECD than non-OECD
countries?
(on a 10 point scale, vertical lines show 95% confidence range)

1.20
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
average
household
income

count on
friends

freedom

not corrupt

donated
money

unexplained
difference

Figure 3: Coefficients in the OECD and non-OECD countries
Gallup World Poll

1.20
1.00
0.80
OECD
non-OECD
Pooled

0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
income

count on
friends

freedom

not corrupt

donation

Figure 4: Comparing life in the Atlantic Provinces with life in BC
Scaled Average Data from GSS17
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

Atlantic
BC

0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
SWL

average
trust
confidence
household neighbours in police
income

seeing
friends

sense of sense of
belonging- belongingcommunity province

Figure 5: Why is average life satisfaction higher in the Atlantic
Provinces than in BC?
0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15
average
trust in
confidence
household neighbours in police
income

seeing
friends

sense of
sense of unexplained
belonging- belonging- difference
community province

