                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 GAME MODELLING THE TIOKYO ROUND
                     OF TARIFF NEGOTIATIONS


                       Robert   E. Baldwin

                       Richard N. Clarke



                     Working Paper No. 1588




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           March 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity and Industrial
Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1588
                                               March 1985




                    Game Modelling the Tokyo Round
                        of Tariff Negotiations


                                 ABSTRACT




   Using actual trade and tariff data for the United States and the European

Comunity, this paper demonstrates how a trade negotiation such as the Tokyo

Round, can be modelled as a game among countries attempting to minimize

individual welfare loss functions. Once welfare functions are constructed, we

compute both noncooperative and cooperative Nash equilibria. These welfare

outcomes are then compared with those arising from the initial tariff

structure, as well as the structure actually determined by the negotiation.

We find that while the game model may track closely the decisions of the

negotiators in the Tokyo Round, later unilateral political decisions resulted

in less "optimal" tariffs.




Robert E. Baldwin                              Richard N. Clarke
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin                        University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706                              Madison, WI 53706
Executive Summary
GAME MODELLING THE TOKYO POUND OF TARIFF NEGOTIATIONS

Robert E. Baldwin, Research Associate, NBER, and University of
Wisconsin—Madison and   Richard   N.  Clarke,   University  of
Wisconsin-Madison

Negotiations in the Tokyo Round over the tariff—cutting formula
to be followed by the participants evolved into a bargaining
process between the United States and the European Community in
which other industrial countries played the role of mediator
seeking a compromise acceptable to the two largest trading
powers. The announced goal of U.S. negotiators was to obtain a
duty cutting formula that would produce a deep average cut in
tariffs. Their intention seemed to be to thereby further reduce
the diversionary effect on U.S. exports caused by the formation
and expansion of the European Economic Community. In contrast,
Community negotiators stated that they sought a duty—cutting rule
that would reduce the degree of dispersion of tariff rates around
a country's average level of duties. Although the average level
of duties in both trading blocs was about the same, the U.S. duty
schedule contained many more high (and low) tariff items than the
Community's. Negotiators from the E.C. believed that the high
rates in the U.S. caused exports from third countries to be
diverted from the U.S. into the Community and thus aggravated
their import-competition problems.     (At the same time they
maintained that the middle level E.C. rates were not sufficiently
high to cause a sigificant shift of third country exports to the
low duty categories in the United States.) Neither trading
partner placed much emphasis on the other's prime objective but
both wanted to achieve reciprocity in the sense of the average
cut in the other's tariffs being about the same as in their own
average tariff reduction.

In game—theoretic terms the negotiators from the United States
and the European Community can be viewed as each having a welfare
function that depends upon the depth of the average cut, the
extent to which the dispersion of tariffs around the average
level are reduced, and the degree to which the depth of the
average cuts are the same. The goal of each negotiating team is
to minimize its overall welfare loss resulting from failing to
satisfy perfectly its objective with respect to each component in
its welfare function.

Using actual pre-Tokoyo Round duty rates (classified on the basis
of 22 sectors) for the U.S. and the E.C., we calculate for each
trading bloc the average duty cut, the variance in duty rates,
and the extent by which the average cut of one diverges from that
of the other, first, for the cutting rules proposed by the two
trading partners and, then, for the cutting rule proposed by the
other participants arid accepted by the United States arid the
European Community. We next select for the two trading partners
the relative weights for each of the three components in their
welfare functions. In these selections we are guided not only by
the announced goals of each trading power but by the supposition
that the initial cutting rules proposed by the U.S. and the E.C.
should yield a low welfare loss for the proposing trading power
compared to the welfare loss for the other trading partner. The
compromise rule proposed by the other pariticipants should
produce an intermediate welfare position for each.

After   choosing   welfare   rates   that yield these results, we then
compute the theoretic Nash noncooperative and cooperative
equilibria on the basis of       these   weights. The overall welfare
losses of the U.S.     and the E.C. are lower under the
noncooperative and the cooperative solutions than under the
compromise formula as well as under the rules proposed by each,
thereby suggesting that the actual negotiating process was not as
efficient as it could have been. It was also found that the cuts
actually achieved after taking             into   account the various
exceptions to the formula cuts and the puilbacks thought to be
necesary to achieve reciprocity, although better than the initial
rates, were inferior in welfare terms for both parties not only
to the game—theoretic solutions but to thfe cutting rules
proposed by either party. While one would expect that the
political necessity of making sector exceptions to the full cuts
given by the agreed-upon formula would reduce welfare levels
compared to those given just by the negotiators' goals in seeking
an acceptable cutting rule, the extent of the welfare differences
suggests that this part of the negotiations also was not as
beneficial to each partner as it could have been.
1. Introduction

   Governments participating in trade-i iberalizing negotiations invariably

regard reductions of their own import barriers as concessions to other

countries, and cuts in foreign import restrictions as gains to their own

country. This attitude could conceivably be justified on the economic grounds

that decreases in import barriers reduce national welfare due to adverse terms

of trade   effects, or   because existing tariff levels enable a country to

capture   part   of the rents earned by imperfectly competitive foreign firms

selling in domestic markets. 1/ However, a political economy explanation of

this behavior seems more plausible.

   Cheaper imports not only increase consumer welfare but may cause temporary

unemployment and losses in particular industries. These latter impacts can

significantly reduce the real income of certain groups, while the consumer

gains are likely to be spread thinly over many individuals. Because of their

small numbers and the large per-person income changes at stake, individuals in

the import-impacted sectors are more likely than consumers to overcome the

free—rider problem of collective action by organizing the voluntary financial

contributions needed for effective lobbying. Even though the aggregate

benefits to consumers exceed the aggregate losses to producers, the individual

consumer is likely to consider it not rational to contribute to an interest

group seeking a liberal trade policy which, if adopted, would benefit that




    Prepared for presentation at the Winter Meeting of the Econometric Society
in Dallas, Texas, December 29, 1984. We are indebted to Bih Jane Liu for
expert research help, and to Marie Thursby for valuable cornents. This paper
does not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Department of Justice.

1/ For the latter possibility, see J. Brander and B. Spencer, "Trade
tlarfare: Tariffs and Cartels," Journal of International Economics (May 1984).
individual regardless of whether he or she contributed. Consequently, since

initiating a duty-cutting exercise may threaten elected officials with the

withdrawal   of voting and campaign—funding support, it is quite understandable
that government negotiators regard voluntary reductions in their own levels of
protection as "concessions.
    Yet political leaders representing the nation as a whole also seem to
believe   that there are significant political and economic advantages

associated with reciprocal trade-liberalizing negotiations. Rightly or

wrongly, they tend to think that trade liberalization promotes better economic

relations among nations, and reduces political tensions. Furthermore, the

correlation between economic prosperity and trade liberalization in the

post-1945 period appears to have convinced most political leaders that general

reductions   of trade barriers promote overall prosperity for their nations.
Therefore, they are sometimes   prepared to accept the political risks of

antagonizing   organized groups representing import-competing sectors, and
engage in multilateral trade negotiations. At the same time, they, of course,

try to minimize their political costs by stressing the employment and profit

benefits stemming from increased export opportunities due to lower foreign

trade harriers, by staging cuts in tariffs and other barriers over an extended

period, and by excluding certain industries from the liberalizing process.

Understandably, each country's negotiators will attempt to shape the rules and

processes followed in the negotiations in ways that enable them, and their

political superiors to claim that the employment gains from increased exports

exceed the employment losses due to increased imports.

    In the first six rounds of multilateral negotiations sponsored by the

General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GAIT) between 1947 and 1962,




                                       -2—
bargaining over reciprocal tariff cuts took the form of item-by-item

negotiations. However, in the last two multilateral negotiations, i.e., the

Kennedy (1962-67) and Tokyo (1974-79) Rounds, the participants dropped this

cumbersome bargaining method in favor of a procedure under which the

participating   countries negotiate a tariff-cutting rule or formula that--with
some exceptions--would apply to all dutiable items. 2/ In the Kennedy Round,
the   American negotiators proposed the rule that all duties be cut by 50

percent and, in effect, informed the other participants that the United States

would not participate in the negotiation unless this formula was adopted.

However, in the Tokyo Round the negotiations on the duty-cutting rule were

more open and flexible. Essentially, the bargaining process evolved into one

between the United States and the European Community, with other participants

acting as facilitators in reaching a formula acceptable to these two economic

superpowers, as well as to themselves.

      This framework suggests that multilateral trade negotiations can be

modelled as a game between several player-countries with the Tokyo Round

serving as an example of a two—country game. Each country has payoffs or

levels of welfare that depend on characteristics of the negotiated structure

of protection. We examine two different types of tariff equilibria. One, the

noncooperative !¼lash solution, assumes that countries negotiate

antagonistically with one another. Each country considers    only the direct
influence that its proposed tariff schedule has on itself. It is not
concerned about the level of welfare the tariff-cutting rule secures for the




2/ The procedure for determining what items would not be subject to the
tariff-cutting rule and what withdrawals would be made in response to other
countries' exceptions was similar to traditional item-by-item negotiations.



                                         -3-
other participants. Another equilibrium is the Nash bargaining solution.

This cooperative equilibrium supposes that countries seek to maximize the

joint welfare of the group, hence improvements in a single country's welfare

are only sought to the extent that they improve the joint payoff.

     In   the following section the tariff goals of different countries, in
particular the United States and the European Community, are presented and
specified    as components of an overall welfare function for that country. The

consistency of these goals will also be analyzed. Section 3 uses these

individual welfare functions to demonstrate the noncooperative Nash and Nash

bargaining equilibria. Several theoretical characteristics of these

equilibria     are examined and related to observed characteristics of the tariff
negotiations    process. In Section 4, we attempt to estimate the relative

weights that the U.S. and E.C. attached to the different components of their

welfare functions based upon various statements made by representatives of

these countries prior to and during the actual negotiating process. We

further refine these weights using the two countries' sequentially suggested

tariff-cutting rules as additional data. In Section 5, the welfare weights

and theoretical game equilibria are compared with the tariff rates actually

negotiated in the Tokyo Round of multilateral negotiations. Concluding

remarks are in Section 6.



2.   Tariffs   and Welfare

     At   the outset and during the early phases of negotiations, countries
indicate to other participants the characteristics of the pattern of tariffs
they consider most important in terms of their negotiating goals. These

characteristics can be combined into a utility function that cumulates the




                                        -4-
welfare effects that a country receives from a particular set of tariff

rates. 3/

   For convenience, we display a model for two countries with k different

product classifications. It is straightforward to extend this analysis to any

finite number of country-players. Initially, each country has a k-vector of

tariff rates for the set of product classifications:

            to =
                    (t,        ...,   t)'
            S°    = (sq,       ...,
                                      s)'    ,   4/
where to represents country l's initial tariff vector and s0 represents

country Vs initial tariff vector. Through negotiations, countries seek to

establish new tariff vectors:


            t1=    (tj, ...,
            sl=    (si,    ...,       si)'
that better satisfy their welfare criteria for a desirable tariff structure.

    The   relative quantities of goods that each country imports of each product
class are given by two additional k-vectors:
            m =
                   (m1,
                           .   . ., mk)
            n =
                   (n1,    •'
where m represents country l's imports and n represents country 2's imports.




3/ Whether these publicly suggested tariff characteristics are an accurate
Tndicator of a country's true preferences is another subject that will be
investigated later. We do this by using numerical examples to evaluate how
closely the actual proposed and negotiated tariffs compare to the ones that
would he optimally implied by the professed considerations.

4/ A prime indicates a transposed vector.




                                                      —5—
  vector component m is the fraction of country 1's total imports that are

in product class i. Similarly for country 2. 5/ While it is quite reasonable

that the desired import vector should change as tariffs shift from their

initial values to their final values, we assume that each countrys import

bundle remains fixed. This analysis could be expanded to accommodate

different initial and final import vectors, however.

    We now examine and quantify several of the characteristics countries may

desire for the structure of tariff rates.

    A. Some countries, in particular, the members of the European Community,

are concerned about the variability of tariff rates across products. Although

the average level of industrial tariffs in the Community is about the same as

in the United States and in other developed countries such as Japan, the

extent of dispersion of the E.C.'s rates about their average level is much

less than in the United States and Japan. 6/ According to Community

officials, reducing all tariff rates by, say, 50 percent still leaves a group

of relatively high tariff items in countries such as the United States that

are significantly protected. In other words, they seem to believe that there

is overkill in high tariff rates, and that these rates will still have a

considerable protective effect even after a uniform percentage cut. They

maintain it is necessary to reduce high duties by a greater percentage than

low duties in order to eliminate this effect and to achieve reciprocity.




5/ It is also possible to interpret mj and nj entries as actual dollar
values of imports in product class i--if country I and country 2 have equal
total amounts of imports.

6/ This lower degree of dispersion is the result of the simple averaging of
country rates on tariff items that was performed when the Community was
formed.




                                     -6-
Community negotiators also believe that higher percentage cuts are needed to

correct for the diversion of third countries' trade from the United States to

the Comunity caused by high U.S. rates. 7/

       We measure the variability of a country's tariffs by the country's

unweighted variance of different product class tariffs around their unweighted

mean tariff divided by a measure of the mean squared tariff rate desired for

that country. 8/ This measure of country l's tariff variability is called

       and of country 2's tariff variability is A2:

                           k                    k

                                                      '
                (k_i)*    1=1                 j-d.




            =
                  1
                          Ct1   -    ee' t1)' Ct1         -   ee'   t1)
                      2
                (k_1)*


                  1
            =             t1' (I -       Ik ee')t1
                (k_i)*2


                          k                    k
 .-•
                      7
                (k_1)* •=           S.—
                                     1
                                                     S.
                                                      3




                  1
            =
                      2
                          (i -       ee' 1)I (i —             ee' 1)
                (k_l)*


                  1
            =             Si' (I —         ee')s1
                (k_1)*2


7/ Community officials first made these points in the Kennedy Round and
repeated them in the Tokyo Round. See Robert E. Baldwin, "Tariff-Cutting
Techniques in the Kennedy Round" in R. E. Caves, H. G. Johnson, and P. B.
Kenen (eds.) Trade, Growth, and the Balance of Payments. (Chicago: Rand
McNally, 1965).

8/ The purpose of this variance normalization is to make the variability
measure less sensitive to the absolute level of tariffs.



                                                —7—
where e is a k-vector of ones, e =   (1,   ...,   1)',   and * and   *   are   the

measures of unweighted average tariff rates desired for the U.S. and E.C.

respectively. 9/ Note that since A increases as country i's tariff

variability rises, countries seek to reduce the size of the Ai's. Thus

can be considered a component of a negative utility function or a loss

function for each country's welfare. A country's goal, then, is to minimize

its welfare loss.

    B. Countries also have views concerning the optimum average level of

tariffs. Government leaders who believe that lower tariffs promote economic

efficiency and domestic growth will balance these goals against the greater

political pressures import-competing industries bring to bear on them the

deeper they cut the average duty. A particular reason why the United States

pushed strongly for a deep average duty cut in the Kennedy Round and also in

the Tokyo Round was to reduce the margin of preference provided to Community

members selling within the Community--compared to United States sales to the

Community. Thus, reducing the extent of the trade diversion from imports from

the United States brought about by the elimination of duties within the

Community has been an important goal of U.S. trade policy.




                                                           k                         k
9/ These measures are computed as follows:           =          t? and *
                                                           j1
The desired reduction from average tariff rates , is computed as the
simple average of the U.S.'s and E.C.'s desired tariff reductions,    and 62.
             + 62
Hence 6 =           The values of    and 62 are explained in the next
             2
paragraph.




                                      -8-
      We assume that each country has a desired percentage reduction in tariff

collections by each country. Country 1 desires a reduction of 1-, and

country 2 of 1-s2. 10/ Thus if tariff collections are initially

 k                 k
      m1t and z                    country j         would prefer these collections to be
i=1               i=1


            m.t?
             1 1
                 and .             n.s?.
                                    1   1
      i=1                1=1


      Loss of welfare results if actual negotiated tariffs do not yield

approximately these desired levels of collection. We assume that the amount

of loss is proportional to the square of the divergence between desired and

negotiated collections. Country l's loss from not meeting its target

reduction in own tariffs is denoted Bii. Its loss from country Vs tariff

reduction not equalling country l's desires is B12. Country Vs loss on

country l's failure is B21, and on its own divergence is 822.




(2.3) B11 = EE          m1t
                               —
                                             z m1t?]


               = [m'(t1 -
                              1t°fl'             [m'(t1 -
                                                            61t°)]

(2.4) l2 =
                   k

                  i=1
                        ii     —
                                   1        E
                                             k

                                            i=1
                                                        2




               = [n'(s1 —
                              s1s°)]' [S(1 —




10/ Desired percentage increases would be denoted by negative des.


                                                        -9-
                      k                            k              2
(2.5)    B7
              =   [           m.t    —                  m.t?J


              = [m'(t1         -
                                    2t°)]' [m'(t1                 -
                                                                       2t°)]

(2.6) B22 = i=1 ns
                                     -
                                             2 ns]
              =   [n'(s1       -
                                    2s°)]'             [n'(s1 -
                                                                       2s°)]
    C. For negotiators to be able to gain domestic political support for the

tariff rates proposed by the negotiation, they must be able to claim that

reciprocity (or better) was achieved with their negotiating partners. A

commonly accepted standard for reciprocity is that the average duty cut, as

measured by the percentage change in pre-cut and post-cut tariff revenues

(based on the pre-cut import values), be the same among the major trading

participants. Consequently, we shall assume that each country expects other

countries to alter the import-weighted level of their tariffs to the same

degree as it does. In our two-country model, we shall measure this difference

in tariff cuts by the squared divergence between the percent change in country

l's and country 2's import-weighted tariff levels, and call this C in equation

(2.7).




                  k                                     k
                                                                        -
                  •E m.(t - t?)                        .:       n1(s        s?)
(2.7) C =                                      -
                          k
                      i1      mjt?
                                                            il   n1s?


              m'(t1 -          t°)       -   n'(s1          -
                                                                50)], m'(t1
                                                                                    -    t°)   -   n'(s1   -
                                                                                                               50)]
                      m't°                         n's0                           m't°                 n's0




                                                                  -10-
      0. Sometimes negotiators express a desire to have equal protective levels

in each sector, thereby creating a so-called "level playing field" in each

broad industry grouping. This concept of sectoral negotiations is set forth

as an objective in the U.S. Trade Act of 1974. 11/ However, the time-

consuming nature of the negotiations on various nontariff trade barriers

precluded extensive negotiations along these lines. Only in the civilian

aircraft sector were such negotiations successful. The European Community was

also not very enthusiastic about sectoral negotiations and specifically stated

that harmonization did not require an equalization of customs duties for the

same products. However, since this goal is likely to be relevant for future

negotiations, wedescribe it in this outline of negotiating objectives, though

we   shall    not include it when analyzing the Tokyo Round empirically.

      The    inter-country similarity of product-class tariffs would be measured by
the sum of squared deviations between countries' tariffs on individual product
classes:

(2.8)
                      k           1      i2
            0 =        E
                      i=1
                              (t -       s)

              =
                  1
                      Ct
                          1
                              -   S1.,
                                    )    (t1- S 1).
ach country would experience this loss if tariff schedules are not equivalent
across products.




11/     See Trade ct of 1974, Public Law 93-618, 93rd            Congress, H.R. 10710, Sec.




                                                      —11—
    E. A country's overall welfare loss from failing to perfectly satisfy

each of these criteria for a desirable tariff structure is a weighted sum of

the individual losses listed above. Since countries may differ in their

relative concern for each criterion, we allow the weights attached to

different loss sources to vary over countries. Thus we may denote country 1

and country 2's overall welfare loss from a new set of tariffs t1 and s1

when initial tariffs are to and s0 as:



(2.9)   L1(t1,s1) = a1A1 + a2A2 + b1B11 + b2B12 + cC + dO,



(2.10) L9(t1,s1) =
                     ci1A1 + a22
                                   +
                                       61B71    B2B22 + 1C +   D.


The weights a1, a2, b1, b2, c, d and z,, 2'           2' y,         for countries

1 and 2, respectively, are nonnegative constants. Their relative values

determine the differences in importance of individual criteria to a country

and differences in interest across countries.

    F. Each country wishes to choose a set of tariffs that minimize its

welfare loss, L(t's'). However, it is generally not possible for a

country to eliminate completely all loss. This is because minimization of one

source of welfare loss may be inconsistent with minimizing another source.

Before we examine (in the next section) how countries decide what is the

overall most favorable tariff structure, we first look at the compatibility of

these several negotiating objectives.

   Countries wish to reduce the variance of their tariff rates over different

product classes (minimize As). This variance can actually be reduced to zero

by setting all of a country's individual tariff rates equal to an identical




                                         —12-
constant, i.e.,               = £1=
                                      c4,   ..., )' e   =        and s1 =   = (4, ..., ' = e.
Elimination of variance loss also does not conflict with achieving a target

cut in own tariff collections. This is because constant tariff rates                          and

can be selected so that each country's total tariff collections equal any

desired amount. Suppose country 1 wishes constant tariff rates and desires a

tariff cut of 1 -              from its current level. Then it chooses a constant tariff

rate       to:


mm          =    [m'(Ee   -
                              61t0)]'   [m'(e -



=> e'rn'(Ie       -
                      51t°)    = 0



           s e'mm't
       =
                e'mm'e


If this          is substituted into B11, then B11 =            0,   hence there is no loss from

failing to meet one's own target tariff cut. Substituting s for t and 2 for 1

repeats this proof for country 2. While setting a constant tariff to minimize

interproduct-class variance and achieve an own desired cut is feasible, it

will generally be infeasible for this policy to provide the foreign country

with no loss as well. Unless the foreigner's desired tariff reduction 1 -


equals the domestic country's desired reduction 1 -                       exactly, then the

selected by country 1 will not set                  =       0. 12/ Thus, the first source of
conflict between country 1 and country 2 arises.




12/ Iote that, similarly, if country 2 selects    to minimize interproduct
variance and achieve its desired cut of 1—s2, then if 6]   62, B12   0
and country 1 will suffer a loss.



                                                  -13-
    Criterion A is completely compatible with criterion C (equiproportional

reduction in tariff collections), however. Zero loss can be incurred by both

countries if each sets its tariff rates constant at            and      respectively-—so

long as E and     are chosen such that


         m'e --                 n'e
           m't°                 n's°

    Likewise, criterion 0 is also compatible with A. to loss is incurred

under criterion D if each country's tariff on a product class equals all other

countries' tariffs on that product class, i.e. t =
                                                             s,   i =   1,   ...,   k.

Thus the choice of          =      will ensure both zero variance on tariffs between

product classes and equal tariffs on each product charged by each country.

    Criterion B is completely compatible with criterion C. To satisfy B with

no loss, we need t1 and s1 such that:

         m't1 =
                  51m't0
         n's1 =
                  52n's°
            =      = 5.
While satisfying C with no loss requires:

          Tn't1
                  -
                          n's1
          m't°            n's0
Substituting from the requirements of B, we get:


         ______       —
                      —
                            2n's0
           m't0                 n's0
which is only true if, as B also requires,             =    = . Hence,       any

specific percentage reduction in tariffs can be reconciled with the need for

an equiproportionate reduction in collections across countries.




                                              -14-
      Condition D requires differences in the tariffs different countries charge

on product classes to be eliminated. This is achieved if t1 =                      s.
Equalization of tariff schedules is consistent with criterion B, so long as

k >   2. 13/ To see this, note first that satisfying criterion D with zero loss

requires a common tariff vector u =               t1    =    5   across countries. To also

satisfy 3 we need:

             m'u =

             n•u =

where s is the common desired tariff depreciation factor needed for B to be

internally consistent. The resulting system of equations:




               ni

has at least one solution for u if dim m = dim n = k equals or exceeds 2.

      Criterion C, equiproportional change in countries' tariff collections, and

criterion D, equal tariff rates across countries, are similarly consistent,

requires u =        t1   =   s,     and C requires:


         m't1            n's1
                                =
         m't0            n's°


Substituting we get:

                    n')
      m't°      nIsO"

which may be solved for u.




13/ Or more generally, the number of individual product class tariffs equals
or exceeds the number of countries whose schedules must be equalized.



                                                      -15-
      As is evident, combinations of these criteria taken three at a time or

four at a time (as in the case of our full welfare loss function) are less

likely to be mutually fulfilled. In the following section we see how

equilibria in this mesh of conflicting interests may be identified.



3. Game Equilibria

      Each country's trade representative negotiates with other representatives

to determine each country's tariff schedule. The institutional structure of

these negotiations can vary. Depending on the character of these processes,

several different definitions of a tariff equilibrium may be appropriate. In

this section we describe two such equilibria, and also demonstrate how the

optimal tariffs may be computed for each equilibrium.

      We examine both the noncooperative Mash equilibrium and the cooperative

Mash equilibrium. These solutions to the tariff negotiation game differ

largely in how much common ground is established between the countries prior

to negotiation, and how much appreciation each country has for tariff

adjustments that improve the welfare of other countries--at the cost of some

of their own welfare. We begin with the simpler noncooperative equilibrium.

      Nash   noncooperative equilibrium characterizes negotiators who are solely
concerned with their    own country's welfare. They refuse to grant other

countries    any concessions unless these actions also directly improve their own

country's    well being--no   matter how large the potential welfare improvement to

the   foreigner. In this process, the only common ground established prior to
negotiation    is each country   announcing its welfare loss function to the other
participants.     Each negotiator then makes and entertains proposals for new

tariff schedules. A country only proposes tariffs that improve its own




                                         -16-
welfare (effects on other countries are ignored), and does not embrace another

country's proposal unless this proposal also directly improves its welfare.

Noncooperative Nash equilibrium is finally reached when no country can make

any further unilateral tariff changes that both directly improve its own

welfare, and do not harm other countries' welfare so as to incite them to take

retaliatory actions that end up reducing the country's welfare.

    A more cooperative approach to negotiation results if countries are

willing to trade off certain small losses in their own welfare, should other

countries receive larger gains in their welfare. This is in contrast to the

zero tradeoff characterizing the noncooperative model. Nash cooperative

equilibrium permits tradeoffs by establishing a joint welfare criterion

function. This welfare function is the product of the differences between

each country's individual welfare that results from a proposed set of tariffs

and a "security level" of welfare that the country could achieve in the

absence of cooperatively determined tariff schedules. This security level

might be the welfare level that is achieved in a noncooperative

equilibrium—-if this is the likely outcome should cooperative negotiations

break down. Or, if when countries cannot reach a new cooperative agreement,

they agree to maintain their current tariff schedules, security levels would

be countries' current welfare levels.

    Using   this cooperative world welfare function, proposed tariffs are
evaluated by the level of joint welfare they generate--subject to the proviso
that acceptable tariff schedules must provide each participating country an
individual welfare level that equals or exceeds its security level (otherwise,
countries may wish to withdraw from the cooperative process). The acceptable
tariff schedule that ranks highest in world welfare terms is then selected.



                                        —17—
      There are several reasons why we have selected these two equilibrium

concepts from among the many that have been proposed. One large advantage of

these two Nash solutions is that they are easy to compute. The intuitive

reasonableness of their assumptions has also made them among the most popular

concepts. And finally, as an expository tool, these two solutions sit at

wirlely separate points on the continuum between noncooperative and cooperative

behavior.

       We now examine how optimal tariffs under these two equilibrium concepts

may be computed. Under the noncooperative Nash concept, each country tries

simultaneously to choose its tariffs so as to maximize its own welfare by

minimizing its welfare loss:


(3.1) Country 1:        mm L1(t1,s1)
                         ti


(3.2) Country 2: mm L2(t1,s1)
                         Si


where L1(t1,s1) and L2(t1,s1) are given in (2.9) and (2.10). This

optimization is carried out by solving the following first order conditions:



(3.3) 0 = 3L1      =   ai A1 +   a   3A2 +
                                             b1 ____ + b2
                                                          aBl2 +            +d    aD




           o = aL2 =     aA1 +   a   aA2 +      aB +   2   3B22 +      aC   +     aD




                                                                                           i
                                                as'        as'


                                                                       aA       aA2        3B,2
Note that from (2.1), (2.2), (2.4), (2.5), we know that                     =          =          =



aB2,                                         aA aA2 aB aB22 aC aC aD
       =   0.   Using the derivatives: —-' —,-'        ' ____' —,-' —,-' —,-' and
as1                                               as at1         as1   at1 as1 at1




                                               -18-
        from (2.1), (2.2), (2.3), (2.6), (2.7), and (2.8); rearranging terms


and discarding superfluous constants, we can convert (3.3) and (3.4) to the

system


                                                      -cmn'-d          t1
a1(I—ee')(b1 m't m't0)mm'+d


        ynm                                                            1
                                                                )nnj
                             •
                          mm t            mn S
                  + c(              -
    61b1mmt0
                         m't0m't0       m't0n's0


          ,0
    2s2nn s
                      , nns0        —
                                          nm14.0
        -                ns°ns°         m'tn's0

Call the left hand matrix Q and the right-hand vector r. Unique non-

cooperative Nash equilibrum tariff vectors n1, n51 exist if Q      is
nonsi ngul ar:


(3.5)

                  =

            n51

Substituting these optimal tariffs into each country's welfare loss function,

we can compute the countries' lowest amount of welfare loss under the non-

cooperative Nash equilibrium: L1(ntl, 's1) and L2(tltl, nsl).

    To compute the cooperative Nash equilibrium, we first must determine the

security levels of welfare loss, J1 and 2' that countries and 1 and 2 can

assure themselves of should cooperative negotiations fail. One possibility is

that countries would revert to noncooperative Nash behavior that provides them

with welfare losses of:




                                                   -19-
(3.6)             =   L1(t1,   flsl), and



(3.7) 3 = L7Ut1,               flsl).



A second possibility is that tariffs remain as previously, hence:


(3.9) J1 =            L1(t°,s°),       and


(3.9) '2 =            L2(t°,s°).

The joint world welfare loss function that the two countries both seek to

minimize is now:


(3.10) L = CL1(t1,s1)                  —                      —
                                           •31][L2(t1,s1)         J2]

subject to the additional requirements that:


(3.11) L1(t1,s1) <J1, and


(3.12) L2(t1,s1) <             J,.

Forming the Lagrangian

              L +                  +
  c:;;L_-.=
                      x1(J1—L1)            x,(J2-L2),
and minimizing with respect to t1 and s yields the first order conditions:


              =   (L2—J2—xj)
                                  3L1        +
                                                 (L1—J1—x2)
                                                              L2        =   0 ,



              = (L2-J2-xj) L1 + (L1-J1-x2)                    2         =   0   ,




                                                         -20-
              > 0, )4(J—L]) =     0

     •J2-L2   > 0,    x,(32—L2) = 0

     X], A2 >    0.

Solving these equations produces the possibly nonunique set of cooperative

14ash tariffs Cl C5I           The welfare loss suffered by each country is

now '_1('t1, Csl) and L2('t1, cSI)

     Before relating the above theoretical constructs to empirically implied

welfare loss functions and their computed optimal tariffs, we make several

comparisons between the character of cooperative versus noncooperative

tariffs. The first point is that if security levels are the amounts of

welfare loss each country would incur from noncooperative tariff setting, then

each country gains an equal or lower level of welfare loss by cooperating over

not cooperating. This is illustrated in Figure 1. Point A represents the

noncooperative security levels of J1 for country 1 and J2 for country 2.

World iso-welfare loci are the rectangular hyperbolae radiating southwest from

the security point .         The welfare loss possibility frontier indicates the

minimum levels of loss that each country could achieve in tandem with the

other country's given loss. The welfare allocation that minimizes the world

welfare loss is indicated by point B: loss of L to country 1, and loss

of     to country 2. ?4ote that for such a point B to be superior in world

welfare to security point ,           it must provide both countries with at least as
much welfare as their security level, i.e.            <
                                                          J1, L < J2.
     If   the countries' security levels are poorer than their noncooperative
losses, as might be the case if the original tariffs          are retained, then it is




                                             —21-
                              Figure 1


                   Cooperation versus Noncooperation




                                                        A (security point)
Cl)
Cl)
0
       C
a)    L2


a)


Cl)




4-i
       B
0     L2
0
                                                             world welfare
                                                            iso-loss curves



               /                                               welfare loss
                                                                possibility
                                                                  frontier

           0
                                                     'Jul            L1

                          Country lts Welfare Loss
 possible that one of the countries could do worse under cooperation than
 noncooperative Nash. Refer back to Figure 1. Suppose C represents the

 noncooperative welfare loss allocation of L to country 1 and L to

country 2. Point A represents the security allocation of         and J2. The

cooperative solution with respect to security allocation A is point B. But

while point B gives both countries less loss than security level A, it gives

country 2 a better level of loss than it would receive under noncooperation,

   <
        L,   while giving country 1 a worse level of loss than noncooperation,

   >
        L.   Note also that while the iso-loss curves tend to favor

equal distributions of loss over unequal ones, it is still quite possible for

losses to be more unequally borne under cooperation than noncooperation.

       A final contrast between the character of optimal loss under cooperation

versus noncooperation is that in the cooperative equilibrium, a greater

percentage of a country's total loss will result from losses that the country

has complete control over, e.g., interproduct tariff variance loss and target

reduction loss (A1 and B1 for country 1, A2 and B2 for country 2),

than will occur in the noncooperative equilibrium. This is because under

cooperation, a country is willing to accept more personally avoidable loss if

it means that foreign countries are made significantly better off.

    In the following two sections we investigate first how well our proposed

welfare loss functions match those empirically implied by the statements of

U.S. and E.C. officials, then whether either or both of these two

theoretically computed equilibria match the observed outcome of the Tokyo

Round of tariff negotiations for these two trading blocs.




                                       -22-
4..   Selecting the Weights for the Welfare Loss Functions
      In   the preceding section, three characteristics of the tariff-cutting rule

to be negotiated in the Tokyo Round were singled out as being important

elements in the tariff-reducing goals of the United States and the European

Community. They are: the effect of the cutting formula on the degree of

disoersion among duty rates in each country; the depth of the average cut

produced by the cutting rule; and the relationship between average cuts in the

two trading blocs.

      t the outset of the Tokyo Round negotiations, the weighted average of

U.S. tariff rates over twenty-two ISIC product classes was 4.8 percent, while

the E.C.'s weighted average tariff rate over the same sectors was 7.0

 percent. 14/ While the average level of U.S. tariff protection was somewhat

 lower than the level in the European Community, tariff rates in the United

 States were more variable across product classes. The unweighted varianc.e in

 the initial rate structures of the United States and the European Community

 was 33.13 and 13.50, respectively.

      The U.S. was strongly in favor of a deep average cut, whereas the E.C.

 apDeared to attach less importance to this feature of a tariff-cutting rule.

 In contrast, the Community strongly favored a harmonization of tariff rates

 over different products, while U.S. negotiators did not appear to be

 particularly concerned about the variation of tariff rates. As in previous




 14/ These averages are calculated by summing the tariff revenue in each
 sector and dividing by the total value of imports in the twenty-two sectors.
 The tariff and trade data used in the analysis are taken from Alan V.
 Deardorff and Robert M. Stern, An Economic Analysis of the Effects of The
 Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations on the United States and the
 Other Major Industrialized Countries, MTN Studies 5, Committee on Finance,
 U.S. Senate, Committee Print, CP 96-15, pp. 26-30 and p. 149.



                                         -23-
negotiations, each country expected the average tariff reduction of the other
to   be approximately the same as its own average cut.

         The foregoing suggests that 1-, the U.S.'s desired tariff cut, was

greater than 1_2 the tariff cut desired by the E.C. Furthermore, it

suggests that the sum of the welfare weights that the U.S. attached to

interproduct variance, i.e., a1 + a2, was lower than the sum of the

weights that the Community attached to this feature of a cutting rule, i.e.,

     +          Statements by the negotiators representing the two trading
al        a2.
powers also indicate that the sum of the weights placed by the U.S. on the

target average duty reduction, i.e., b1 +        b2, was high compared to the
negotiations, each country expected the average tariff reduction of the other

to be approximately the same as its own average cut.

         The foregoing suggests that 1-h, the U.S.'s desired tariff cut, was

greater than 157 the tariff cut desired by the E.C. Furthermore, it

suggests that the sum of the welfare weights that the U.S. attached to

interproduct variance, i.e., a1 +       a2, was lower than the sum of the
weights that the Community attached to this feature of a cutting rule, i.e.,

     +
a1        a2.   Statements by the negotiators representing the two trading

powers also indicate that the sum of the weights placed by the U.S. on the

target average duty reduction, i.e., b1 +        b2, was high compared to the
E.C.s weighting of this characteristic, i.e., B1 +              Furthermore,
                                                          B2.
given the mercantilistic outlook of the negotiators, one can infer that each

country was more interested in reductions in the other country's variance and

average cut than in its own, i.e., a1 <
                                             a2, b1 < b2 and a1 > a2, B > 82.
         Additional information about theweights on the welfare loss functions

should be revealed by the sequence of proposals for a tariff-cutting rule.




                                          -24-
One would expect that the rules first proposed by the U.S. and by the E.C.

would tend to yield a low welfare loss for the proposing trading power

compared to the welfare loss for the other trading partner. However, the rule

finally settled upon should represent a compromise between these welfare

outcomes.

     The first serious discussion of specific formulas occurred at a May 1975

GATT meeting where suggestions for a cutting rule were presented by various

delegations. 15/ The United States, for example, proposed a 60 percent

across-the--board cut in tariffs, whereas the European Community proposed

cutting the tariff on each item by the level of the tariff on the item--and

repeating this several times. Japan proposed reducing all duties by a fixed

percentage, e.g., 60 percent and then adding a constant number of percentage

points, e.g., 3 percentage points, to the result. The Japanese proposal also

included a 5 percent floor below which no duties would be cut.

     There was little further progress in settling upon a formula until 1976.

                                                                  1.5x   +   50,
In March, 1976 the U.S. formally proposed a cutting rule of y =

where y is the percentage by which the tariff is cut, x is the initial percent

tariff rate, and the constant term, 50 percent, is the uniform element in the

formula. The U.S. also imposed a 60 percent cut ceiling on all rates

currently over 5 percent, since the U.S. law giving authority to reduce

tariffs contained such a ceiling. This formula reduced U.S. weighted average




15/ For a brief history of the Tokyo Round negotiations, see General
Nreement on Tariffs and Trade, The Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade
Negotiations, A Report by the Director-General of GATT, Geneva, April 1979.
In addition to this source, the following description is based on various
other GATT documents and on conversations with some of those who were involved
in the negotiations.



                                      -25—
rates from 4.8 to 2.0 percent or by 58 percent, and the Community's weighted

average rates from 7.0 to 3.4 percent or by 51 percent. The variance in

unweighted U.S. rates decreased from 33.18 to 5.41 under this formula, while

that of the E.C. declined from 13.50 to 2.02. The reaction of the Community

and the other participants was generally negative on the grounds that the

formula produced insufficient harmonization of tariffs. They pointed out that

it was essentially the old 60 percent cut proposal of the United States, since

it became a linear-cut rule of 60 percent for all rates initially above 6.67

percent.

   The Community made its proposal for a cutting rule in July, 1976. The

formula was y =   x repeated four times, where y is the percentage reduction and

x is the percentage on an item. ence if an item initially had a tariff of 20

percent, this figure would be cut by 20 percent down to 16 percent, the 16

percent reduced by 16 percent down to 13.44 percent, the 13.44 percent rsduced

by 13.44 percent down to 11.63 percent, and finally the 11.63 percent reduced

by 11.63 percent down to 10.28 percent. This cutting rule decreased the

weighted average tariff levels of the U.S. and the E.C. to 3.4 and 4.7

percent, respectively, or by 29 and 33 percent and their unweighted variance

to 4.37 and 3.34, respectively. The reaction of the United States and the

other participants was also generally critical, this time on the grounds that

the formula produced an insufficiently deep average cut. It was pointed out

that, even before any exceptions, the formula gave only a 33 percent average

cut in the E.C.'s own tariff schedule. The U.S. formula, in contrast, gave an

average cut of 51 percent.

    In summing up the accomplishments of the March meetings, the chairman of

the negotiating group (the Director-General of the GAIT) stated that a




                                      -26-
consensus appeared to be emerging that the tariff-cutting plan should contain
an important element of harmonization and should aim at a significant
reduction in duties.
    Japan and Switzerland took on the task of trying to come up with a

compromise formula that would meet these objectives, and they both suggested

new formulas at the next meeting in October, 1976. The Swiss formula was y =

lOOx/(14   +
               x),   where y is the percentage cut, and x is the existing percentage

duty. A 14 percent tariff, for example, would be reduced 50 percent under

this formula. The Japanese formula was y = 100(.7       -   3.5/x),   where y is the

percentage cut, x is the current percentage tariff, .7 is the uniform element

in the cutting formula, and 3.5 is the term that produces the harmonization.

An additional part of the Japanese proposal was that no tariffs that were

currently 5 percent or less were to be reduced. A 14 percent tariff is cut 45

percent under the Japanese cutting rule.

    The Comrnunity's initial reaction to both proposals was generally favorable

with the E.C. delegation noting in particular that both formulas contained an

element of harmonization. The U.S. also expressed interest in the two

proposals, but stated that the Japanese formula gave a smaller average

reduction for the major trading countries than did the Swiss formula. Besides

preferring the Swiss formula because of its deeper average cut, the U.S.

delegation objected to the 5 percent floor in the Japanese cutting rule and

stated that the U.S. would have great difficulty in accepting a rule which

excluded fully 17 percent of all developed country tariffs. The final outcome

of the negotiations was that the participants finally agreed on the Swiss




                                          -27—
formula. 16/ This rule cut U.S. weighted average tariffs to 3.1 percent or by

35 percent and E.C. weighted average tariffs to 4.3 percent or by 39 percent.

The unweighted tariff variance in the two countries was reduced to 4.35 for

the U.S. and to 2.55 for the Community. Interestingly, the variance for U.S.

rates--the main concern of the E.C.--was reduced slightly more under this

formula than under the Community's own suggested formula. But, in agreeing to

this cutting rule, the Community had to accept a considerably deeper average

cut in its rates than under its own formula. The U.S., for its part, seemed

quite willing to trade the deeper reduction in its variance for a deeper

average cut in the E.C.'s rates. The means and variances for the two

countries under the Swiss formula as well as the other cutting rules are given

in Table 1.

    Besides     satisfying the conditions set forth above concerning the relative
magnitude of the weights on the different welfare components, and on the -
relative      size of the weights of foreign versus domestic welfare components,

the weights selected should, as also noted above, yield a "reasonable"

progression of welfare losses from the actual sequence of negotiating

proposals. Specifically, one would expect the welfare loss for the United

States to be less under the U.S. formula than under the E.G. formula, and the

Community's loss under its proposed rule to be less than under the U.S.

formula. Finally, the Swiss formula should give an intermediate loss position

for both countries.

    D   set   of weights, that when inserted into the overall welfare loss

equations (2.9) and (2.10), fulfills all these conditions is as follows:



15/ Some countries, e.g., the E.C., used 16 as the constant term whereas
6Ehers, e.g., the U.S., used 14 as the constant term.



                                         -28-
(4.1) '1(t1,s)      = .03 i + .80   A2   1000 Bii + 4000 812 + 50 C, and


(4.2)   L2(t1,t1)   =   .80 Al + .10 A2 + 3000 B21 ÷ 500 822 + 50   C,



where i = .40 and c52 = .32.

     The resulting losses for the United States and the European Comunity

under the three tariff-cutting rules as well as under the initial set of

tariff rates are plotted in Figure 2.



5.   Calculated same Theoretic Equilibria and Their Relationship to Formula and
     Actual Rates

     Using the welfare weights selected in the previous section, we now compute
the theoretic 4ash noncooperative and cooperative equilibria. To compute the

cooperative equilibrium, we alternatively use the initial tariffs, the actual

post-Tokyo Round tariffs, and the noncooperative optimum tariffs as security

levels. Table 2 lists the home and foreign welfare losses of the United

States for the three components of the loss function (together with the

overall loss) for these four equilibria as well as for the three proposed

cutting formulas, the initial tariffs, and the actual post-Tokyo Round rates.

Table 3 gives the same information for the European Community. The four

theoretic equilibria      and the actual post-Tokyo overall losses for the two
countries   are also included in Figure 2.

     The overall welfare losses of the U.S. and the E.C. are lower under the

noncooperative and all the cooperative solutions than under the Swiss

formula.    The noncooperative and cooperative solutions are also better for the
Community than either their own proposed cutting-rule or the rule set forth by




                                           -29-
                                    Figure 2


                       U.S. arid E.C. Welfare Losses




    E.C. loss
           5.0.



                                               S   Pre-negotiation
           4.0




           3.0
                               • Actual post-Tokyo



           2.0




           1.0     U.S. -proposed
                  (   -Swiss-proposed
                      •1E.C. -proposed
Noncooperative
                  Cooperative (post-Tokyo security)


      /7                 0.5         1.10          1.5       2.0
                                                                     U.S. loss

    /              Cooperative (prenegotiation security)
  Cooperative (noncooperative security)
the United States. In the case of the United States, the noncooperative

solution,    and the cooperative one using the noncooperative solution as the

security point, are    better than all the proposed formulas, but the cutting

rule proposed by the U.S. is better for    itself than the other two cooperative
solutions.    The actual post-Tokyo Round rates yield welfare losses for both

countries that are less than their losses from the pre-Tokyo rates, but

greater than for all the game theoretic solutions as well as all the proposed

cutting formulas.

    Misspecificatiori of   the negotiating model,   both in selecting the welfare

functions and equilibrium concept, along with incorrect empirical selection of

weights may explain the failure of this model to predict precisely the

actually negotiated tariffs. There is another possible reason, however.         To

appreciate why the actual welfare losses for the two trading blocs are greater

than what the outcomes would have been if any of the formulas had been

implemented or plausible game theoretic behavior had been followed, it is

necessary to understand that there were essentially two distinct parts to the

negotiations in the Tokyo (and Kennedy) Rounds. The first part, at which the

cutting rule was negotiated, was conducted by the chief negotiators of the

various countries with comparatively little political pressure from particular

economic sectors. Perceived national goals such as achieving a deep average

cut in others' tariff rates or a significant reduction in the variance in

their rates dominated the negotiating issues. The working hypothesis was that

there would be a minimum of tariff item exceptions from the generally agreed

cut.

       Once the cutting formula was agreed upon, the second stage of the

negotiations began, namely, determining the specific items to be excluded from




                                        -30-
 formula tariff reductions and making sure that overall reciprocity with other

 major trading partners was achieved. The internal process of determining

 exceptions involved a much broader group of interests than deciding upon the

 more general formulas to propose. Particular industries and labor

 organizations now brought strong political pressure on members of Congress,

Cabinet officials, and the President, to exclude their sectors from any cut,

or at least from the full formula cut. Governments vary greatly in their

ability and willingness to withstand these pressures. In the Kennedy Round,

for example, the strong support of President Kennedy for a deep average cut

enabled U.S. negotiators to stand up quite successfully to these lobbying

pressures and to keep the initial exceptions to a minimum. Community and

Japanese negotiators were less successful. In the Tokyo Round, the

Community's initial offer list contained no exceptions to the Swiss cutting

rule, whereas there were many exceptions in the initial U.S. offer list. In

order to produce a significant average cut despite these exceptions, the U.S.

actually offered cuts of more than 60 percent on many items with rates of 5

percent or less. (The 1974 Trade Act permitted cuts of up to 100 percent on

this group of rates.)

    After the initial sets of formal offers in January 1978, the various

countries first attempted to improve the offers of others by requesting

specific additions to the offer lists. After this stage, which did not appear

to be very successful, the process of pulling back to achieve reciprocity

began. For example, in April 1978, the Community announced that, in view of

the exceptions of the other countries and its unwillingness to give

compensation for greater than formula cuts, it would withdraw formula cuts

either partially or totally on a specified list of products unless the




                                    -31-
exceptions of others were withdrawn. Apparently their announcement produced

few tangible results so in July they formally withdrew these items from

formula cuts. A rough sampling from their initial and July 1978 offers

indicates that about 20 percent of the tariff items were withdrawn from the

full formula cut at this time.

    In February 1979, the United States announced it would withdraw its

greater-than-formula cuts at the end of the month, and this was done. Then,

in March 1979 the Community presented its final offer list which involved a

further pullback in order to achieve what it regarded as reciprocity.     A rough

estimate of the extent of this additional pullback is that it involved another

15 percent of all tariff items.

    In reading the relevant GATT documents and talking with individuals

directly involved in the negotiations, one concludes that there was

insufficient effort made by the participants or the GATT Secretariat to

minimize the pulibacks designed to achieve reciprocity for the individual

participants. Many of the pullbacks in both the Kennedy and Tokyo Rounds were

on items on which there was not much domestic political pressure for

less-than—formula   cuts. It almost seemed as if the negotiators were content
to call what had been achieved a great success and to conclude the long
process of negotiation as quickly as possible. However, the main point to
emphasize is that the process of determining exceptions and achieving
 reciprocity resulted in a considerably different outcome than what would have

occurred if the cutting rules were strictly followed.




                                       -32—
6. Conclusions

    Using actual trade and tariff data for the United States and the European

Community, this paper has attempted to indicate how a trade negotiation such

as the Tokyo Round, which in its first stage seeks to achieve agreement upon a

general tariff-cutting formula, can be interpreted as an effort by the

participants to minimize individual, multidimensonal welfare loss

functions--each component weighted differently for the two trading blocs. The

different components and specific weights on these components were selected on

the basis of statements by the negotiators as to what their objectives were,

and also on the basis of what would give a logical sequence of welfare changes

as various formulas were proposed. Using these weights, the Nash

noncooperative equilibrium and three separate Nash cooperative equilibria

(differing only in their security points), were then calculated.

    These welfare outcomes were compared with those given by the initial and

final tariff rates, using the same weights. While the final set of rates

improved the welfare position of both the United States and the European

Comunity as compared to their initial positions, the final outcome was

inferior to that given by the various formulas or the different game theoretic

outcomes. It was noted that the second stage of a negotiation, where

exceptions are determined and pulibacks to achieve perceived reciprocity are

made, is likely to result in such an inferior outcome. Various welfare

considerations dealing with the weights placed on individual sector that are

not included in our model enter at this stage. Of course, an incorrectly

specified model could also account for this result. In any event, thinking

about trade negotiations in the terms outlined in this paper would seem to be

useful for improving the negotiating process in the future, especially with

regard to minimizing pulibacks for reciprocity purposes.


                                    -33-
                           Table 1

    Characteristics  of Weighted Average Tariffs Rates and
                  Uriweighted Tariff Variances
                         (in   percent)


                                 U.S.                   E.C.
                          Mean       Variance    Mean      Variance


Pre-negotiatiOn            4.8          33.18    7.0           13.50

U.S. proposed formula      2.0            5.41   2.8           2.02

E.C. proposed formula      3.4            4.37   4.7           3.34

Swiss-proposed formula     3.1            4.35   4.3           2.55

Actual                     3.3          22.03    5.2           10.38




                                          -34-
                                           Table 2

                                   U.S. Welfare Losses



Tariff Structure       a1A1        a2A2       b1B11     b2B12     cC       Sum


Pre-negotiation       0.1533      0.4250     0.1175    0.6079   0.0000   1.3037

U.S.-proposed         0.0237      0.0630     0.0002    0.0004   0.0044   0.0916

E.C.-proposed         0.0203      0.1040     0.0340    0.1201   0.0198   0.2981

Swi ss-proposed       0.0200      0.0793     0.0219    0.0703   0.0680   0.2595

Actual post-
  Tokyo               0.0972      0.3100     0.0239    0.2013   0.1124   0.7448

Noncooperative
  opti mum            0.0055      0.0267     0.0051    0.0284   0.0000   0.0658

Cooperative
  optimum             0.0011      0.0461     0.0142    0.0612   0.0001   0.1227
(prenegoti ati on
  security)

Cooperative
  optimum             0.0010      0.0318     0.0173    0.0154   0.0002 0.0658
(noncooperative
  security)

Cooperative
  optimum             0.0011      0.0464     0.0142    0.0636   0.0001   0.1254
(post-Tokyo
  security)



    ai A1    - U.S.   loss from U.S. tariff variability

    a 2      -   U.S. loss from   E.C.    tariff variability
    b1B1j    - U.S.   loss from U.S.      tariff reduction
    b2 812 -     U.S. loss from   E.C. tariff reduction
   cC        -   U.S. loss from   unequal tariff reduction
   Sum       —   Overall U.S. loss



                                              -35—
                                           Table 3

                                   E.C. Welfare Losses



Tariff Structure a1A1              2A2        B1B21      B2822              Sum


Pre-negoti ati on      4.0868    0.0531      0.1003    0.0216    0.0000   4.2618

U.S. -proposed         0.6327    0.0079      0.0742    0.0163    0.0044   0.7354

E .C .-proposed        0.5402    0.0130      0.0339    0.0016    0.0198   0.6084

Swi ss-proposed        0.5343    0.0099      0.0247    0.0031    0.0680   0.6400

Actual post-
  Tokyo                2.5916    0.0387      0.0211    0.0018    0.1124   2.7656

Noncooperative
  optimum              0.1470    0.0033      0.0749    0.0086    0.0000   0.2339

Cooperative
  optimum              0.0283    0.0058      0.0837    0.0056    0.0001   0.1228
(prenegotiation
  sec u r i ty)


Cooperative
  opti mu'n            0.0277    0.0040      0.1893    0.0127    0.0002   0.2339
(noncooperative
  security)

Cooperative
  optimum              0.0306     0.0058     0.0819    0.0055    0.0001   0.1239
(post-Tokyo
  security)



              - E.C.   loss from U.S. tariff variability

     a2A2
              -   E.C. loss from E.C. tariff variability

     81B21 - E.C. loss from U.S. tariff reduction

     B 2 B2 2 -   E.C. loss from E.C.      tariff reduction
     'rC
              -   E.C. loss from   unequal tariff reduction
     Sum      -   Overall   E.C. loss




                                               -36-
