NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE-IN-GOODS AND TRADE-IN-TASKS:
AN INTEGRATING FRAMEWORK
Richard Baldwin
Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
Working Paper 15882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w15882

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2010

This paper is a complete transformation (including substantial new results) of our working paper circulated
in 2006 and 2007 under the title “Offshoring: General equilibrium effects on wages, production and
trade.” We thank conference and seminar participants at the National University of Singapore, Hitotsubashi
University, the Paris School of Economics, Oxford, Geneva, LSE, Tokyo, Warwick, Manchester, CORE/UCL
and University of Toronto for comments, especially Pol Antràs, Christopher Bliss, Holger Breinlich,
Fabrice Defever, Marco Fugazza, Masa Fujita, Taiji Furusawa, Jota Ishikawa, Sébastien Jean, Ron
Jones, Jim Markusen, Marc Melitz, Peter Neary, Volker Nocke, Toshi Okubo, Gianmarco Ottaviano,
Henry Overman, Alessandra Tucci, Thierry Verdier, Pierre-Louis Vézina, David Vines, Adrian Woods
and Dao-Zhi Zeng. We especially thank Gene Grossman and Estaban Rossi-Hansberg for comments
on early drafts in September 2006 and November 2006. Robert-Nicoud is also a visiting scholar at
Princeton, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Richard Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade-in-goods and trade-in-tasks: An Integrating Framework
Richard Baldwin and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
NBER Working Paper No. 15882
April 2010
JEL No. F11,F12,F16
ABSTRACT
Our paper integrates results from trade-in-task theory into mainstream trade theory by developing tradein-task analogues to the four famous theorems (Heckscher-Ohlin, factor price equalisation, Stolper-Samuelson,
and Rybczynski) and showing the standard gains-from-trade theorem does not hold for trade-in-tasks.
We show trade-in-tasks creates intraindustry trade in a Walrasian economy, and derive necessary and
sufficient conditions for analyzing the impact of trade-in-tasks on wages and production. Extensions of
the integrating framework easily accommodate monopolistic competition and two-way offshoring/
trade-in-tasks.
Richard Baldwin
Graduate Institute, Geneva
Cigale 2
1010 Lausanne Switzerland
and CEPR
and also NBER
baldwin@graduateinstitute.ch
Frédéric Robert-Nicoud
Université de Genève
24 rue du Général-Dufour
CH - 1211 Genève 4
frederic.robert-nicoud@unige.ch
f.l.robert-nicoud@lse.ac.uk

1. Introduction
A growing list of economists argue that the nature of international trade is changing in important
ways (inter alia, Jones and Kierzkowski 1990, Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2006, 2008,
Blinder 2006, 2009, Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter 2005, and Hummels, Ishii and Yi 2001).
Instead of simply creating more trade in goods, global integration is increasingly marked by
“trade in tasks” – as Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) labelled it – that is to say, more trade
of intermediate goods and services due to the widespread emergence of offshoring.
This trend has elicited a substantial number of theoretical contributions that characterise the
impact of this type of international commerce. To date, this body of theory is marked by a wide
range of cases where unexpected outcomes are common – many of which seem to contradict
standard trade theory’s received wisdom.
The goal of our paper is threefold. First, we present a simple but flexible analytic framework in
which both trade-in-goods and trade-in-tasks arise endogenously in response to exogenous
changes in the cost of moving goods and ideas. Second, we use the framework to integrate
results from trade-in-tasks theory into mainstream trade theory. For example, we develop tradein-tasks analogues to the four famous trade-in-goods theorems: Heckscher-Ohlin (HO), factor
price equalisation (FPE), Stolper-Samuelson, and Rybczynski, and show that the standard gainsfrom-trade theorem for trade-in-goods does not hold for trade-in-tasks (i.e. some trade-in-goods
is always better than none, but the same cannot be said of trade-in-tasks when trade-in-goods is
already possible). Third, we show that our framework can integrate the many special-case results
in the offshoring/trade-in-tasks theory. Additionally we show that trade-in-tasks creates
intraindustry in a Walrasian economy, and that extensions of the framework easily accommodate
monopolistic competition and two-way offshoring/trade-in-tasks.
Integrating trade-in-tasks theory with trade-in-goods theory is a challenge because they pose
fundamentally different questions. Starting from a list of goods, factors and countries, mainstay
trade theory studies the switch from no-trade to free-trade in goods. Trade-in-tasks/offshoring
theory tackles a different intellectual exercise. Starting from an equilibrium where trade-in-goods
exists, the theorist considers the impact of expanding the list of tradable goods – specifically of
allowing ‘fragments’ of previously bundled production processes to be produced abroad, thus
giving rise to trade in intermediate goods and services, i.e. trade-in-tasks.
2

The key to our integration is a transformation that permits analysis of trade-in-tasks’ general
equilibrium effects using the HO toolkit. The transformation turns on the insight that offshoring
is like “shadow migration” – i.e. it is as if foreign factors migrated to the offshoring nation but
were paid foreign wages. For example, the HO and HOV theorems fail to predict the tradepattern impact of trade-in-tasks; we show that the theorems hold when “shadow migration
adjusted” endowments are used instead of actual endowments. Foreign factors employed in
offshore production are potentially observable, so the resulting propositions should be testable
with firm-level datasets. On the dual side, the vector of cost-saving generated by “shadow
migration” can be use to transform the FPE and Stolper-Samuelson theorems in ways that predict
factor-price effects. The trade-in-tasks equilibrium conditions thus transformed, the HO toolkit is
used to establish necessary and sufficient conditions for the wage, price, output, trade, and gainsfrom-trade effects of allowing trade-in-tasks.
1.1. The theoretical literature
The early HO theory incorporated trade in intermediate goods (Batra and Casas 1973, Woodland
1977, Dixit and Grossman 1982, and Helpman 1984) and the 1990s saw a number of informal
analyses of fragmentation as well as some formal modelling (Deardorff 1998a, b, and Venables
1999). Trade-in-tasks issues, however, were more recently crystallised by Kohler (2004a),
Markusen (2006), Antràs et al. (2006), and Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006, 2008).
The most commonly cited reference in the early offshoring/fragmentation literature is the
informal analysis of Jones and Kierzkowski (1990), which seems to be the first to leverage the
insight that fragmentation acts as technological progress and should therefore be expected – as
per Jones (1965, p.567) – to have complex wage effects. This line of modelling typically worked
with small open economies where fragmentation occurs in only one sector and in one direction.
The analysis is largely verbal or graphical with the focus firmly on wage effects.1 The gallery of
special cases varies along three axes: the offshoring nation’s factor abundance, the factor
intensity of the fragmenting sector and fragment offshored. Jones and Kierzkowski (1990), for

1

See Jones and Marjit (1992), Arndt (1997, 1999), Jones and Findlay (2000, 2001), Jones and
Kierzkowski (1998, 2000), Jones, Kierzkowski and Leonard (2002), and Francois (1990a, b, c).
3

instance, argue that workers whose jobs are “lost” to offshoring may, somewhat paradoxically,
see their wages rise in some special cases.
Among the mathematical formalisations of fragmentation, Deardorff (1998a,b) studies
fragmentation in a multi-cone HO model where cost-saving offshoring is driven by non-factor
price equalisation. The focus is on factor prices and showing that trade-in-tasks need not foster
wage convergence. Venables (1999) works with a 2x2x2 HO model where offshoring is cost
saving due to non-factor price equalisation arising from a factor-intensity reversal.
Fragmentation occurs in only one industry and in one direction. Numerical simulations and
Lerner-Pearce diagrammatic analysis are employed to study examples where trade-in-tasks
produces wage convergence and divergence. Kohler (2004a) works with a small-open-economy
specific-factor model where fragmentation can only occur in one sector. The focus is on the
reward to the specific capital that moves offshore when fragmentation occurs, and the overall
welfare effects on the home nation. Markusen (2006) works with a multi-cone HO model that he
simulates numerically assuming that fragmentation occurs in the skill-intensive sector and the
fragment is of middle skill-intensity. He typically finds that skilled workers gain. Kohler (2004b)
works with a small open economy where fragmentation/offshoring can only happen in one
sector, using the Dixit and Grossman (1982) model with a continuum of intermediate goods; he
shows that cheaper offshoring raises or lowers factor prices according to the relative factor
intensity of the two sectors and the fragments offshored. No formal results are presented on
production and trade effects, nor are necessary and sufficient conditions developed in any of
these papers.
More recently, Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) present a perfect competition model where
two final-goods are produced using two continuums of tasks, each employing only one type of
labour. Offshoring arises endogenously and the range of tasks offshored varies continuously with
the cost of offshoring. The resulting wage effects are ambiguous in general, but they highlight a
special case where both sectors offshore only unskilled labour tasks and yet unskilled wages rise
while skilled wages are unchanged (see detailed analysis of this case in Section 3.4 below). The
paper formalises the analogy between offshoring and technological change (the ‘productivity
effect’) showing that trade-in-tasks, unlike trade-in-goods, can generate gains for all factors in
the offshoring nation. The paper establishes necessary and sufficient conditions for wagechanges in the two-factor-two-good small open economy case. It also explores the novel “labour
4

supply effect” that influences wages when there are more factors than goods. Trade and
production effects are not explored.
Rodriguez-Clare (2010) embodies the Grossman-Rossi-Hansberg approach in a Ricardian model
à la Eaton and Kortum (2002). He studies the impact of trade-in-tasks on the gains from trade for
the home and host nations. Global welfare rises due to offshoring’s productivity effect, but
terms-of-trade effect can mean that the home nation losses despite this. Antràs et al. (2006, 2008)
propose a model in which all tasks are potentially offshorable. The focus is on the formation,
composition and size of (cross-border) teams when workers have different abilities (skills), and
countries have different skill endowments. Among other results, they show that improved
communication technology yields larger teams and larger wage inequalities. Their model also
provides a trade-induced explanation for the rise in returns to skills.
In summary, the trade-in-tasks/offshoring literature illustrates that standard trade theorems are
not good at predicting the wage effects of allowing trade-in-tasks. The literature has not
systematically explored the production and trade-pattern effects, nor has any attempt been made
to systematically integrate the predictions of trade-in-tasks models with standard trade theory.
1.2. Organisation of paper
The next section introduces notation by presenting a slightly modified HO model. Section 3
considers the impact of allowing offshoring/trade-in-tasks. Section 4 considers trade-in-tasks
when the offshored intermediate goods/services can be sold to local firms instead of only being
re-imported to the home nations as in the standard models. Section 5 shows the framework is
flexible enough to be easily extended to allow for monopolistic competition and two-way
offshoring. Section 6 concludes.

2. Trade in goods
To fix notation, this section presents an HO model modified slightly à la Trefler (1993); the
modification creates an incentive for offshoring when the possibility arises in Section 3.
There are two countries, Home and Foreign (Foreign variables distinguished by asterisks), F
factors of production, and I perfectly competitive industries ( f  1,..., F and i  1,..., I index
factors and industries respectively). The factor price, goods price, factor endowment, production,
5

consumption and import vectors are denoted w  {w f } , p  { pi } , V  {V f } , X  { X i } , C  {C i }
and M  {M i } .2 The I  F matrix A(w )  {a fi (w )} and its transpose A T summarise Home’s

constant returns technology with typical element a fi giving the cost-minimizing input
requirement of factor f in industry i as a function of w. Tastes are homothetic and identical
across nations. We adopt standard regularity conditions to ensure that a unique equilibrium exists
with diversified production. 3 Our departure from the standard model is that Home is technically
superior in the Hicks-neutral sense:
Assumption 1 (homothetic technologies). All Foreign unit-input requirements are  > 1

times higher than Home’s for any w* equal to w, (or – since factor demands are
homogenous of degree zero – proportional to w).
Such Hicks-neutral technology differences do not create Ricardian motives for trade. As is well
known, the model can be mechanically transformed into a standard HO model by defining
Foreign factor supplies in ‘effective units’, i.e. dividing V f* by the technology gap . We denote
effective units of factors by “~”, so the world factor endowment in effective units is
 w  V  V* /  .
V
The autarky equilibriums are characterised by market-clearing conditions M* = 0 and M = 0 as
well as I pricing conditions and F employment conditions in each nation, which in familiar
notation are:

p  Aw ,

p*   A* w *

V  AT X ,

V*   A*T X*

(1)

where the arguments are suppressed, so A(w) and A(w*) are written as A and A*.

2

Vectors and matrices are denoted by bold letters; variables and parameters by italics, and Z > N
means that each element of Z exceeds the corresponding element of N.
3

The condition is that the V’s lie in the Chipman (1967) ‘diversification cone’, i.e. the space
spanned by the columns of A T evaluated at equilibrium factor prices.
6

When trade becomes free, goods prices are equalised (law of one price), goods-markets clear
globally (M* + M = 0), and (1) characterises the equilibrium but with a common p. Under
standard regularity conditions, equilibrium production and price vectors are strictly positive.4
Throughout the paper, we assume A is invertible in which case the law-of-one-price can, and
assuming no factor intensity reversals, must imply effective factor price equalisation (FPE),
i.e. w   w* – a fact established by simple manipulations of (1) using the fact that A = A* when
w = w*.5 With homothetic preferences, the common p, and A = A* due to effective FPE, the
~
effective-factor-content of C must be sV w (s is Home’s share of world income). The factor
content of Home production is V, so the pattern of trade must respect the HOV and HO
theorems:
~
M  ( A T ) 1 ( sV w  V )

 w V
A T M  sV

(2)

The third and fourth standard theorems consider the impact on w of an exogenous variation in p
(Stolper-Samuelson theorem) and the impact on X of an exogenous variation of V
(Rybczynski theorem); these follow from simple manipulations of (1) given that A = A* under
free trade.
The standard gains-from-trade (GFT) theorem states that some trade is better than none –
ignoring intra-national distribution issues (Ohyama 1972, Smith 1982, Dixit 1985). As the GFT
theorem analogue for trade-in-tasks does not hold (see Proposition 3), we review why it holds for
trade-in-goods. By revealed preference arguments (Samuelson 1939, 1962, Kemp 1962), one
equilibrium is preferred to another if the inferior equilibrium’s consumption vector is affordable
at the preferred equilibrium’s prices. Denoting Home’s autarky consumption vector as Ca, the
trade equilibrium is preferred by Home if p(C  Ca )  0 . Using M’s definition, the condition can
be written as p(M  M a )  p( X  X a )  0 . This inequality holds because: (i) the first term is zero
due to balanced trade (pM = 0) and by autarky’s definition (Ma = 0), and (ii) profit maximisation

4

See the appendix of our working paper (http://www.dagliano.unimi.it/media/wp2008_250.pdf)
for necessary and sufficient conditions for existence.
5

While invertibility of A is far from innocuous (in particular, it requires I = F), the implications
of relaxing the assumption are well understood (Ethier 1984).

7

by Home firms implies the second term is positive. A symmetric result holds for Foreign, so both
nations gain from trade. The logic holds even for partial liberalisations of autarky (Dixit 1985).

3. Trade in tasks
This section modifies the model to allow trade-in-tasks. Production in industry I involves Ni
tasks indexed by t  1,..., N i , Ni  2. Tasks are either segments of the physical production process
(so the task’s output is an intermediate good, say wheels) or a slice of the necessary factor inputs
(so the task’s output is a productive service, say accounting services). In the model described
above, all tasks were bundled into the unit-input-coefficient vectors {a fX (w )}Ff 1 . This implicitly

assumed that all tasks in a given production process had to be performed in a single nation. Here
we consider an exogenous change that allows the production process to function even when tasks
are spatially unbundled – thus opening the door to offshore production and the attendant trade-intasks. More specifically, each task involves a non-negative quantity of each factor f, so with
constant returns, a fi can be written as the sum of task-level coefficients:
a fi (w )  t i1 a fit (w ) ;
N

 f  1,..., F ; i  1,..., I

(3)

where a fit denotes the unit input requirement of factor f for task t in sector i. This allows
substitutability of factors in the performance of individual tasks, but not of tasks. For, example if
making wheels is one task then each car requires exactly 4 wheels; extra wheels cannot be
substituted for the engine. A key additional assumption is:
Assumption 3 (firm-specific technologies). Firms that offshore a task can do so using their own
nation’s technology.6
This makes offshoring economical despite effective FPE. Home firms can combine their superior
technology with lower Foreign factor prices, so Home-to-Foreign offshore may be economic;
Foreign-to-Home offshoring will never be economic. One interpretation of this assumption is
6

The concept of what constitutes a firm does not seat easily with our otherwise Walrasian
model. Section 5 shows that our results all got through in a monopolistic competition trade
model where firms are well-defined; here we stick with the HO setting to improve comparison
with the four theorems.

8

that Foreign workers are themselves as productive or as well educated as Home workers but that
Foreign technology or management practices are inferior to Home’s (Bloom and Van Reenen
2007).
To be concrete about the exogenous changes that allow trade-in-tasks, we introduce
“coordination costs” i.e. the cost of exchanging information necessary to coordinate various tasks
into a single production process. We introduce two types of coordination costs, within- and
between-firm costs:
Assumption 4 (within- and between-firm coordination costs). It costs  it  0 to offshore taskt in sector-i to Foreign when other tasks are undertaken within the firm; it costs an
additional  it  0 when the task is done by a separate firm.
We think of these as the cost of moving ideas internationally and informally associate lower 
and  with advances in information and communication technology. Following standard
offshoring theory, it varies across tasks. Routine tasks, which are easily codified, are cheaper to
offshore than complex tasks that require frequent face-to-face interactions. To integrate trade-intasks results with trade-in-goods theory (where the standard thought experiment is autarky-tofree-trade), we focus on extreme changes in it. For the routine tasks, which we call type-1 tasks,
the switch is from prohibitive to zero. For complex tasks, type-2 tasks, the coordination costs
remain prohibitive. Without further loss of generality, we set N i  2 for all i. Task t  1 is the set
of all tasks that can be offshored at zero coordination cost; task t  2 is the set of tasks that are
prohibitively expensive to offshore.
In many offshoring models (e.g. Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008), the offshored tasks are
provided only within the firm; no sales to local unrelated firms are allowed. As this within-firmonly assumption affects the general equilibrium in an important way, and it is not the only
reasonable assumption, we consider variation in  it  0 that helps or hinders between-firm sales.
Depending upon the nature of the task, it may be possible to coordinate production even when
some tasks are performed by other firms – especially when the task does not involve firmspecific services or components. In keeping with trade theory traditions, we consider two polar
cases. The first takes the ’s as sufficiently high to make inter-firm trade-in-tasks uneconomical,

9

i.e.  i1 ,  i 2   . The second takes  i1  0 so the output of offshored tasks production can be
bought by both Home and Foreign firms. We refer to the first case as the “no local sales” case,
and the second as the “local sales” case. We study the no-local-sales case in the remainder of this
section; Section 4 analyses the local-sales case.

3.1. Free trade in tasks: No-local-sales of offshored tasks
To explore the impact of trade-in-tasks, we start from the trade-in-goods equilibrium and – in the
spirit of trade theory – consider the impact of an exogenous drop in  it . Specifically, the
coordination costs for offshore production of type-1 tasks (routine) switch from prohibitive to
zero, while the coordination costs for type-2 tasks (complex) remain prohibitive. By the usual
cost-savings logic, all Home production of type-1 tasks is offshored to Foreign (assuming
standard regularity conditions that ensure diversified production in both economies).7 Formally:
Proposition 1 (trade-in-tasks occurs). Under regularity conditions that assure diversified
production, all type-1 tasks are offshored from Home to Foreign in the trade-in-tasks
equilibrium.
Proof. Suppose that trade in type-1 tasks was possible but none occurred in equilibrium. As this
prospective equilibrium is identical to the trade-in-goods equilibrium, w would equal w*, so by
Assumption 3 an atomistic firm deviating from the prospective equilibrium would reduce costs
by offshoring its type-1 tasks. The resulting pure profit contradicts the definition of a competitive
equilibrium, so some trade-in-tasks occurs. To show that all Home firms offshore all type-1
tasks, note that any firm that did not fully exploit the cost-saving opportunity would earn
negative profits when competing with firms that did – provided only that w  w*. This factor
price inequality is assured by diversified production as it is not possible for Foreign firms using
the inferior technology to be competitive with Home firms unless w  w* by the pricing
expressions in (1) (with p* = p). QED.

7

The appendix of our working paper (http://www.dagliano.unimi.it/media/wp2008_250.pdf)

provides exact necessary and sufficient conditions for diversification in the 2x2x2 version of the
model.
10

Given Proposition 1, Home’s pricing and employment equations reflect Foreign-factor usage (for
type-1 tasks), while Foreign’s pricing condition is unaffected (Foreign firms continue to use
Foreign technology and pay Foreign wages). Foreign’s employment condition, however, reflects
offshoring employment. In the no-local-sales case, all offshore task production is re-imported to
Home, so Foreign employment in the offshore sector is proportional to Home’s production
vector. Formally, using the subscript ‘O’ (for ‘offshoring’) to indicate trade-in-task equilibrium
variables:
p O  ( A O  A1 )w O  A*1 w *O ,

pO   A*O w *O
*
*T
V*   A*T
O X O  A1 XO

V  ( A OT  A1T ) XO ,

(4)

where A O  A(w O ) , A 1  {a fi1 (w O )} , A *1  {a fi1 (w *O )} , and A*O  A(w*O ) . From (4), we see
the first main difference between trade-in-goods and trade-in-tasks:
Proposition 2 (effective factor price divergence). Unless there exists a real number  in the
unit interval such that A1   A , trade-in-tasks forces a divergence of (effective) factor
prices. ( A1   A is the knife-edge case where the sets of type-1 and type-2 tasks have
identical factor intensity.)
Proof. The law of one price holds, so ( A O  A1 )w O  A*1 w *O   A*O w*O given (4). If Proposition 1



were false and effective FPE held, then w O   w *O for some   1 and by Assumption 1, we


would have A*O  A O and A1*  A1 , implying ( A O  A 1 )w O   1 (A O  A 1 )w O . This
expression can be true only if: (i) all factor prices are zero, which violates the zero profit
condition; (ii) A1 = 0, i.e. no offshoring occurs, which violates Proposition 1; or (iii) the factor
intensity of type-1 tasks are exactly proportional to aggregate factor intensity in each industries,
i.e. A1   A for some   [0,1) . Thus the supposition that effective FPE occurs under trade in
task must be false unless (iii) is true. QED.
Intuition for this result is simple. As authors from Jones and Kierzkowski (1990) to Grossman
and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) have argued, offshoring/fragmentation/trade-in-tasks is akin to
technological progress for the offshoring nation. As the new trade involves a subset of tasks and
offshoring is unidirectional, the technological change is non-homothetic and this destroys
effective FPE. Intuition is further served by deviating from the long-standing tradition in the
11

fragmentation/offshoring literature by considering the case where all tasks are offshorable. In
this extreme case, no goods are produced using Foreign technology as such goods would be
uncompetitive with goods produced using Home technology. In short, Home technology
supplants Foreign technology globally, resulting in perfect factor price equalisation.
Perhaps the most robust theoretical finding in trade theory is the HOV theorem. Does this hold
when trade-in-tasks as well as trade-in-goods occurs? Given homothetic preferences, Home’s
consumption vector is proportional to world output, i.e. C O  sX Ow , however solving for X O and
X *O from (4):

M O  sXOW  XO





T 1
* T 1
 T
 s I  ( A*O T ) 1 A*T
1  ( A O  A 1 ) V  ( A O ) V *

 ( A OT  A1T ) 1 V

(5)

The only circumstance in which this reduces to the standard HO expression in (2) is when the
offshoring matrices A 1 and A *1 are both zero – i.e. when no offshoring occurs. In short, given
Proposition 1, we can say that the HO theorem breaks down with trade-in-tasks.
The GFT theorem also breaks down – a result established by application of the Dixit (1985)
technique for comparing restricted trading equilibriums.8 Under our Walrasian assumptions, the
cost of combining the output of type-1 and type-2 sets of tasks into a consumable good is zero,
so we can readily apply Dixit’s result. We think of there being 2I goods (the two sets of tasks for
each of the I goods) whose ‘shadow prices’ are the actual marginal production costs (i.e.
including offshoring in the trade-in-tasks equilibrium). The relevant GFT condition is therefore

p O ( CO  C )  0 where bars indicate the artificially extended vectors, and the price vector
consists of the shadow prices (marginal costs). As before, this implies

(p  pO )M  pO ( XO  X)  0 due the definition of imports and the fact that trade balance implies
p M  p O M O  0 . Profit maximisation assures that pO ( XO  X) is positive, but the term
(p  pO )M can be positive or negative; indeed, this is the Laspeyres index of Home’s terms-of8

In independent work, Markusen (2010) derives a result; assuming all goods are traded
domestically and some also internationally, he shows that allowing more to be traded
internationally yields ambiguous GFT with a terms of trade improvement being a sufficient
condition for a gain.
12

trade loss when trade-in-tasks is allowed. Offshoring could, for example, boost global production
of Home exports more than Home’s imports, engendering a terms-of-trade loss. Relative output,
however, could fall in the opposite direction, so the terms-of-trade impact is ambiguous.
Isomorphic reasoning implies Foreign GFT are also not assured, but the zero-sum nature of
terms-of-trade effects alerts us to the fact that at least one nation must gain from offshoring. If
goods prices are unaffected by trade-in-tasks, Home gains and Foreign is unaffected (Foreign is
also strictly better off in the model of Section 4). Formally (proof in the text), we write:
Proposition 3: (ambiguous GFT from trade-in-tasks). Trade-in-tasks is Pareto improving if
terms-of-trade are unaffected and global welfare rises in all cases as terms-of-trade
effects disappear at the global level. If Home or Foreign loses from trade-in-tasks, then
the other nation must gain. A necessary condition for a nation to lose is that it
experiences a terms-of-trade loss.

3.2. The integrating framework: The shadow migration approach
Proposition 2 and expressions (4) and (5) reveal that trade-in-tasks ruins much of the HO
model’s elegance, and this for three reasons. First, by Proposition 1, Home and Foreign choose
different positions on their isoquants so the A matrices are not proportional. Second, even if
techniques were invariant to factor prices (Leontief), (4) shows that Home and Foreign goods are
produced with different technologies where the differences are non-homothetic except in the
knife edge case of A 1  A O . Third, some Foreign factors use Foreign technology while others
use Home technology. Each problem disrupts the elegant flow of HO logic.
A key contribution of our paper is to suggest a transformation of the model that restores much of
the HO elegance and does so in a way that enables us to integrate trade-in-tasks theory into the
received body of trade-in-goods theory. It also allows us to integrate the wide range of special
cases considered in the offshoring literature. The transformation turns on the insight that
offshoring is like “shadow migration”. That is, Home firms employ Foreign factors to produce
tasks using Home technology, so offshoring affects the equilibrium in a way akin to migration of
Foreign factors to Home assuming the migrated factors were paid foreign wages rather than
Home wages.

13

The shadow-migration transformation has two manifestations – one for quantities and one for
prices – with each involving the introduction of a new vector. The shadow migration vector,
denoted as V , equals the vector of Foreign factors employed in performing the offshored tasks,
T

i.e. A 1* X O . The offshoring cost-saving vector, denoted as S , equals the difference between the
cost of performing the offshored tasks in Home and Foreign, i.e. A 1 w O  A *1 w *O . Both are
potentially observable given modern datasets as they require only information on the offshored
production (in addition to the usual information of w’s, X’s and A’s).
Approximating around the trade-in-goods A(w), the trade-in-tasks employment conditions in
terms of shadow-migration-adjusted endowments (denoted VO and VO* ) are:

VO  A T XO  R1 , VO*   A*T X*O  R 2

(6)

where the Foreign shadow-migration-adjusted endowment is VO*  V *  V with
T

V  A 1* X O  0 , and R2 is the remainder from a Taylor expansion of A around w weighted by

X *O .9 Also, VO and R1 are the Home versions of VO* and R2 with an additional approximation
that comes from the fact that (due to effective factor price divergence) V may not exactly
equal the vector of Home factors that would be necessary to produce the offshored tasks, i.e.

VO  V  V  R 3 where
R3 equals  A1T  A1*T  X O . Similarly, the transformed pricing equations are:
p O  S  Aw O  R 5 ,

p O  A * w *O  R 6

(7)

where S  A 1 w O  A *1 w *O is the vector of cost-savings, and the R’s are Taylor expansions
arising from the approximation around A(w) as before.

9

More precisely, the infinite order Taylor expansion approximation is
A T ( w * ) *
A T (w *O )  A T (w * ) 
(w O  w * )  H where H includes the higher order terms. Thus
w
 A T ( w * ) *

(w O  w * )  H  X *O .
R 2   
 w

14

The R’s are negligible – and the trade-in-task employment and pricing conditions, (6) and (7),
are isomorphic to those of the HO model, (1) – in two cases: (i) when the changes in the ’s are
such that the scale of offshoring is modest, so factor-prices changes are modest and A changes
are second-order-small by the envelope theorem; and (ii) when the technology is such that the
afi’s are not very sensitive to factor prices so A changes are modest even for large factor-price

changes; Leontief technology is the extreme of fully insensitive technique choices implying all
R’s are identically zero.
Using the shadow-migration transformed employment conditions, (6), and approximating the
Taylor expansion remainders as zero, Home’s import under trade-in-tasks, MO, is related to
endowments by:

M O  sX OW  X O
~
 ( A T ) 1 sVOw  VO





(8)

~
~
where VOw  V w  (1   1 )V . Inspection of this yields (proof in the text):
Proposition 4 (trade-in-tasks analogue to HO and HOV theorems). The pattern of goodstrade in the trade-in-tasks equilibrium is explained by the HO theorem where actual
endowments are replaced by shadow-migration-adjusted endowments.
This is subject to the usual provisos that apply to higher-dimension versions of the HO and HOV
theorems (see Ethier (1974, 1984), or Dixit and Norman (1980)) as well as the well-known
provisos that come with Taylor-expansion approximations.
A number of implications of this proposition are noteworthy and potentially testable. Switching
~
to the HOV approach and using the definition of VOw :

 sV

w



 V  A T M O  1  s (1   1 )  V

(9)

The HOV theorem asserts that the left-side should be zero (see (2)), but with trade-in-tasks:
Corollary 4.1: The difference between the factor-content predicted by the HOV theorem and the
measured factor-content of Home’s import vector, ATMO, is proportional to but smaller
than the shadow migration vector V.

15

For example, in the 2x2x2 case where Home is skill-abundant but coordination costs are such
that the offshored tasks are particularly unskilled intensive, Home’s shadow-migration-adjusted
endowment is skewed towards unskilled labour, so, as per Proposition 4, it may import the skillintensive good for reasons that are conceptually different from the exogenous Ricardian
differences suggested by Leontief (1953) and confirmed by Trefler (1993).
If the offshored tasks are intangible – e.g. accounting services – Home will be importing
‘invisible’ tasks from Foreign. As the factor content of this could be measured with data on
offshore production, predictions for the total factor content of ‘visible’ and ‘invisible’ trade may





 w  V  ( A T M  V )   s (1   1 )V and combining this with
be testable. From (9), sV
O

Corollary 4.1 we have:
Corollary 4.2 (bounded HOV errors): In the presence of trade-in-tasks, the standard HOV
~
factor-content prediction, sV w  V , should overstate the factor-content of final-goods
trade but understate the factor-content of final-goods trade plus that of trade-in-tasks.
More precisely, the factor-content of final-goods and traded tasks are ATMO and V
~
respectively, so the following bounds should hold: A T M O  sV w  V  A T M O  V .
The proof is by inspection of (9) noting that every element of V is non-negative.
If the offshored tasks yield firm-specific intermediate goods, we have:
Corollary 4.3 (intraindustry trade): If the offshored tasks produce intermediate goods then
intraindustry trade must arise.
Proof. Every sector offshores some task (Proposition 1) so Home’s vector of imported
intermediates is strictly positive. From Proposition 4, Home exports some final goods, so Home
engages in intraindustry trade in each of its export sectors (assuming the intermediate goods are
classified in the same industry as their corresponding final good). QED.
Corollary 4.4 (source of comparative advantage): Offshoring is a source of comparative
advantage in the sense that trade-in-tasks creates trade-in-goods that would not occur
otherwise.

16

The general proof is simply a restatement of the fact that offshoring alters the pattern of trade, as
per Proposition 4 or inspection of (8). Intuition, however, is served by illustrating Corollary 4.4
with an example. Consider the special case where Home and Foreign have proportional factor
endowments (i.e. V  bV * , b > 0), so no trade occurs in the trade-in-goods equilibrium.
Allowing trade-in-tasks creates trade in final goods (except in the usual knife-edge case
A1   A ) as Foreign will export the output of type-1 tasks (Proposition 1) and Home must
export final goods to balance trade.
Proposition 5 (trade-in-tasks analogue to FPE theorem). Starting from the trade-in-goods
equilibrium, allowing trade-in-tasks produces a divergence in effective factor prices that
is proportional to the value of the cost-saving stemming from trade-in-tasks.
The proof is by inspection of (7). Under the trade-in-goods equilibrium, effective factor price
equalisation, w  w * , holds. Trade in tasks changes all goods and factor prices, in general, but
the effective factor price gap – ignoring Taylor expansion remainders – is:

w O  w *O  A 1 S

(10)

QED.
An implication, whose proof is by inspection of (10), is:
Corollary 5.1 (shadow migration not necessarily a substitute for real migration). From
Proposition 5, shadow migration can widen or narrow the international wage gap for each
type of labour, so offshoring may increase or decrease the pressure for real migration.
Given (6) and (7), and assuming the Taylor expansion remainders are negligible, analogues for
the Rybczynski and Stolper-Samuelson theorems are straightforward. From (6), approximating
the remainders as zero, VO  A T X O , so X O  ( A T ) 1 (V  V ) while before trade-in-tasks
X  ( A T ) 1 V ; analogous expressions hold for X *O and X * . Inverting the Home pricing equation
in (7), w O  A 1 (p O  S) while under the trade-in-goods equilibrium, w  A 1 p ; Foreign
wages are only affected by price changes. With p  p O  p , the equations of change are:

17

X*O  X*  ( A T ) 1 V

XO  X  ( A T ) 1 V ,
w O  w  A 1 (p  S) ,

w *O  w *    A  p
1

(11)

Proposition 6 (trade-in-tasks analogue to Rybczynski theorem). Starting from free trade-ingoods, allowing trade-in-tasks affects production in exactly the way predicted by the
standard Rybczynski theorem with the implied ‘shadow migration’ replacing the usual
exogenous variation of factor endowments. Standard Jonesian magnification effects
occur.
This is subject to the usual provisos that apply to higher dimensional versions of the original
Rybczynski theorem. Also:
Proposition 7 (Trade-in-tasks analogue to Stolper-Samuelson theorem). Starting from free
trade in goods, allowing trade-in-tasks affects Home factor prices in exactly the way
predicted by the standard Stolper-Samuelson theorem with the vector of cost-savings
from offshoring S coming in addition to the usual exogenous variation in prices.
This is subject to the usual provisos that apply to higher dimensional versions of the original
Stoler-Samuelson theorem.
The proofs are by inspection of (11), noting that the production-change and the wage change
problems have been reduced to the standard Rybczynski and Stolper-Samuelson theorem
thought-experiments (respectively), so the impact on production is as predicted by the
Rybczynski and Stolper-Samuelson theorems.
Standard trade theory rarely addresses the impact of free trade on global output. With trade-intasks, however, there are important and systematic global changes in output since shadow

w V
 w . From (11) and the definition
migration expands the effective world endowments, i.e. V
O
of XW we get:
X OW  X W  (1   1 )( A T ) 1 V

(12)

Proposition 8 (global production effects). If trade-in-tasks produces shadow migration in only
one factor, then global production of at least one good must rise and that of at least one
other good must fall.
18

Proof is by the usual Ethier (1984) approach to the I x F version of the Rybczynski theorem.10
As a minor corollary, we note the expansion of the shadow-migration-adjusted world
endowment vector is proportional to the augmentation of Home’s shadow-migration-adjusted
endowment, thus the global production effects tend to be proportional to Home’s production
effects as shown by comparison of (11) and (12).

3.3. The 2x2x2 example
The 2x2x2 version of the HO model is a key source of theoretical insights for trade-in-goods and
a workhorse of the offshoring/trade-in-tasks literature. Here we present the analytic solutions for
the trade-in-tasks and trade-in-goods equilibrium in a 2x2x2 example.
The two factors (skilled labour K and unskilled labour L) are paid r and w, respectively and work
in the X and Y sectors. X is numeraire and L-intensive (i.e.  Y   X where  i  aKi / aLi for i = X,
Y). Foreign is abundantly endowed with unskilled labour (i.e. k*  k where k  K / L and

k*  K* / L* ). To ensure diversified production with free trade in goods, we assume

 Y  k  k *   X when the ’s are evaluated at the equilibrium factor prices.
Inverting expressions in (1) yields solutions for w’s and X’s in the trade-in-goods equilibrium:
w  A 1 p, X  ( A T ) 1 V, w*   1 A 1 p, X*   1 ( A T ) 1 V*,

(13)

where
 w
1
L
w , p , V ,
r 
 p
K 

X 
X  ,
Y 

X 
X  ,
Y 

a
A   LX
 a LY

a KX 
,
a KY 

a
A 1   LX 1
 a LY 1

and from global market-clearing:

10

From the employment condition of the expanding factor, we know that the proportional
expansion in the factor equals the average of the proportional changes in outputs weighted by
employment-shares (Jones algebra). From the employment condition for some non-expanding
factor, we know that the employment-share-weighted average proportional changes in output
must be zero. The only way both can be true is if at least one output expands and one contracts.

19

a KX 1 
a KY 1 

p

 /(1   )  Y  k w
;
~
a LX / a LY k w   X

K  K*/ 
~
kw
L  L*/ 

Here  ()  (0,1) denotes the equilibrium expenditure share on Y.
Next consider the trade-in-tasks equilibrium. Solving (6) and (7) for XO and wO (ignoring the
remainders) and using (13) yields:

XO  X  (

1  Y L  K
)
,
a LY  Y   X

a S  a KX S Y
0
wO  w  KY X
 A 1  ,
a LX a LY ( Y   X )
p 

YO  Y  (

1 K   X L
)
a LY
Y  X

a S  a LY S X
0
rO  r  LX Y
 A 1  
a LX a LY ( Y   X )
p 

(14)

where p equals pO – p, S X  aLX 1 ( wO  wO* )  aKX 1 (rO  rO* ) and

SY  aLY 1 ( wO  wO* )  aKY 1 (rO  rO* ) . These are examples of Proposition 6 and 7, and we note that
Jonesian magnification effects are in operation.11
Expression (14) shows the necessary and sufficient conditions for signing production and wage
effects of trade-in-tasks. Rather than write out the results in the form of propositions, we
depicted the full range of outcomes in Figure 1. For example, if shadow migration is heavily
skewed towards L (specifically, K/L is less than the capital intensive of X, X) then X rises and

Y falls. If shadow migration has an intermediate factor ratio, namelyX < K/L <Y, then both X
and Y rise. Finally, if it is heavily skewed towards K (K/L > Y) then X falls and Y rises.
Foreign production effects are characterised in an isomorphic manner.
Figure 1: Necessary and sufficient conditions for wage and production effects due to trade in
tasks.

For example, X/X = {(L/L) /(1- k/Y) - (K/K)/(Y/k-1)} and k/Y < 1 since both economies’
product is diversified.
11

20

wO  w

rO  r

0

aKX /aKY

YO  Y

wO  w

XO  X

rO  r

aLX /aLY

YO  Y

SX/SY

0

X

XO  X

Y

K/L

Turning to the wage effects, we see from (14) that the wage of Home L-workers rises
(controlling for terms-of-trade effects) if and only if the cost-saving is sufficiently greater in the

L-intensive sector than in the K-intensive sector, namely S X / SY  aKX / aKY ; in this case r rises
less or actually falls. The necessary and sufficient condition for r to fall (controlling for relative
prices), is that the ratio of cost-savings exceeds the ratio of L-input coefficients,

S X / SY  aLX / aLY . If the cost-savings ratio lies between the skilled-unskilled endowment ratios
then both w and r rise by the direct effect. Apart from terms-of-trade effects, i.e. p, trade-intasks has no effect on foreign wages in the no-local-sales case we are considering (this changes
in the local-sales case considered below).

3.4. Integrating special cases in the literature
The theoretical trade-in-tasks literature has focused on special cases. Here we illustrate how the
various cases fit together. As most the literature works with what are effectively 2x2x2 models
and ignore terms-of-trade effects (i.e. small country assumption), we follow suit. In this case, the
impact of offshoring on w and r are given by the bottom row of (14) taking p = 0.
Many papers assume that offshoring occurs in only a single sector. This includes Jones and
Kierzkowski (1990) and follow-on papers,12 Deardorff (1998a), Venables (1999), Kohler (2004a,
b), and Markusen (2006). In such papers, either SX = 0 or SY = 0, so offshoring acts like sectorspecific technical progress. The wage effects thus depend on the factor intensity of the

12

For example, Jones and Marjit (1992), Arndt (1997, 1999), Jones and Kierzkowski (1998,
2000), and Jones, Kierzkowski and Leonard (2002). Francois (1990a, b, c) explicitly considers
the impact of offshoring on the factor price equalization set.
21

progressing sector; offshoring only in the L-intensive X sector raises w and lowers r; while
offshoring only in Y does the opposite, as (14) shows.
Other papers consider offshoring involving only one factor but in both sectors, so offshoring is
like factor-specific technical progress, specifically S X  aLX 1 ( wO  wO* ) and SY  aLY 1 ( wO  wO* ) .
As is well known, factor-specific technical progress has ambiguous effects on w and r (Jones
1965); what matters is the relative size of the cost savings by sector – the necessary and
sufficient conditions are summarised by the left-panel in Figure 1.
Perhaps the most famous special case in the literature is the Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg
(2006) result (repeated in the main body of analysis of their 2008 paper) that unskilled labour
unambiguously gains from the offshoring of unskilled-intensive tasks while the other factor’s
wage effect is exactly zero. How does this fit in with the ambiguity apparent in (14)? As it turns
out, the result is driven by the concatenation of three normalisations. Working in what could be
boiled down to a 2x2x2 model, they describe each sector’s production process as involving two
continuums of tasks – one that uses only L, the other only K. The four continuums are
normalised to the unit interval, and within each continuum, tasks are normalised to use the same
amount of the relevant factor. After ordering the tasks by increasing offshoring costs, they
normalise the offshoring costs across sectors. In the famous special case, only L-tasks are
offshoreable, but the three normalisations imply that exactly the same fraction of L is offshored
in X and Y. In our notations S X  a LX ( wO  wO* ) and S Y  a LY ( wO  wO* ) , where  is the
endogenous fraction. As (14) shows, proportional offshoring of a single factor produces the
famous special case. Specifically, all the cost-saving goes to L, i.e. rO  r  0 and

wO  w  a LX ( wO  wO* ) . Ambiguity of the wage effects is restored in subsequent analysis in
Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) when the cross-sector normalisation is dropped, or
offshoring of H-tasks is allowed.

22

4. Offshoring with local sales
In the previous section, all output of the offshored sector was ‘sold’ to Home. Here we allow
local sales of offshored tasks by assuming the inter-firm coordination costs, the ’s, are zero.13
With zero inter-firm coordination costs, Home firms have an incentive to sell type-1 tasks to
Foreign producers as their superior technology gives them an edge over local producers. Taking
all remainders as zero in this sector to reduce clutter, the pricing and employment equations with
local sales of offshored tasks are:
p  S  Aw O ,

p  S*   Aw *O ;

V  ΔV  A T XO ,

V* ΔV*   A T X*O

(15)

where S and V are defined as in Section 3, but now Foreigners benefit directly from
offshoring’s cost saving, so S*  (  1) A 1 (w O  w *O )  0 and V*  A T X *O . Importantly, S* >
0 means Foreign wages are directly affected by trade-in-tasks whereas they were only indirect
effected via terms-of-trade effects in the no-local-sales case. Solving (15) and (1) for wages:
w O  w  A 1 (S  p),

w *O  w *  A 1 (S*  p)

(16)

The expression for Home factor prices is isomorphic to the no-local-sales case in the previous
section (although the values of SX and SY may change since the factor prices will in general be
different).
There is a crucial difference, though, between the factor price effects on Home versus Foreign
labour. For Home labour, it is rents that generate the cost-savings (i.e. the fact that Foreign
workers are paid less than their average products); for Foreign labour it is technology transfer
that generates the cost-savings. Nevertheless, the Foreign wage changes in (16) are isomorphic to
those of Home. Consequently, all the detailed analysis in the previous section relating the costsavings to the wage effects is now applicable to the impact of offshoring on Foreign wages with

S X* and SY* substituted for SX and SY.
Solving (15) for production and using (13) yields:
13

This version of the model can also be thought of as capturing long-run technology spillovers
brought about by FDI. In an augmented model, local Foreign firms might close the technology
gap by learning from the presence of Home offshore production.
23

X O  X  ( A T ) 1 V ,

X *O  X*   1 ( A T ) 1 V*,

Qualitatively, the impact on Home production is the same as in the service-offshoring case in the
previous section. The impact on Foreign production, however, is qualitatively different and the
shadow migration interpretation is less clear-cut – note in particular that the signs of the elements
of V, namely L* and K*, are now ambiguous, though effective world endowments of L and
~
~
K are unambiguously larger with offshoring, i.e. VOw  V w . In the no-local-sales case, Home
offshored technology that was used only for Home production, so the Foreign labour employed
in the offshoring sector was diverted from Foreign production and this meant that the Foreign
production change was proportional to the Home production effect but of the opposite sign. Here
the tech-transfer embodied in offshoring tends to stimulate Foreign production, so this simple
proportionality breaks down. Nevertheless, the basic analysis of production effects for Foreign
follows the reasoning of Proposition 4 and Figure 1 with X* substituted for X. Since the trade
effects follow from the production and factor price changes, it is clear that offshoring in the
local-sales case at hand will also be a source of comparative advantage and intra-industry trade.
To summarise, the main difference between the two cases is that offshoring with local-sales
spreads some of the benefit of the implicit technology transfers to Foreign factors whereas in the
no-local-sales case all the benefits accrued to Home factors (modulo terms of trade effects).

5. Extending the basic model
The integrating model can be easily extended to allow Ricardian differences among nations that
result in two-way offshoring – a common phenomenon among OECD nations (Amiti and Wei
2005) – and to incorporate monopolistic competition a la Helpman and Krugman (1985).

5.1. Intra-industry two-way offshoring 14
Davis (1995) shows that intraindustry trade arises in a HO-like model due to minor technological
differences among nations when there are more goods than factors. As many production patterns
are consistent with (1) when I > F, even minor technological advantages can shift global
production of individual goods to a single nation. We apply this insight to generate two-way
14

We would like to thank Toshi Okubo for providing the idea for this section.
24

trade-in-tasks that arises from task-level technology differences across nations (e.g. Italy may be
especially excellent at making brakes for small cars, while France may be especially excellent at
making air bags for small cars, even though France and Italy are roughly at parity when it comes
to small car technology).
To implement this idea cleanly, we eliminate all macro differences between Home and Foreign
by assuming  = 1, and V = V*. The trade-in-goods equilibrium is thus marked by absolute FPE
and zero trade. There are, however, task-level technology differences in the sense that Foreign’s
task technology is as in (3), but Home’s task technology is now:

a fi (w )  t i1  it a fit (w ) ;
N

 f  1,..., F ; i  1,..., I

where  [1-, 1+] is a random variable that is iid across sectors and tasks, symmetrically
distributed around E{ } = 1 and with  > 0.
Assuming coordination costs such that  it  0 and  it  0 for all i and t, all tasks are potentially
offshorable and firms can supply tasks to one another. We also assume that Ni is sufficiently
large for all industries (or assuming a continuum of tasks) so that afi(.) is the same in Home and
Foreign; thus, factor prices are equalised and Home is competitive in all tasks where it < 1;
Foreign is has the edge in all other tasks. To see this, note that the cost of producing task t in
sector i at Home is



F
f 1

 it a fit w fi , while the cost of producing it in Foreign is isomorphic with

all the ’s set to unity. Assuming the Ni’s are large, the law of large numbers implies that Home
has the edge in half the tasks sector-by-sector. Moreover, the tasks in which Home has the
Ricardian comparative advantage will be a random sample of all tasks, so the Home employment
condition will be:

V

1 T
1
A X  ATX*
2
2

As Home and Foreign are symmetric at the macro level, it is clear that trade-in-tasks will have no
impact on the w’s or X’s, but intraindustry offshoring and intraindustry trade-in-tasks will arise.
There are no terms-of-trade effects, so gains from trade-in-tasks are assured. To see this, note
that AOT  12 1  F 1  A T  43 A T  A T holds (by the law of large numbers), where F(.) is the
CDF of . Further, all factor owners are better off if preferences are homothetic; to see this, note
25

that w O  w follows by unit cost pricing ( w O  A O1pO and w  A 1p ) and homothetic
preferences imply pO  p .
5.2. Offshoring in a Helpman-Krugman trade model

A fact that has been well appreciated in trade theory since Helpman and Krugman (1985) is that
the basic HOV results carry through unaltered in a Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition
setting provided that the increasing returns technology is homothetic, i.e. the cost function is (mx
+ F)faifwf where the summation is over all factors, m is a parameter that governs marginal cost,
x is firm-level output, and F is the standard fixed cost. Here we use this insight to show that the

above analysis could easily be conducted in a monopolistic competition trade model setting.
The key to the Section-3 analysis lies in the pricing and employment equations and their
restatement using the shadow migration insight. As is well known, the free-entry output of a
typical variety under monopolistic competition with homothetic technologies depends only on
cost and taste parameters and so does not vary across the equilibriums we consider. This implies
that monopolistic competition sectors display constant returns at the sector level (doubling
sectoral output at equilibrium would require double the inputs), specifically, X  nx is the
sector’s total output where x is the invariant firm-level output. The sector’s employment of
factor f is thus nx (m  F / x )aif where i is the Dixit-Stiglitz sector. Likewise the price of the
Dixit-Stiglitz sector equals average cost, namely (m  F / x ) f 1 aif w f . Choosing units such that
F

m  F / x is unity, the employment and pricing equations for this model are identical to those of
the HO model of Section 3, as are the Foreign pricing and employment conditions. With this, we
have reduced the problem to the one solved in Sections 3, so can conclude that the relevant
Propositions also in a model that allows monopolistic competition.

6. Concluding remarks
Recent theoretical contributions have renewed interest in characterising the effects of offshoring
and the result has been a wide range of cases that generate unexpected results – many which
seem to contradict intuition based on standard trade theory. This paper is an attempt to integrate
the theoretical trade-in-tasks literature into standard trade-in-goods theory. We present a simple

26

modification of the HO model that allows us to consider trade-in-goods in the traditional sense
(i.e., the exogenous shift from no-trade to free-trade in goods) as well as trade-in-tasks (i.e. the
exogenous shift from no-trade-in-tasks to free-trade in a range of routine tasks).
The expressions for the trade and production patterns, and goods and factor prices are highly
complex in the trade-in-tasks equilibrium and clearly violate the standard HO predictions.
However, if one views offshoring as ‘shadow migration’, and uses shadow-migration adjusted
endowments instead of actual endowments, the HO trade and production predictions work
perfectly. As such, we can use the elegant HO theorems to establish necessary and sufficient
conditions for the trade and production effects of offshoring. As the quantities of factors
employed in offshore production is potentially observable with firm-level datasets, these tradein-tasks analogues of the HO, HOV and Rybczynski theorems are testable in principle. We also
show that offshoring creates intra-industry trade when the various tasks are considered as being
in the same sector. On the price side, we show the using the vector of the cost-savings the
‘shadow migration’ produces can be used to develop trade-in-tasks analogues of the FPE and
Stolper-Samuelson theorems.
Our integrating framework does not encompass the many important contributions in the
offshoring literature that focus on issues of corporate governance, e.g. Grossman and Helpman
(2002). These papers typically focus on the division of rents and how they depend upon the
corporate structure chosen. As the division of rents will affect the division of the benefits from
offshoring, we conjecture that it could have significant general equilibrium effects as well as the
more direct effects on ownership. Incorporating such issues would seem to be an important topic
for future theoretical research.

References
Amiti, M. and S.J. Wei (2005). Fear of Service Outsourcing: Is it Justified?, Economic Policy 20, 308-348.
Antràs, P., L. Garicano and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2006). Offshoring in a knowledge economy, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 121(1), 31-77.
Antràs, P., L. Garicano and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Organizing offshoring: Middle managers and communication
costs, in E. Helpman, D. Marin and T. Verdier (eds), The Organisation of Firms in a Global Economy
(Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press).

27

Arndt, Sven (1997). “Globalization and the Open Economy”. North American Journal of Economics and Finance;
Vol. 8, No.1, pp. 71-79.
Arndt, Sven (1999). “Globalization and Economic Development”. Journal of International Trade and Economic
Development; Vol.8, No.3, pp. 309-18.
Baldwin, R.E. and F. Robert-Nicoud (2007). Offshoring: General equilibrium effects on wages, production and
trade, NBER working paper 12991.
Batra, R. N. and F. R. Casas (1973). Intermediate Products and the Pure Theory of International Trade: A NeoHecksher-Ohlin Framework. American Economic Review 63(3), 297-311.
Blinder, A. (2009). “How Many U.S. Jobs Might Be Offshorable,” World Economics, April-June, 2009, 10(2): 4178.
Blinder, A. S., (2006). Offshoring: The Next Industrial Revolution? Foreign Affairs 85(2), 113-128.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices across firms and nations,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4), 1351-1408.
Chipman, J. 1966. A survey of the theory of international trade, Part 3. Econometrica 34, January, 18–76.
Davis, D. (1995). Intra-Industry Trade: A Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo Approach, Journal of International Economics
39(3-4), 201-226.
Deardorff, A. V. (1998a). Fragmentation in Simple Trade Models, RSIE Discussion Paper 422, University of
Michigan, January 8, 1998. www.spp.umich.edu/rsie/workingpapers/wp.html
Deardorff, A. V. (1998b). Fragmentation across cones, RSIE Discussion Paper 427, Discussion Paper No. 427,
August 7, 1998. www.spp.umich.edu/rsie/workingpapers/wp.html
Dixit, A. (1985). Tax policy in open economies, Handbook of Public Economics, in Handbook of Public Economics,
Vol. I, eds. Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 313-374.
Dixit, A. and G. M. Grossman, (1982). Trade and Protection with Multi-Stage Production, Review of Economic
Studies 49(4), 583-594.
Dixit, A. and V. Norman (1980). Theory of International Trade. Cambridge University Press.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography and trade. Econometrica 70, 1741-1780.
Ethier, W. (1974). Some of the theorems of international trade with many goods and factors. Journal of International
Economics, v. 4; 199–206.
Ethier, W. (1984). "Higher dimensional issues in trade theory," Handbook of International Economics, in: R. W.
Jones & P. B. Kenen (ed.), Handbook of International Economics, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 3, pages
131-184 Elsevier.

28

Findlay, R. and R. W. Jones (2001). Input Trade and the Location of Production, American Economic Review P&P
91(2), 29-33.
Findlay, R., and R. Jones (2000). Factor bias and technical progress, Economics Letters 68(3), 303-308.
Francois, J. (1990a). Producer Services, Scale, and the Division of Labor, Oxford Economic Papers 42(4), 715-29.
Francois, J. (1990b). Trade in Producer Services and Returns Due to Specialization under Monopolistic
Competition, Canadian Journal of Economics 23(1), 109-24.
Francois, J. (1990c). Trade in Nontradables: Proximity Requirements and the Pattern of Trade in Services, Journal
of Economic Integration, 31-46.
Grossman, G. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2006). The Rise of Offshoring: It’s Not Wine for Cloth Anymore, July 2006.
Paper presented at Kansas Fed’s Jackson Hole conference for Central Bankers. http://www.kc.frb.org/
Grossman, G. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,”
www.princeton.edu/~grossman/offshoring.pdf (August 2006, forthcoming, American Economic Review).
Hanson, G., R. Mataloni and M. J. Slaughter (2005). "Vertical Production Networks in Multinational Firms," The
Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 87(4), pages 664-678, November.
Heckscher, E. and B. Ohlin (1991), in H. Flam and M. J. Flanders (eds), Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory (Cambridge
MA: MIT Press).
Helpman, E. (1984). A simple theory of international trade with multinational corporations, Journal of Political
Economy 92(3), 451-471.
Helpman, E. and P. Krugman (1985). Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Hummels, D., J. Ishii and K.M. Yi (2001). The nature and growth of vertical specialization in world trade, Journal of
International Economics 54(1), 75-96.
Jones, R. (1965). The structure of simple general equilibrium models, Journal of Political Economy, 73(6), 557-572.
Jones, R. and H. Kierzkowski (2000). A Framework for Fragmentation, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, TI
2000-056/2.
Jones, R. W. and H. Kierzkowski (1990). The Role of Services in Production and International Trade: A Theoretical
Framework, in R. Jones and A. Krueger (eds.), The Political Economy of International Trade, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Jones, R. W. and H. Kierzkowski (1998). Globalization and the Consequences of International Fragmentation,
forthcoming in R. Dornbusch, G. Calvo and M. Obsfeld (eds.), Money, Factor Mobility and Trade: The
Festschrift in Honor of Robert A. Mundell, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jones, R. W. and S. Marjit (1992). International trade and endogenous production structures, in W. Neuefrind and R.
Riezman (eds), Economic Theory and International Trade, Springer-Verlag.

29

Jones, R. W., H. Kierzkowski and G. Leonard (2002). Fragmentation and intra-industry trade, in P. Lloyd and H.
Lee (eds), Frontiers of research in intra-industry trade, Palgrave Macmillian.
Kohler, W. (2004a). Aspects of International Fragmentation, Review of International Economics 12 (5), 793–816.
Kohler, W. (2004b). International outsourcing and factor prices with multistage production, Economic Journal 114
(494), C166–C185.
Leontief, W. (1953). Domestic Production and Foreign Trade; The American Capital Position Re-Examined,
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 97, No. 4, 332-349.
Markusen, J. (2006). Modeling the offshoring of white-collar services: from comparative advantage to the new
theories of trade and fdi, in S. L. Brainard and S. Collins (eds.), Brookings Trade Forum 2005: Offshoring
White-Collar Work, Washington: the Brookings Institution, 1-34.
Markusen, J. (2010). Expansion of trade at the extensive margin: A gains-from-trade theorem and some examples.
Mimeo, U. of Colorado (Boulder) and UCD.
Ohyama, M. (1972). Trade and Welfare in General Equilibrium, Keio Economic Studies 9, 73-73.
Rodriguez-Clare, Andres (2010). Offshoring in a Ricardian world, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
forthcoming.
Samuelson, P. (1939). The Gains from International Trade. Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science,
May.
Samuelson, P. (1962). The Gains from International Trade Once Again, The Economic Journal, December.
Smith, A. (1982). Some simple results on the gains from trade, from growth and from public production, Journal of
International Economics, Elsevier, vol. 13(3-4), pages 215-230, November.
Spitz-Oener, A. (2006). Technical change, job tasks, and rising educational demands: Looking outside the wage
structure, Journal of Labour Economics 24(2), 235-270.
Trefler, D. (1993). International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right! Journal of Political Economy 101(6),
961-987.
Venables, A. J. (1999). Fragmentation and multinational production, European Economic Review 43, 935-945.
Woodland, A. (1977). Joint outputs, intermediate inputs and international trade theory, International Economic
Review, 18(3), 517-533.

30

