                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HAS MEDICAL INNOVATION REDUCED CANCER MORTALITY?

                                         Frank R. Lichtenberg

                                         Working Paper 15880
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15880


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2010




This research was supported by Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc. Siemens placed no restrictions
or limitations on data, methods, or conclusions, and had no right of review or control over the outcome
of the research. I am grateful to the National Bureau of Economic Research for making the MEDSTAT
MarketScan Commercial Claims and Encounters Database available to me, and to the editor and an
anonymous referee for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Frank R. Lichtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Has medical innovation reduced cancer mortality?
Frank R. Lichtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 15880
April 2010, Revised October 2013
JEL No. C23,C33,I12,J1,L64,L65,O33

                                                ABSTRACT

I analyze the effects of four types of medical innovation and cancer incidence on U.S. cancer mortality
rates during the period 2000-2009, by estimating difference-in-differences models using longitudinal
(annual) data on about 60 cancer sites (breast, colon, etc.). The outcome measure used is not subject
to lead-time bias. I control for mean age at diagnosis, the stage distribution of patients at time of diagnosis,
and the sex and race of diagnosed patients.

Under the assumption that there were no predated factors that drove both innovation and mortality
and that there would have been parallel trends in mortality in the absence of innovation, the estimates
indicate that there were three major sources of the 13.8% decline of the age-adjusted cancer mortality
rate during 2000-2009. Drug innovation and imaging innovation are estimated to have reduced the
cancer mortality rate by 8.0% and 4.0%, respectively. The decline in incidence is estimated to have
reduced the cancer mortality rate by 1.2%. The social value of the reductions in cancer mortality attributable
to medical innovations has been enormous, and much greater than the cost of these innovations.


Frank R. Lichtenberg
Columbia University
504 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
frl1@columbia.edu
                                                                                                                  3


    1.   Introduction


         The cost of cancer care is substantial, and increasing. In 2010, the direct cost of U.S.
cancer care was $125 billion (almost $9000 per cancer patient). This figure does not include
indirect costs, such as lost productivity, which add to the overall financial burden of cancer.
According to researchers at the National Cancer Institute (Mariotto et al (2011), Yabroff et al
(2008), National Cancer Institute(2013a, 2013b)), in the absence of any change in the cost per
patient of cancer care, changes in the U.S. population alone will result in a real cost increase of
27%, to $155 billion, by 2020. However, if costs in the initial and final phases of care increase
by 2% annually, e.g. due to advances in diagnostic technology and novel targeted treatments, the
total cost of care in 2020 will be $173 billion, an increase of 40% from 2010. If costs increase
by 5% annually, the total cost of care in 2020 will be $207 billion, an increase of 68% from
2010. Thus, medical innovation during the period 2010-2020 may increase the direct cost of
U.S. cancer care by $52 billion in 2020. More generally, the Congressional Budget Office
(2008, Preface) stated that “the largest single factor driving [healthcare] spending growth [is] the
greatly expanded capabilities of medicine brought about by technological advances in medical
science over the past several decades.”1
         As noted by the Australian Productivity Commission (2005), even if advances in medical
technology drive increased healthcare expenditure, the critical question is whether the benefits
outweigh the costs. In other markets, increased expenditure generally would indicate increased
consumer benefits. But because the direct purchase of healthcare is mostly undertaken by third
parties — governments and private health insurers — normal market tests for ensuring value for
money generally do not apply. Although assessing the benefits of medical innovation—its
impact on health outcomes—is as important as assessing the costs—its impact on health
expenditure—the Commission (2005, p. 99) noted that “most formal studies…have focused on
the expenditure impacts of medical technology, partly because costs are more easily identified
and quantified than are benefits.”
1
  However, this conclusion was based on studies that may have not fully accounted for spillovers across episodes of
care or medical conditions. Such spillovers may be important: a recent study of a cohort of U.S. Medicare
beneficiaries aged 65 years and older with a diagnosis of cataract found that patients who had cataract surgery had
lower odds of hip fracture within 1 year after surgery compared with patients who had not undergone cataract
surgery (Tseng et al (2012)). Also, Lichtenberg (2011) found that U.S. states that adopted new drugs and diagnostic
imaging procedures more rapidly had larger gains in life expectancy during the period 1991-2004, but that they did
not have larger increases in per capita medical expenditure, controlling for other factors.
                                                                                                            4

         In this paper, I will analyze the effects of medical innovation on U.S. cancer mortality
rates.   During the period I will study (1996-2009), the age-adjusted cancer mortality rate
declined 19%; the age-adjusted cancer incidence rate declined by only 4%. Lakdawalla et al
(2010) quantified the value of gains in cancer survival, and analyzed the distribution of value
among various stakeholders. They estimated that, between 1988 and 2000, life expectancy for
cancer patients increased by roughly four years, and the average willingness-to-pay for these
survival gains was roughly $322,000. Improvements in cancer survival during this period
created 23 million additional life-years and roughly $1.9 trillion of additional social value.
However, Lakdawalla et al (2010) did not identify the source of these gains, or determine the
extent to which they were due to innovation in cancer treatment.
         A randomized clinical trial (RCT) undoubtedly provides the most reliable evidence about
the impact of a specific treatment innovation (e.g. new drug or diagnostic procedure) on
mortality or survival from a specific type of cancer. Therefore, to conduct an overall assessment
of the impact of medical innovation on cancer mortality, one might consider performing a meta-
analysis of data from RCTs. But that approach seems unlikely to be fruitful, for several reasons.
The sheer number of studies that would need to be considered is overwhelming: PubMed
contains over 29,000 articles that address both cancer mortality and just one type of cancer
treatment: drug therapy.2 The metrics used in these studies are likely to be quite heterogeneous.
As Thaul (2012, p. 4) observes, a drug’s “effectiveness”—how well it works in a real-world
situation—may differ from its “efficacy”— whether a drug demonstrates a health benefit over a
placebo or other intervention when tested in an ideal situation, such as a tightly controlled
clinical trial. And the overall impact of medical innovation on cancer mortality depends on the
extent to which various treatments are used, as well as on the effectiveness of each treatment.
         Rather than performing a meta-analysis of RCTs, I will perform an original analysis of
observational data on cancer treatment, incidence, and mortality. The data I will analyze—
longitudinal (annual) data on about 60 cancer sites (breast, colon, etc.)—are aggregate data,
rather than patient-level data. The patient-level datasets to which I have access do not include
adequate information on both treatment and mortality.3 Even if patient-level data on both


2
  The following PUBMED search yielded 29,699 results (articles): (((neoplasms[MeSH Major Topic])) AND ("drug
therapy"[MeSH Subheading])) AND ("mortality"[MeSH Subheading]).
3
  The dataset I use to obtain treatment information (the MEDSTAT Marketscan database) includes only inpatient
mortality data. The majority of deaths occur outside the hospital
                                                                                                                         5

treatment and mortality were available, Stukel et al (2007) argue that comparisons of outcomes
between patients treated and untreated in observational studies may be biased due to differences
in patient prognosis between groups, often because of unobserved treatment selection biases. I
believe that difference-in-differences estimates based on aggregate panel data are much less
likely to be subject to unobserved treatment selection biases than estimates based on cross-
sectional patient-level data.4
         Several previous studies have examined the overall impact of medical innovation on
cancer mortality.5 These studies were subject to several limitations. First, the outcome measure
in all of these studies was the cancer survival rate—the proportion of patients alive at some point
subsequent to the diagnosis of their cancer—and this measure may be subject to lead-time bias.
Second, only one kind of medical innovation—chemotherapy innovation—was usually analyzed,
and this was usually measured by the number of drugs potentially available to cancer patients,
rather than by the drugs actually used by them.
         This paper builds upon previous research in several ways. First, the outcome measure I
use—the unconditional cancer mortality rate (the number of deaths, with cancer as the
underlying cause of death, occurring during a year per 100,000 population)—is not subject to
lead-time bias. Second, I analyze the effects of four important types of medical innovation—
chemotherapy,6 diagnostic imaging, radiotherapy, and surgical innovation —and cancer
incidence rates on cancer mortality rates. Third, my measures of medical innovation are based
on extensive data on treatments given to large numbers of patients with different types of cancer.
         In Section 2, I will briefly review the history of several types of medical innovation, and
discuss recent trends in cancer incidence and mortality. In Section 3, I will present the
econometric model I will estimate to assess the impact of medical innovation on cancer


(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/Mortfinal2005_worktable_309.pdf). Moreover, if a person disenrolls from a
health plan covered by Marketscan after he or she is treated, his or her death would not be observed, either inside or
outside the hospital.
4
  Jalan and Ravallion (2001) argued that ”aggregation to village level may well reduce measurement error or
household-specific selection bias” (p. 10).
5
  Lichtenberg (2008, 2009a, 2009b) examined the effect of pharmaceutical innovation on relative cancer survival
rates, controlling for variables likely to reflect changes in probability of diagnosis (e.g. age at diagnosis, cancer stage
of diagnosis, and number of people diagnosed).
6
  I will analyze the impact of innovation in drugs administered by providers, not innovation in self-administered
drugs, because provider-administered drug claims contain diagnosis codes, but self-administered drug claims do not.
Data from MEDSTAT Marketscan and IMS Health’s National Sales Perspectives indicate that about 70% of cancer
drug expenditure is on drugs administered by providers. Only 10% of expenditure on other (non-cancer) drugs is on
drugs administered by providers.
                                                                                                        6

mortality. Data sources and descriptive statistics will be discussed in Section 4. Estimates of
cancer mortality models will be presented in Section 5. The implications of the estimates will be
discussed in Section 6.

   2. Brief review of history of medical innovation, and recent trends in cancer incidence
      and mortality

       In this section, I will first briefly review the history of three types of medical innovation:
chemotherapy, diagnostic imaging, and radiation therapy. Then I will discuss recent trends in
cancer incidence and mortality.
Chemotherapy. Chabner and Roberts (2005) and DeVita and Chu (2008) provide useful
accounts of the history of chemotherapy. According to DeVita and Chu (2008), the use of
chemotherapy to treat cancer began at the start of the 20th century with attempts to narrow the
universe of chemicals that might affect the disease by developing methods to screen chemicals
using transplantable tumors in rodents. It was, however, four World War II–related programs,
and the effects of drugs that evolved from them, that provided the impetus to establish in 1955
the national drug development effort known as the Cancer Chemotherapy National Service
Center. The ability of combination chemotherapy to cure acute childhood leukemia and
advanced Hodgkin’s disease in the 1960s and early 1970s overcame the prevailing pessimism
about the ability of drugs to cure advanced cancers, facilitated the study of adjuvant
chemotherapy, and helped foster the national cancer program. Today, chemotherapy has changed
as important molecular abnormalities are being used to screen for potential new drugs as well as
for targeted treatments.
       Chabner and Roberts (2005) say that the beginnings of the modern era of chemotherapy
can be traced directly to the 1942 discovery of nitrogen mustard as an effective treatment for
cancer. Their history of chemotherapy timeline includes the following five milestones during the
period 1975-2004:
      1975: A combination of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and fluorouracil (CMF) was
       shown to be effective as adjuvant treatment for node-positive breast cancer.
      1978: The FDA approved cisplatin for the treatment of ovarian cancer, a drug that would
       prove to have activity across a broad range of solid tumors.
      1992: The FDA approved paclitaxel (Taxol), which becomes the first ‘blockbuster’
       oncology drug.
                                                                                                    7


      2001: Studies by Brian Druker led to FDA approval of imatinib mesylate (Glivec) for
       chronic myelogenous leukemia, a new paradigm for targeted therapy in oncology.
      2004: The FDA approved bevacizumab (Avastin), the first clinically proven
       antiangiogenic agent, for the treatment of colon cancer.

       The pace of chemotherapy innovation has increased sharply during the last two decades.
Data from IMS Health indicate that, by the end of 2009, cancer drugs (EphMRA/PBIRG
Anatomical Classification L: antineoplastic and immunomodulating agents) used in the U.S.
contained 133 distinct molecules. Twenty of these drugs had been launched by the end of 1969,
and 49 had been launched by the end of 1989. Thus, the number of new cancer molecules
launched during 1990-2009 (84 = 133 – 49) was almost three times as large as the number of
new cancer molecules launched during 1970-1989 (29 = 49 – 20).
       Pharmaceuticals are more research-intensive than other types of medical care: in 2007,
prescription drugs accounted for 10% of U.S. health expenditure (Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, 2013: Table 2), but more than half of U.S. funding for biomedical research
came from pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms (Dorsey et al, 2010). Moreover, new drugs
often build on upstream government research (Sampat and Lichtenberg, 2011).
Diagnostic imaging. Bradley (2008) provides a useful survey of the history of medical imaging.
He argues that computers really entered the world of medical imaging in the early 1970s with the
advent of computed tomography (CT scanning) and then magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). CT
was a major advance that first allowed multiple tomographic images (slices) of the brain to be
acquired. Prior to the advent of CT in 1973, we had only plane films of the head (which basically
just show the bones) or angiography (which only suggests masses when the vessels of the brain
are displaced from their normal position). Basically there was no way to directly image the
brain. Today’s multidetector row CTs acquire multiple submillimeter spatial resolution slices
with processing speeds measured in milliseconds rather than hours. MRI also evolved during the
1970s, initially on resistive magnets with weak magnetic fields, producing images with low
spatial resolution. Even then, however, it was obvious that the soft tissue discrimination of MRI
was superior to that of CT, allowing earlier diagnoses. MR also had the advantage that it did not
require ionizing radiation like X-ray-based CT.
       As stated by the National Cancer Institute (2010)
       imaging, by itself, is not a treatment, but can help in making better decisions about
       treatments. The same imaging technique can help doctors find cancer, tell how far a
                                                                                                      8

           cancer has spread, guide delivery of specific treatments, or find out if a treatment is
           working… Imaging can be used to make cancer treatments less invasive by narrowly
           focusing treatments on the tumors. For instance, ultrasound, MRI, or CT scans may be
           used to determine exact tumor locations so that therapy procedures can be focused on the
           tumor, minimizing damage to surrounding tissue… Imaging can be used to see if a
           previously treated cancer has returned or if the cancer is spreading to other locations.

Radiation therapy. The American Society for Radiation Oncology (2013) provides a brief
survey of the history of radiation therapy. It is clear from this that recent advances in radiation
therapy have been facilitated or enabled by advances in diagnostic imaging. Medicine has used
radiation therapy as a treatment for cancer for more than 100 years, with its earliest roots traced
from the discovery of x-rays in 1895 by Wilhelm Röntgen. Emil Grubbe of Chicago was
possibly the first American physician to use x-rays to treat cancer, beginning in 1896. The field
of radiation therapy began to grow in the early 1900s largely due to the groundbreaking work of
Nobel Prize–winning scientist Marie Curie (1867–1934), who discovered the radioactive
elements polonium and radium in 1898. This began a new era in medical treatment and research.
Radium was used in various forms until the mid-1900s, when cobalt therapy and cesium units
came into use. Medical linear accelerators have been used too as sources of radiation since the
late 1940s.
           With Godfrey Hounsfield’s invention of computed tomography (CT) in 1971, three-
dimensional planning became a possibility and created a shift from 2-D to 3-D radiation
delivery. CT-based planning allows physicians to more accurately determine the dose
distribution using axial tomographic images of the patient's anatomy. Orthovoltage and cobalt
units have largely been replaced by megavoltage linear accelerators, useful for their penetrating
energies and lack of physical radiation source.
           The advent of new imaging technologies, including MRI in the 1970s and positron
emission tomography (PET) in the 1980s, has moved radiation therapy from 3-D conformal to
intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and to image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT)
tomotherapy. These advances allowed radiation oncologists to better see and target tumors,
which have resulted in better treatment outcomes, more organ preservation and fewer side
effects.
Recent trends in cancer incidence and mortality. Data on rates of incidence of and mortality
from all malignant cancers are shown in Figure 1. Cancer incidence and mortality were both
                                                                                                                           9

increasing between 1973 and the early 1990s, but have declined since then. The change in
cancer mortality during the period 1996-2009 (the period covered by my econometric analysis)
has varied considerably across cancer sites, whether or not we control for the change in
incidence. Figure 2 presents data on the 1996-2009 log change in the mortality rates of the ten
largest cancer sites (ranked by their average mortality rate during 1985-2009). The red bars
show the simple log change in the mortality rate, i.e. ln(morti,2009/morti,1996), where mortit is the
age-adjusted mortality rate from cancer at site i in year t. The change in cancer mortality ranged
between -39% (= exp(-0.49) - 1) for prostate cancer and +3% for pancreatic cancer. The blue
bars show the residual from the simple regression of ln(morti,2009/morti,1996) on
ln(inci,2009/inci,1996), where incit is the age-adjusted incidence rate of cancer at site i in year t.7
The change in cancer mortality, adjusted for the decline in incidence, ranged between -25% for
prostate cancer and +16% for pancreatic and urinary bladder cancers. Figure 3 shows annual
data on the age-adjusted mortality rates of six major cancer sites during 1996-2009. In the next
section, I will present an econometric model for testing the hypothesis that cancer sites
experiencing more medical innovation tended to have larger reductions in mortality rates.

    3. Econometric model to assess the impact of medical innovation on cancer mortality

         To assess the impact of medical innovation on cancer mortality, I will estimate
difference-in-differences models using longitudinal (annual) data on about 60 cancer sites
(breast, colon, etc.). The dependent variable in these models will be ln(mort_ratest), where
mort_ratest is the age-adjusted mortality rate from cancer at site s in year t. The explanatory
variables will be current and lagged measures of the vintage8 of drug, imaging, radiotherapy, and
surgery treatments for cancer at site s in year t; current and lagged values of ln(inc_ratest), where
inc_ratest is the age-adjusted incidence rate of cancer at site s in year t; and current and lagged
values of several variables that should reflect case mix, illness severity, and cancer stage at time
of diagnosis:
        mean age at diagnosis


7
  The coefficient on ln(inci,2009/inci,1996) in this regression is 0.385 (t-statistic = 3.50; p-value = 0.0009). R2 = 0.1604;
N = 66. The equation was estimated by weighted least-squares, weighting by the cancer site’s average mortality rate
during 1985-2009.
8
  According to the Merriam Webster dictionary, one definition of vintage is “a period of origin or manufacture (e.g.
a piano of 1845 vintage)”. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/vintage
                                                                                                                    10


        stage distribution of patients at time of diagnosis: the fractions of patients with (1) in situ;
         (2) localized or regional; and (3) distant cancers. (The omitted category is unstaged
         cancers.)
        the fraction of diagnosed patients who were male
        the fraction of diagnosed patients who were white

         I assume that there were no pre‐dated factors that drove both vintage and mortality, and
that there would have been parallel trends in mortality in the absence of innovation. Direct
testing of this assumption (e.g. by comparing the pre-trends of early and late adopters or of
deep/non-deep new technology implementers) is difficult, because, as shown below, medical
innovation is a continuous process, not a discrete process.9 Since I control for the current and
lagged incidence rate and several variables that should reflect case mix, illness severity, and
cancer stage at time of diagnosis, I believe that this assumption is very likely to be satisfied.
Before describing the specific models I will estimate, I will provide justifications for my choices
of dependent and explanatory variables.
         Two types of statistics are often used to assess progress in the “war on cancer”: survival
rates and mortality rates. Survival rates are typically expressed as the proportion of patients alive
at some point subsequent to the diagnosis of their cancer. For example, the observed 5-year
survival rate is defined as follows:

       5-year Survival Rate = Number of people diagnosed with cancer at time t alive at time
t+5 / Number of people diagnosed with cancer at time t
       = 1 – (Number of people diagnosed with cancer at time t dead at time t+5 / Number of
people diagnosed with cancer at time t)

         Hence, the survival rate is based on a conditional (upon previous diagnosis) mortality
rate. The second type of statistic is the unconditional cancer mortality rate: the number of
deaths, with cancer as the underlying cause of death, occurring during a year per 100,000
population.
         The 5-year relative survival rate from cancer has increased steadily since the mid 1970s,
from 49.1% for people diagnosed during 1975-1977 to 67.6% for people diagnosed during 2001-
2008. Although this increase suggests that there has been significant progress in the war against


9
 When an intervention (or policy change) being analyzed is discrete, e.g. in Galiani et al’s (2005) study of the
impact of privatization of water services on child mortality in Argentina, analysis of pre-trends is feasible and
appropriate.
                                                                                                                    11

cancer, it might simply be a reflection of (increasing) lead-time bias. Lead time bias is the bias
that occurs when two tests for a disease are compared, and one test (the new, experimental one)
diagnoses the disease earlier, but there is no effect on the outcome of the disease--it may appear
that the test prolonged survival, when in fact it only resulted in earlier diagnosis when compared
to traditional methods. Epidemiologists have argued that while 5-year survival is a perfectly
valid measure to compare cancer therapies in a randomized trial, comparisons of 5-year survival
rates across time (or place) may be extremely misleading. If cancer patients in the past always
had palpable tumors at the time of diagnosis while current cancer patients include those
diagnosed with microscopic abnormalities, then 5-year survival would be expected to increase
over time even if new screening and treatment strategies are ineffective. Therefore, to avoid the
problems introduced by changing patterns of diagnosis, progress against cancer should be
assessed using unconditional mortality rates.10
         The unconditional cancer mortality rate is essentially the unconditional probability of
death from cancer (P(death from cancer)). The law of total probability implies the following:

P(death from cancer) = P(death from cancer | cancer diagnosis) * P(cancer diagnosis)

         + P(death from cancer | no cancer diagnosis) * (1 – P( cancer diagnosis))                         (1)

If the probability that a person who has never been diagnosed with cancer dies from cancer is
quite small (P(death from cancer | no cancer diagnosis) ≈ 0), which seems plausible,11 this
reduces to

P(death from cancer) ≈ P(death from cancer | cancer diagnosis) * P(cancer diagnosis) (2)

Hence

ln P(death from cancer) ≈ ln P(death from cancer | cancer diagnosis)

                                             + ln P(cancer diagnosis)                                      (3)




10
   I will control for cancer incidence (by including it in the mortality equation), but in a completely unrestrictive
manner. If changes in incidence are merely due to lead-time bias, the coefficient on incidence should be zero.
11
   The cancer incidence rate is 2.5 times as high as the cancer mortality rate: 2006 U.S. age-adjusted incidence and
mortality rates were 456.2 and 181.1, respectively. Since the probability of dying from cancer is much lower than
the probability of being diagnosed with cancer, P(death from cancer|no cancer diagnosis) is likely to be small.
                                                                                                           12

        I hypothesize that the conditional mortality rate (P(death from cancer | cancer diagnosis))
is inversely related to the average (current and lagged) quality of medical procedures.12 The
quality of procedures is not directly observable. However, I also hypothesize that, in general, the
average quality of newer (later vintage) procedures is higher than that of older (earlier vintage)
procedures. The hypotheses that vintage has a positive effect on quality, and that quality has a
negative effect on mortality, imply that vintage has a negative effect on mortality, i.e. that  < 0
in the following equation:


ln P(death from cancer | cancer diagnosis) =  treatment_vintage                                   (4)

        Robert Solow (1960) introduced the concept of vintage into economic analysis. This was
one of the contributions to the theory of economic growth that the Royal Swedish Academy of
Sciences cited when it awarded Solow the 1987 Alfred Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic
Sciences:
        Solow’s basic idea was that technical progress is "built into" machines and other capital
        goods and that this must be taken into account when making empirical measurements of
        the role played by capital.13 This idea then gave birth to the "vintage
        approach"…Solow's empirical results naturally gave the formation of capital a markedly
        higher status in explaining the increase in production per employee…the vintage capital
        concept …is no longer solely employed in analyses of the factors underlying economic
        growth [and] has proved invaluable, both from the theoretical point of view and in
        applications...” (Nobelprize.org (2013)).

Subsequently, Grossman and Helpman (1991) argued that “almost every product exists on a
quality ladder, with variants below that may already have become obsolete and others above that
have yet to be discovered,” and that “each new product enjoys a limited run at the technological
frontier, only to fade when still better products come along.” Harper (2007, p. 103) argued that
“new improved models of high-tech equipment that embody improvements are frequently
introduced and marketed alongside older models.”
        Substituting (4) into (3),

ln P(death from cancer) ≈  treatment_vintage+ ln P(cancer diagnosis)                      (5)
12
  The average quality of imaging procedures may also affect the probability of diagnosis.
13
  Solow assumed that technical progress is embodied in machines because machine manufacturers perform R&D.
Since the medical substances and devices industry is much more research-intensive than the machinery industry
(National Science Foundation, 2013), new medical treatments may embody even more technical progress than new
machines.
                                                                                                                    13



         I will estimate difference-in-difference (DD) versions of eq. (5), generalized to include
four different types of treatment, using longitudinal, cancer-site-level data on over 60 cancer
sites.14, 15 The equations will be of the following form:

ln(mort_ratest) = k=0 4 [k drug_vintages,t-k + k imaging_vintages,t-k + k radiation_vintages,t-k

         + k surgery_vintages,t-k + k ln(inc_rates,t-k) + 1k age_diags,t-k + 2k %in_situs,t-k

         + 3k %loc_regs,t-k + 4k %distants,t-k + 5k %males,t-k + 6k %whites,t-k)] + s + t + st

         (6)

where

          mort_ratest = the age-adjusted mortality rate from cancer at site s (s = 1,…, 60) in
                        year t (t=1991,…,2006)
     drug_vintages,t-k = index of the vintage of drug procedures associated with cancer at site
                        s in year t-k (k = 0,1,…,4)
 imaging_vintages,t-k = index of the vintage of imaging procedures associated with cancer at
                        site s in year t-k
radiation_vintages,t-k = index of the vintage of radiation procedures associated with cancer
                        at site s in year t-k
  surgery_vintages,t-k = index of the vintage of surgical procedures associated with cancer at
                        site s in year t-k
          inc_rates,t-k = the age-adjusted incidence rate of cancer at site s in year t-k
         age_diags,t-k = mean age of patients diagnosed with cancer at site s in year t-k
         %in_situs,t-k = fraction of patients diagnosed with cancer at site s in year t-k whose
                        cancer was in situ
        %loc_regs,t-k = fraction of patients diagnosed with cancer at site s in year t-k whose
                        cancer was localized or regional
         %distants,t-k = fraction of patients diagnosed with cancer at site s in year t-k whose
                        cancer was distant
           %males,t-k = fraction of patients diagnosed with cancer at site s in year t-k who
                        were male
           %whites,t-k = fraction of patients diagnosed with cancer at site s in year t-k who
                        were white
                   s = a fixed effect for cancer site s
                    t = a fixed effect for year t

14
  The cancer sites are those included in the National Cancer Institute’s SEER Cause of Death Recode.
15
  Galiani et al (2005) used a difference-in-differences model to assess the impact of privatization of water services
on child mortality in Argentina. They estimated their model using data classified by region and year, whereas the
data I will use are classified by disease and year. Their “treatment variable” (whether water services were publicly
or privately provided) was discrete, whereas my treatment variables (vintage indexes) are continuous.
                                                                                                       14


                       st = a disturbance

           In eq. (6), the cancer mortality rate is postulated to be an unrestricted distributed lag
function of the cancer incidence rate and the vintages of the four types of medical procedures in
the current year and the four previous years. Eq. (6) includes lagged values of the explanatory
variables, since it may take several years for medical innovation to have its peak effect on
mortality rates. In this model, the long-run effect of a variable on ln(mort_rate) is the sum of the
coefficients on the current and lagged values of the variable,16 e.g. the long-run effect of drug
vintage is k=0 4 k. A finding that k=04 k < 0 would signify that cancer sites that had above-
average rates of drug innovation (increases in drug vintage) had above-average reductions in the
age-adjusted mortality rate, ceteris paribus. The estimation procedure will account for clustering
of disturbances within cancer sites.
           Eq. (6) will be estimated via weighted least-squares, weighting by the mean mortality rate
of cancer site s during the period 1985-2009. Since the dependent variable is the log of the
mortality rate, I am analyzing percentage changes in the mortality rate. As shown in Figure 4,
the data exhibit heteroskedasticity: cancer sites with low average mortality rates exhibit much
larger positive and negative percentage changes in mortality rates than cancer sites with high
average mortality rates. Weighted least squares is appropriate in the presence of
heteroskedasticity.
            The four treatment vintage (innovation) measures will all be defined as follows:

treatment_vintagest = p n_procpst newp                                           (7)
                          p n_procpst

where

      n_procpst = the number of times procedure p was performed in connection with
                cancer diagnosed at site s in year t

          newp = 1 if procedure p is a “new” procedure

                   = 0 if procedure p is an “old” procedure




16
     Wooldridge (2009), p. 344.
                                                                                                                     15

         However, as shown in Table 1, the definition of newp will vary across treatment
categories. Hence, drug_vintagest is defined as the fraction of drug procedures (performed in
connection with cancer diagnosed at site s in year t) that utilized drugs approved by the FDA
after 1995;17 imaging_vintagest is defined as the fraction of imaging procedures that were
advanced procedures; radiation_vintagest is defined as the fraction of radiation procedures that
had codes established by the AMA after 1995; and surgical_vintagest is defined as the fraction of
surgical procedures that had codes established by the AMA after 1995.
         I believe that drug_vintage and imaging_vintage are good indicators of the diffusion of
drug and imaging innovations, respectively, but I am less confident that radiation_vintage and
surgical_vintage are good indicators of the diffusion of radiation and surgical innovations,
respectively. Although the AMA (2013) says that establishment of a new CPT code requires that
the “procedure or service [be] clearly identified and distinguished from existing procedures and
services already in CPT,” it seems that in some cases procedures that are assigned new codes had
already been performed under different, existing codes. For example, several psychotherapy
procedure codes were retired at the end of 2012, and the procedures were reassigned to new
codes.18 In the case of radiation and surgical innovations, there may therefore be substantial
measurement error in the variable newp in eq. (7).
         The variable newp is subject to little or no error in the case of drug and imaging
innovations, but delays in the establishment by CMS or the AMA19 of codes for new procedures
introduce another source of error in eq. (7): n_procpst may be positive but reported as zero during
the first few years of a procedure’s existence. Consequently, drug_vintage is likely to be a
“lagging indicator” of the true diffusion of pharmaceutical innovations. Table 2 shows the FDA
approval dates and HCPCS code establishment dates for five cancer drugs approved by the FDA
in 1996. HCPCS codes for these five drugs were established 19-33 months after FDA approval.
These drugs were administered to patients prior to the establishment of their HCPCS codes.

17
   I performed analyses using alternative measures of drug vintagest, e.g. the fraction of drug procedures that utilized
drugs approved by the FDA after 1990 (rather than 1995); this had very little effect on the estimates.
18
   CPT code 90801 (psychiatric diagnostic interview examination) was replaced by code 90791 (diagnostic
evaluation without medical services), and code 90804 (20-30 minutes psychotherapy) was replaced by code 90832
(30 minutes). Source: http://thriveworks.com/blog/2013-cpt-code-revisions-what-the-changes-mean-for-
counselors/
19
   Codes for chemotherapy procedures (and other procedures involving equipment and supplies)—Level II HCPCS
codes—are established and maintained by CMS. Codes for other medical services and procedures furnished by
physicians and other health care professionals)—CPT codes or Level I HCPCS codes—are established and
maintained by the AMA. (Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2013))
                                                                                                                    16

Table 3 shows unpublished IMS Health data for four of these drugs on the number of “standard
units” sold in the U.S. via retail and hospital channels in the years 1996-1998. According to one
Medicare carrier, “J9999 [not otherwise classified, antineoplastic drugs] is the code that should
be used for chemotherapy drugs that do not already have an assigned code.”20 16% of
chemotherapy treatments for patients with colorectal cancer used code J9999 in 2004.

     4.   Data sources and descriptive statistics

Cancer incidence and mortality rates. Data on age-adjusted cancer incidence and mortality
rates, by cancer site and year, were obtained from the National Cancer Institute’s Cancer Query
Systems (http://seer.cancer.gov/canques/index.html). Mortality data are based on a complete
census of death certificates and are therefore not subject to sampling error, although they are
subject to other errors, i.e. errors in reporting cause of death and age at death.21 Cancer
incidence rates are based on data collected from population-based cancer registries, which
currently cover approximately 26 percent of the US population; incidence rates are therefore
subject to sampling error.
Medical procedure innovation. Data on the number of medical procedures, by CPT or HCPCS
code22, principal diagnosis (ICD9) code, and year (n_procpst) were obtained from MEDSTAT
MarketScan Commercial Claims and Encounters Database produced by Thomson Medstat (Ann
Arbor, MI).23 Each claim in this database includes information about the procedure performed
(CPT code), the patient’s diagnosis (ICD9 code), and the date of service. I extracted data on one



20

http://www.palmettogba.com/palmetto/providers.nsf/44197232fa85168985257196006939dd/85256d580043e75485
256db3004fe953
21
   During the period 1979-1998, cause of death was coded using ICD9 codes. Since 1999, cause of death has been
coded using ICD10 codes. An advantage of the National Cancer Institute’s Cancer Query Systems is that the
mortality data from the two periods have been linked together.
22
   According to the American Medical Association’s CPT Assistant Archives, procedures with CPT codes between
70010 and 75893 are diagnostic imaging procedures.
23
   The MarketScan Databases capture person-specific clinical utilization, expenditures, and enrollment across
inpatient, outpatient, prescription drug, and carve-out services from a selection of large employers, health plans, and
government and public organizations. The MarketScan Databases link paid claims and encounter data to detailed
patient information across sites and types of providers, and over time. The annual medical databases include private
sector health data from approximately 100 payers. Historically, more than 500 million claim records are available in
the MarketScan Databases. The Commercial Claims and Encounters Database provides data on the medical
experience of active employees, early retirees, COBRA continues, and their dependents insured by employer-
sponsored plans (i.e., non-Medicare eligibles). I am grateful to the National Bureau of Economic Research for
making these data available to me.
                                                                                                                   17

million outpatient procedures and one million inpatient procedures in which the principal
diagnosis was cancer in each year during the period 1996-2009.24
         The MEDSTAT Marketscan database is not based on a nationally representative sample
of Americans. Moreover, the database I use contains data on medical care used by active
employees, early retirees, COBRA continues, and their dependents insured by employer-
sponsored plans. Medical care used by people eligible for Medicare is not covered.25 The
majority of cancer patients are enrolled in Medicare. Nevertheless, there is likely to be a strong
positive correlation across cancer sites between innovations in treatment of nonelderly and
elderly patients. If there was more treatment innovation for cancer type A than for cancer type B
among nonelderly patients, there was likely to have been more treatment innovation for cancer
type A than for cancer type B among elderly patients.
Measurement of newp, by treatment category. In the case of drugs, newp is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the active ingredient was approved by the FDA after 1995, and otherwise equal to
zero. To measure newp for each chemotherapy procedure, I used three databases. The first
database, Noridian’s NDC to HCPCS Crosswalk, provides a link between (HCPCS) procedure
codes and drug product codes (NDCs: National Drug Codes). The second database, the FDA’s
National Drug Code Directory, provides a link between NDCs and New Drug Application
(NDA) numbers, which are assigned by FDA staff to each application for approval to market a
new drug in the United States.26 The third database, the Drugs@FDA database, provides a link
between NDA numbers and active ingredients, and allows me to determine the date when each
active ingredient was first approved by the FDA.
         In the case of imaging procedures, newp is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the procedure
is designated as an “advanced imaging” procedure by CMS, and otherwise equal to zero. To



24
   More than half of these procedures were diagnostic lab and physician attendance procedures.
25
   I do not have access to a separate MEDSTAT database that covers Medicare-eligible retirees with employer-
sponsored Medicare Supplemental plans. The National Cancer Institute publishes data
(http://healthservices.cancer.gov/seermedicare/aboutdata/hcpcs.html) on the number of patients in the Patient
Entitlement and Diagnosis Summary File (PEDSF) receiving each procedure in each year (1991-2009) by cancer
site, but only for four cancer sites (breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate). NCI informed me that, due to budget
constraints, it is not able to support the significant amount of programming that would be required to provide similar
data for other cancer sites.
26
   The National Drug Code Directory also includes Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA) numbers, which
are assigned by FDA staff to each application for approval to market a generic drug in the United States, and
Biologic License Application (BLA) numbers, which are assigned by FDA staff to each application for approval to
market biological products under the provisions of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act.
                                                                                                      18

measure newp for each imaging procedure, I used CMS’ 2013 Berenson-Eggers Type of Service
(BETOS) file.
           In the case of radiation and surgical procedures, newp is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
the CPT code for the procedure was established by the AMA after 1995, and otherwise equal to
zero. To measure newp for each of these procedures, I used the AMA’s CPT Assistant Archives
database, which indicates the year in which each CPT code was added, revised, or deleted.
Other explanatory variables. Data on mean age and cancer stage at time of diagnosis, and on the
sex and race of cancer patients were calculated from the National Cancer Institute’s SEER 9
Research Data file (http://seer.cancer.gov/data/). This stage distribution corresponds to “SEER
historic stage A” in the SEER Research Data Record Description: Cases Diagnosed in 1973–
2010, http://seer.cancer.gov/data/seerstat/nov2012/TextData.FileDescription.pdf. The SEER 9
Research Data file does not include other measures of socioeconomic status, such as income or
educational attainment.
Descriptive statistics. Data on the number of sample procedures, and on new procedures as a
percent of the total number of procedures, by treatment type and year (1996-2009), are shown in
Table 4. My sample includes data on about 1.5 million drug procedures, 1.0 million imaging
procedures, 1.1 million radiation procedures, and 1.6 million surgical procedures. The fraction
of drug procedures that were post-1995 procedures increased from 1% in 1996 to 26% in 2009.
The fraction of radiation and imaging procedures that were post-1995 procedures increased by
similar amounts: 27 and 23 percentage points, respectively. The large jump between 1999 and
2000 in the fraction of radiation procedures that were post-1995 procedures looks suspicious,
however. The fraction of imaging procedures that were advanced procedures increased from
40% in 1996 to 60% in 2009.

           Table 5 shows data on mortality, incidence, and treatment in 1996 and 2009, by cancer
site, for the top 16 cancer sites (ranked by average mortality rate during 1985-2009).27 It
illustrates that the rate of diffusion of medical innovations varied across cancer sites and
treatment types. For example, the fraction of drug procedures that were post-1995 procedures
increased by almost twice as much for breast cancer (30%) as it did for stomach cancer (16%).
But the fraction of imaging procedures that were advanced procedures increased much less for
breast cancer (14%) than it did for prostate cancer (37%).

27
     Appendix Table 1 shows similar data for the 50 cancer sites not shown in Table 5.
                                                                                                    19

           Figure 5 provides data about the ten drugs with the largest 1996-2009 increase in share of
all cancer drug procedures. These ten drugs accounted for only 2% of drug procedures in 1996,
and 25% of procedures in 2009. Seven of the ten drugs were approved by the FDA after 1995.
Figure 6 shows annual data on the fraction of drug procedures that were post-1995 drug
procedures for 6 major cancer sites during 1996-2009.
           Figure 7 provides data about the ten imaging procedures with the largest 1996-2009
increase in share of all cancer imaging procedures. These ten procedures accounted for 19% of
imaging procedures in 1996, and 45% of procedures in 2009. Figure 8 shows annual data on the
fraction of imaging procedures that were advanced imaging procedures for 6 major cancer sites
during 1996-2009.

       5. Estimates of cancer mortality models

           Weighted least-squares estimates of six versions of the model of the age-adjusted
mortality rate (eq. (6)) are presented in Table 6. All models include cancer-site fixed effects and
year fixed effects, and were estimated using annual data during the period 2000-2009. To
conserve space, estimates of cancer-site fixed effects are not reportedAlso to conserve space,
only estimates of the sums of coefficients of current and lagged values of variables (e.g. k=0 4
k) are reported in Table 6.28 As discussed earlier, sums of coefficients are estimates of long-
run effects.
           Models 1-4 each includes one of the four treatment vintage (innovation) measures.
Model 1 includes current and lagged values of drug vintage (post-1995 drug procedures as a
percentage of all drug procedures). The sum of the drug vintage coefficients is negative (-
0.3807) and highly significant (p-value = .0007), indicating that mortality rates declined more for
cancer sites subject to more pharmaceutical innovation, controlling for the change in incidence.
The sum of the cancer incidence coefficients is 0.3923 (p-value < .0001): cancer sites with larger
declines in incidence had larger declines in mortality. However, the coefficient is much smaller
than one. This is consistent with the view that some changes in measured incidence are due to
changes in the probability of diagnosis, as opposed to changes in true incidence. The sum of the
age_diag (mean age at diagnosis) coefficients is positive, as one might expect—earlier diagnosis
(lower mean age at diagnosis) is associated with lower mortality—but not significant (p-value =

28
     Estimates of all of the parameters of one model (model 5) are shown in Appendix Table 2.
                                                                                                                     20

0.0921). The sums of the coefficients on the stage distribution and %white variables are
insignificant.29 The sum of the %male coefficients is positive, as one might expect—men have
higher age-adjusted mortality rates—and marginally significant (p-value = 0.0572).
         Model 2 includes current and lagged values of imaging vintage (advanced imaging
procedures as a percentage of all imaging procedures). The sum of the imaging vintage
coefficients is negative (-0.2438) and significant (p-value = .046), indicating that mortality rates
also declined more for cancer sites subject to more imaging innovation, controlling for the
change in incidence and other included variables.
         Model 3 includes current and lagged values of radiation vintage (post-1995 radiation
procedures as a percentage of all radiation procedures). The sum of the radiation vintage
coefficients is negative (-0.1565) but not significant (p-value = .1532). Model 4 includes current
and lagged values of surgery vintage (post-1995 surgery procedures as a percentage of all
surgery procedures). The sum of the surgery vintage coefficients is also insignificant (p-value =
.8297). The insignificance of the radiation and surgical innovation measures may be attributable
to substantial errors of measurement of radiation and surgical innovation.
         Model 5 includes all four treatment vintage (innovation) measures. The coefficients on
the measures in this model are not very different from the corresponding coefficients in models
1-4, suggesting that the four treatment vintage measures are not highly collinear. Model 6 also
includes all four treatment vintage (innovation) measures, but excludes current and lagged
incidence rates. The sums of the coefficients on the drug and imaging innovation measures are
over 50% larger in model 6 than they are in model 5: controlling for incidence reduces the
estimated effects of drug and imaging innovation. But since eq. (3) indicates that the incidence
rate should be included in the mortality rate equation (and also to obtain conservative estimates
of the effects of drug and imaging innovation), I will use the estimates of model 5 to assess the
contributions of medical innovation and changes in incidence to the recent decline in cancer
mortality.
         During the period 2000-2009, the age-adjusted cancer mortality rate declined by 13.8%.
If the distribution of cancer deaths by cancer site had not changed, the mortality rate would have


29
   The insignificance of the stage distribution variables is consistent with the “stage migration” hypothesis (Feinstein
et al (1985)). Measured changes in the stage distribution may be due to improvements in diagnostic imaging—
metastases that had formerly been silent and unidentified are now identified—rather than a true change in the
disease distribution.
                                                                                                   21

declined slightly more, by 14.3%. To calculate the contribution of each factor to the decline in
cancer mortality, I multiply the estimated long-run effect of that variable by the long-run change
in the variable: the difference between the average value of the variable during 2005-2009 and its
average value during 1996-2000. These calculations are shown in Table 7. I calculate the
contribution of each factor using the 95% lower and upper bound estimates of long-run effects as
well as the mean estimates shown in Table 6 (for model 5). The mean estimates imply that there
were three major sources of decline in the cancer mortality rate. Drug innovation was the largest
source: it is estimated to have reduced the cancer mortality rate by 8.0%. Imaging innovation is
estimated to have reduced the cancer mortality rate by 4.0%. The 3% decline in the cancer
incidence rate is estimated to have reduced the cancer mortality rate by just 1.2%. Surgical
innovation is estimated to have had almost no effect on cancer mortality. The magnitude of the
sum of the estimated contributions (13.2%) is only slightly smaller than the observed decline in
mortality.. Drug and imaging innovation and (to a much lesser extent) declining incidence
explain almost the entire decline in cancer mortality.


   6.   Discussion


        Although randomized clinical trials (RCTs) undoubtedly provide the most reliable
evidence about the impacts of specific treatment innovations (e.g. new drugs or diagnostic
procedures) on mortality or survival from a specific type of cancer, it would be exceedingly
difficult to assess the overall impact of medical innovation on cancer mortality from a meta-
analysis of RCTs. An alternative approach is to perform well-designed econometric analyses of
observational data on cancer treatment and outcomes. Several previous econometric studies
were subject to several limitations. The outcome measure used in those studies—the cancer
survival rate—was potentially subject to lead-time bias. Only one kind of medical innovation—
chemotherapy innovation—was usually analyzed, and this was usually measured by the number
of drugs potentially available to cancer patients, rather than by the drugs actually used by them.
        This paper has built upon previous research in several ways. The outcome measure
used—the unconditional cancer mortality rate—is not subject to lead-time bias. I analyzed the
effects of four important types of medical innovation—chemotherapy, diagnostic imaging,
radiotherapy, and surgical innovation —and cancer incidence rates on cancer mortality rates.
                                                                                                   22

My measures of medical innovation were based on extensive data on treatments given to large
numbers of patients with different types of cancer. I allowed there to be a relationship between
incidence and mortality, but did not impose a relationship. I also controlled for mean age at
diagnosis, the stage distribution of patients at time of diagnosis; and the sex and race of
diagnosed patients.
       During the period 2000-2009, the age-adjusted cancer mortality rate declined by 13.8%.
Under the assumption that there were no pre‐dated factors that drove both vintage and mortality,
and that there would have been parallel trends in mortality in the absence of innovation, the
estimates imply that there were three major sources of decline in the cancer mortality rate. Drug
innovation was the largest source: it is estimated to have reduced the cancer mortality rate by
8.0%. Imaging innovation is estimated to have reduced the cancer mortality rate by 4.0%.
Estimates of the effects of radiation and surgical innovation were not significant, but these types
of innovation are more difficult to measure than drug and imaging innovation. The 3% decline
in the cancer incidence rate is estimated to have reduced the cancer mortality rate by just 1.2%.
Drug and imaging innovation and (to a much lesser extent) declining incidence explain almost
the entire decline in cancer mortality.
       Murphy and Topel (2006) estimated that a “1 percent reduction in cancer mortality would
be worth nearly $500 billion.” This implies that the social value of the reductions in cancer
mortality attributable to medical innovations has been enormous, and much greater than the cost
of these innovations. For example, the value of the mortality reduction resulting from cancer
drug innovation would be $4.2 trillion (= 8.4 * $500 billion). Data from IMS Health indicate
that total U.S. expenditure on cancer drugs in 2009 was $40.5 billion; 76% ($31.0 billion) of this
expenditure was on drugs launched after 1995. If Murphy and Topel’s and my calculations are
correct, the cost of new cancer drugs is less than 1% of the value of the mortality reduction they
yielded. This implication is broadly consistent with the findings of Lakdawalla et al (2010).
They found that, between 1988 and 2000, health care providers and pharmaceutical companies
appropriated 5-19% of the value of gains in cancer survival, with the rest accruing to patients,
and that the share of value flowing to patients has been rising over time.
                                                                                                23


References

American Medical Association (2013), Applying for CPT® Codes, https://www.ama-
assn.org/ama/pub/physician-resources/solutions-managing-your-practice/coding-billing-
insurance/cpt/applying-cpt-codes.page?

American Society for Radiation Oncology (2013), History of Radiation Therapy,
http://www.rtanswers.com/aboutus/history.aspx

Australian Productivity Commission. (2005). Impacts of Advances in Medical Technology in
Australia, Research Report, Melbourne,
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/17193/medicaltechnology.pdf

Bradley, W. G., (2008). History of Medical Imaging, Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society 152 (3), September, http://www.amphilsoc.org/sites/default/files/1520303.pdf

Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2013), National Health Expenditure Data,
http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/tables.pdf.

Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2013), HCPCS - General Information,
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/MedHCPCSGenInfo/index.html?redirect=/medhcpcsgeni
nfo/

Chabner BA, Roberts TG Jr. (2005) Timeline: Chemotherapy and the war on cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer. 5(1): 65-72, January.

Congressional Budget Office (2008), Technological Change and the Growth of Health Care
Spending, January, http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/89xx/doc8947/01-31-
techhealth.pdf

DeVita, V.T. Jr., Chu, E. (2008). A History of Cancer Chemotherapy, Cancer Research 68(21):
8643-53, November 1.

Dorsey, E. R., et al, 2010. Financial Anatomy of Biomedical Research, 2003 – 2008. Journal of
the American Medical Association 303(2), 137–143.

Ederer, F., Axtell, L. M. and Cutler, S. J. (1961). The relative survival rate. A statistical
methodology. In End Results and Mortality Trends in Cancer. National Cancer Institute
Monograph 6 101-121. U.S. Department of Health Education and Welfare, Public Health
Service, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD.
http://srab.cancer.gov/documents/survival/ederer.pdf

Feinstein AR, Sosin DM, Wells CK (1985). "The Will Rogers phenomenon. Stage migration
and new diagnostic techniques as a source of misleading statistics for survival in cancer," N Engl
J Med. 312(25):1604-8.
                                                                                                  24



Galiani, S., Gertler, P., Schargrodsky, E., (2005). Water for Life: The Impact of the Privatization
of Water Services on Child Mortality. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), February, 83-120.

Grossman, G. M., Helpman, E., (1991). Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth. The Review of
Economic Studies 58 (1), 43-61.

Harper MJ (2007), Technology and the Theory of Vintage Aggregation, in Berndt ER, Hulten
CR (eds.), Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches (University
of Chicago Press), pp. 99-120, http://www.nber.org/chapters/c0875

Hercowitz, Zvi (1998), “The 'embodiment' controversy: A review essay”, Journal of Monetary
Economics 41, 217-224.

Jalan J, Ravallion M (2001) Does Piped Water Reduce Diarrhea for Children in Rural India?,
World Bank Development Research Group, Policy Research Working Paper 2664,
http://www1.worldbank.org/prem/poverty/ie/dime_papers/332.pdf

Lakdawalla, Darius N. & Sun, Eric C. & Jena, Anupam B. & Reyes, Carolina M. & Goldman,
Dana P. & Philipson, Tomas J., (2010). "An economic evaluation of the war on cancer," Journal
of Health Economics 29(3): 333-346, May.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. (2008), "Pharmaceutical Innovation and U.S. Cancer Survival, 1992-2003:
Evidence from Linked SEER-MEDSTAT Data," Forum for Health Economics & Policy: Vol.
10: Iss. 1 (Frontiers in Health Policy Research), Article 1. http://www.bepress.com/fhep/10/1/1

Lichtenberg, Frank R. (2009a), “The effect of new cancer drug approvals on the life expectancy
of American cancer patients, 1978-2004,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 18 (5),
2009, 407-28.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. (2009b), “International differences in cancer survival rates: the role of
new drug launches,” International Journal of Healthcare Technology and Management 10 (3),
2009, 138-55.

Lichtenberg, F. (2011). The quality of medical care, behavioral risk factors, and longevity
growth. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 11(1), 1-34.

Mariotto AB, Yabroff KR, Shao Y, Feuer EJ, and Brown ML (2011). Projections of the Cost of
Cancer Care in the United States: 2010-2020. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 103 (2),
Jan 19, http://www.natap.org/2010/newsUpdates/NatlCancerMariotto.pdf

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel (2006). "The Value Of Health And Longevity," Journal
of Political Economy, v114(4) : 871-904, August.
                                                                                                  25

National Cancer Institute (2013a), Cancer costs projected to reach at least $158 billion in 2020,
http://www.cancer.gov/newscenter/newsfromnci/2011/CostCancer2020

National Cancer Institute (2013b), The Cost of Cancer,
http://www.cancer.gov/aboutnci/servingpeople/cancer-statistics/costofcancer

National Cancer Institute, Cancer Imaging,
http://imaging.cancer.gov/imaginginformation/cancerimaging/page2

National Science Foundation, U.S. Corporate R&D: Volume 1: Top 500 Firms in R&D by
Industry Category, http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf00301/expendit.htm.

Nobelprize.org (2013), The Prize in Economics 1987 - Press Release,
http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/1987/press.html

Sampat, B. N., Lichtenberg, F. R., 2011. What are the Respective Roles of the Public and Private
Sectors in Pharmaceutical Innovation? Health Affairs 30(2), 332-9.

SEER Cancer Statistics, http://seer.cancer.gov/statistics/

Solow, Robert M. (1960), “Investment and technological progress,” in K. Arrow, S. Karlin and
P. Suppes (eds.), Mathematical Methods in Social Sciences 1959, 89.104. Stanford University
Press.

Stukel TA, Fisher ES, Wennberg DE, Alter DA, Gottlieb DJ, Vermeulen MJ. (2007) Analysis of
Observational Studies in the Presence of Treatment Selection Bias: Effects of Invasive Cardiac
Management on AMI Survival Using Propensity Score and Instrumental Variable Methods.
JAMA 297(3):278-285, http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=205172

Thaul S (2012), “How FDA Approves Drugs and Regulates Their Safety and Effectiveness,”
Congresional Research Service, June 25, http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41983.pdf

Tseng, V., Yu, F., Lum, F., & Coleman, A. (2012). Risk of Fractures Following Cataract Surgery
in Medicare Beneficiaries. JAMA, 308(5), 493-501.

Wooldridge, JM (2009), Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 4e (Cengage
Learning).

Yabroff KR , Lamont EB , Mariotto A , et al (2008). Cost of care for elderly cancer patients in
the United States. J Natl Cancer Inst. 100 (9): 630-641,
http://jnci.oxfordjournals.org/content/100/9/630.full
                                               Figure 1
                     Age‐adjusted cancer incidence and mortality rates, 1973‐2009
  550                                                                                                    220


                                                     215.1
  530


                                                     510.5                                               210
  510


i                                                                                                            m
n 490                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                         200
c                                                                                                            r
            198.7                                                                                            t
i
  470
d                                                                                                            a
e                                                                                                            l
n                                                                                                            i
  450                                                                                                    190
c                                                                                                            t
e                                                                                                            y
  430
r                                           Incidence: 9 SEER registries                                     r
a                                           Mortality: All Malignant Cancers                             180 a
t 410                                                                                                        t
e                                                                                                            e

                                                                                              173.1
  390
                385.5                                                                                    170

  370



  350                                                                                                     160
     1970           1975    1980    1985     1990            1995              2000   2005   2010     2015
                                                       Figure 2
                                Log change in age‐adjusted mortality rate, 1996‐2009,
                                top 10 cancer sites (ranked by average mortality rate)
0.2
                                                                                                                            0.15             0.15


0.1                                                                                        0.08             0.09

                                                                             0.03                                                  0.03

  0
       Prostate    Non‐Hodgkin     Stomach      Breast     Colon excluding   Lung and        Ovary      Brain and Other     Pancreas      Urinary Bladder
                    Lymphoma                                   Rectum        Bronchus                   Nervous System                           ‐0.02

‐0.1                                                                                                            ‐0.08
                                                             ‐0.11
                                               ‐0.12                                            ‐0.12

‐0.2                               ‐0.19                                        ‐0.18
                    ‐0.19



‐0.3
       ‐0.29
                                                   ‐0.30
                        ‐0.33                                                       Log change in mortality rate, adjusted for log change in incidence
‐0.4                                                              ‐0.37
                                       ‐0.41                                        Log change in mortality rate


‐0.5
           ‐0.49



‐0.6
                                                         Figure 3
                                               Age‐adjusted mortality rate,
                                            six major cancer sites, 1996‐2009
                                                   (index: 1996 = 1.00)
1.10




1.00




0.90




0.80


             22030 Lung and Bronchus
             21040 Colon excluding Rectum
0.70
             26000 Breast
             28010 Prostate
             21100 Pancreas
0.60         33040 Non‐Hodgkin Lymphoma




0.50
    1996   1997      1998       1999        2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009
                                                     Figure 4
                          Heteroskedasticity: relationship across cancer sites between
                            average mortality rate and log change in mortality rate
                                1.0




                                0.5




                                0.0
                                       0   10        20                  30                   40   50   60
log change in mortality rate,
        1996‐2009


                                ‐0.5




                                ‐1.0




                                ‐1.5
                                                          average mortality rate, 1985‐2009
                                                      Figure 5
                Ten drugs with the largest 1996‐2009 increase in share of all cancer drug procedures
                                           0%          1%     2%          3%     4%   5%      6%

                                            0.0%
     PALONOSETRON HYDROCHLORIDE (2003)
                                                                                             5.6%

D                                                                  2.1%
  DIPHENHYDRAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE (1946)
r                                                                                          5.4%
u
g                                           0.0%
                   TRASTUZUMAB (1998)
                                                                          2.7%
(




F
                                            0.0%
D                 ZOLEDRONIC ACID (2001)
                                                               1.8%
A

                                            0.0%
a                    BEVACIZUMAB (2004)                                                             share of drug procedures in 1996
                                                               1.8%
p
                                                                                                    share of drug procedures in 2009
p
                                            0.0%
r                   PEGFILGRASTIM (2002)
                                                              1.7%
o
v
                                            0.0%
a                      DOCETAXEL (1996)
                                                            1.5%
l
                                            0.0%
y      GEMCITABINE HYDROCHLORIDE (1996)
                                                            1.5%
e
a                                           0.0%
      GRANISETRON HYDROCHLORIDE (1993)
r                                                           1.4%
)




                                                0.1%
                 FENTANYL CITRATE (1968)
                                                            1.5%
                                             Figure 6
                Fraction of drug procedures that were post‐1995 drug procedures ,
                                  6 major cancer sites, 1996‐2009
40%
                22030 Lung and Bronchus
                21040 Colon excluding Rectum
35%
                26000 Breast
                28010 Prostate
                21100 Pancreas
30%
                33040 Non‐Hodgkin Lymphoma


25%



20%



15%



10%



5%



0%
  1996   1997       1998         1999     2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009
                                                                Figure 7
                                     Ten imaging procedures with the largest 1996‐2009 increase in
                                                share of all cancer imaging procedures

                                           0%                   2%          4%            6%           8%                  10%          12%


       77014 Ct scan for therapy guide                                                  5.4%
                                            0.0%


       78815 Pet image w/ct skull‐thigh                                          4.6%
                                            0.0%


                 72193 Ct pelvis w/dye                                                                                  9.5%
                                                                                         5.5%


                71260 Ct thorax w/dye                                                                               9.1%
                                                                                           5.8%

                                                                     2.1%                         Share of imaging procedures in 2009
 Q9967 LOCM 300‐399mg/ml iodine,1ml
                                            0.0%                                                  Share of imaging procedures in 1996

      38792 Ra tracer id of sentinl node                         1.8%
                                            0.0%


77051 Computer dx mammogram add‐on                            1.4%
                                            0.0%


             74160 Ct abdomen w/dye                                                                             8.6%
                                                                                                    7.4%


          78195 Lymph system imaging                     1.1%
                                                0.1%


  A9579 Gad‐base MR contrast NOS,1ml                   0.8%
                                            0.0%
                                          Figure 8
          Fraction of imaging procedures that were advanced imaging procedures,
                              6 major cancer sites, 1996‐2009
90%



80%



70%



60%



50%



40%



30%
                                                          22030 Lung and Bronchus

20%                                                       21040 Colon excluding Rectum
                                                          26000 Breast
                                                          28010 Prostate
10%
                                                          21100 Pancreas
                                                          33040 Non‐Hodgkin Lymphoma
0%
  1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004     2005       2006       2007   2008   2009
                                          Table 1

             Definition of new procedure indicator (newp), by treatment category

Treatment category       newp definition
                         = 1 if the active ingredient was approved by the Food and Drug
Drug procedures          Administration (FDA) after 1995
                         = 0 otherwise
                         = 1 if the procedure is designated as an “advanced imaging”
                         procedure by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Imaging procedures       (CMS)[1]
                         = 0 if the procedure is designated as a “standard imaging” procedure
                         by CMS
                         = 1 if the CPT code[2] for the procedure was established by the
Radiation procedures     American Medical Association (AMA) after 1995
                         = 0 otherwise
                         = 1 if the CPT code for the procedure was established by the
Surgical procedures      American Medical Association after 1995
                         = 0 otherwise




[1] “Advanced imaging” procedures are CAT/CT/CTA (CT Angiography) or MRI/MRA (MR
Angiography) procedures, which are generally newer than “standard imaging” procedures.

[2] The Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) code set is maintained by the American Medical
Association (AMA) through the CPT Editorial Panel. The CPT code set--copyright protected
by the AMA-- describes medical, surgical, and diagnostic services and is designed to
communicate uniform information about medical services and procedures among physicians,
coders, patients, accreditation organizations, and payers for administrative, financial, and
analytical purposes.
                                     Table 2

 FDA approval dates and HCPCS code establishment dates of five cancer drugs
                       approved by the FDA in 1996

                                            HCPCS code
Drug                      FDA approval date establishment Lag (months)
                                                 date
daunorubicin liposomal           4/8/1996            1/1/1999        33
docetaxel                       5/14/1996            1/1/1998        20
gemcitabine                     5/15/1996            1/1/1998        20
topotecan                       5/28/1996            1/1/1998        19
irinotecan                      6/14/1996            1/1/1998        19

FDA, Listing of Approved Oncology Drugs with Approved Indications,
CMS, 2007 Alpha‐Numeric HCPCS File,
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HCPCSReleaseCodeSets/downloads/anweb07.zip
                   Table 3

Number of “standard units” sold in the U.S. via
 retail and hospital channels in the years 1996-
  1998 of four cancer drugs approved by the
                  FDA in 1996

                   1996       1997      1998
docetaxel          36,962    115,191   211,728
gemcitabine       185,237    508,379   763,405
topotecan          88,987    150,492   170,665
irinotecan        117,510    371,832   439,420
                                               Table 4

Number of sample procedures, and new procedures as % of total number of procedures, by treatment type
                                       and year, 1996‐2009

Year             total drug         total imaging           total radiation           total surgical
                procedures           procedures               procedures               procedures
1996                     52,682                 58,156                    63,857                  90,012
1997                     59,951                 60,905                    65,745                  87,340
1998                     81,961                 59,062                    68,016                  83,431
1999                     93,892                 57,400                    64,450                  85,325
2000                    102,044                 57,202                    80,644                  86,440
2001                    116,540                 58,735                    85,643                  92,765
2002                    118,860                 66,928                    82,068                 119,204
2003                    123,088                 75,536                    85,262                 137,556
2004                    124,002                 77,552                    86,508                 131,290
2005                    128,251                 81,662                    83,825                 136,826
2006                    128,149                 84,569                    79,288                 136,435
2007                    118,899                 95,496                    78,445                 144,288
2008                    117,227                 99,564                    83,614                 150,522
2009                    112,656                 99,621                    76,663                 148,626
Total                 1,478,202             1,032,388                  1,084,028               1,630,060

Year          Post‐1995 drug       advanced imaging       Post‐1995 radiation       Post‐1995 surgical
             procedures/total      procedures/total        procedures/total         procedures/total
             drug procedures      imaging procedures     radiation procedures      surgical procedures
1996                       1%                    40%                        0%                      5%
1997                       1%                    42%                        0%                      5%
1998                       4%                    44%                        0%                      7%
1999                       9%                    45%                        0%                      7%
2000                      12%                    47%                       15%                      8%
2001                      15%                    51%                       16%                      5%
2002                      16%                    51%                       18%                      8%
2003                      18%                    50%                       18%                     11%
2004                      18%                    53%                       19%                     17%
2005                      22%                    57%                       21%                     18%
2006                      25%                    57%                       22%                     19%
2007                      25%                    57%                       23%                     25%
2008                      26%                    58%                       25%                     27%
2009                      26%                    60%                       27%                     29%
                                                                                       Table 5
                        Data on mortality, incidence, and treatment in 1996 and 2009, top 16 cancer sites (ranked by average mortality rate during 1985‐2009)
Cancer site                                      year    average mort‐      incid‐   total drug    post‐1995       total     advanced        total       post‐1995         total      post‐1995
                                                        mort. rate, ality    ence      procs.        drug        imaging      imaging     radiation      radiation       surgical      surgical
                                                        1985‐2009 rate       rate                 procs./total    procs.    procs./total    procs.      procs./total      procs.     procs./total
                                                                                                  drug procs.              imaging procs.             radiation procs.              surgical procs.

22030 Lung and Bronchus                          1996        55.5    57.9     66.4     81,619              1%     81,619            32%       7,406                0%      4,335               11%
22030 Lung and Bronchus                          2009        55.5    48.5     58.8    101,013             24%    101,013            57%       5,561               18%      7,701               16%
21040 Colon excluding Rectum                     1996        18.4    18.7     39.4     59,582              0%     59,582            43%         522                0%      3,811                5%
21040 Colon excluding Rectum                     2009        18.4    12.9     30.5     79,826             28%     79,826            73%         306               14%      7,388               31%
26000 Breast                                     1996        16.2    16.8     73.3    256,945              0%    256,945            23%      20,345                0%     15,438                4%
26000 Breast                                     2009        16.2    12.4     69.8    275,753             30%    275,753            37%      27,277               18%     30,986               38%
28010 Prostate                                   1996        16.1    18.0     84.6     60,337              0%     60,337            27%       5,824                0%      5,447                6%
28010 Prostate                                   2009        16.1    11.0     76.0     82,238             22%     82,238            64%      12,230               53%     13,419               46%
37000 Miscellaneous Malignant Cancer             1996        14.7    14.4     11.4     73,249              1%     73,249            47%       6,775                0%      4,600                8%
37000 Miscellaneous Malignant Cancer             2009        14.7    12.9      7.3    101,921             28%    101,921            70%      10,421               17%     10,069               23%
21100 Pancreas                                   1996        10.6    10.5     11.3     14,344              4%     14,344            44%         881                0%        940                9%
21100 Pancreas                                   2009        10.6    10.8     12.8     28,360             32%     28,360            72%         654               33%      2,274               19%
33040 Non‐Hodgkin Lymphoma                       1996         7.7     8.8     19.4     69,308              0%     69,308            60%       1,568                0%      3,371                8%
33040 Non‐Hodgkin Lymphoma                       2009         7.7     6.3     20.2     88,030             27%     88,030            80%       1,317               19%      4,801               26%
21020 Stomach                                    1996         5.0     5.1      8.5      9,292              1%      9,292            35%         128                0%        669                2%
21020 Stomach                                    2009         5.0     3.4      7.3     15,132             17%     15,132            60%         497               44%      1,333               17%
31010 Brain and Other Nervous System             1996         4.6     4.7      6.7     24,967              1%     24,967            84%       2,802                0%      1,609                5%
31010 Brain and Other Nervous System             2009         4.6     4.4      6.6     36,554             31%     36,554            83%       2,366               34%      3,834               21%
27040 Ovary                                      1996         4.5     4.4      7.1     32,582              2%     32,582            51%         222                0%      2,530               10%
27040 Ovary                                      2009         4.5     3.9      6.4     33,969             23%     33,969            75%          97               11%      3,471               30%
29010 Urinary Bladder                            1996         4.4     4.4     20.8     16,571              0%     16,571            27%         200                0%      3,286                4%
29010 Urinary Bladder                            2009         4.4     4.3     20.5     16,488             18%     16,488            54%          81               16%      3,280                8%
21010 Esophagus                                  1996         4.2     4.3      4.8     10,280              0%     10,280            28%       1,166                0%        682                0%
21010 Esophagus                                  2009         4.2     4.2      4.6     19,221             21%     19,221            54%       1,189               39%      1,808               22%
29020 Kidney and Renal Pelvis                    1996         4.2     4.3     11.4     15,336              2%     15,336            39%         285                0%        974                3%
29020 Kidney and Renal Pelvis                    2009         4.2     3.9     15.0     27,087             33%     27,087            67%         133               16%      2,954               31%
34000 Myeloma                                    1996         3.7     3.9      5.8     22,130              1%     22,130            31%         753                0%      1,092                7%
34000 Myeloma                                    2009         3.7     3.3      6.1     46,619             43%     46,619            47%         496               14%      2,441               26%
21071 Liver                                      1996         3.5     3.6      4.6      3,940              2%      3,940            51%         130                0%        389                3%
21071 Liver                                      2009         3.5     4.5      7.1     10,763             21%     10,763            57%          53               13%      1,179               17%
21050 Rectum and Rectosigmoid Junction           1996         3.1     3.1     15.4     37,309              1%     37,309            45%       2,138                0%      2,836                2%
21050 Rectum and Rectosigmoid Junction           2009         3.1     2.8     12.2     40,340             27%     40,340            74%       1,889               23%      4,556               28%
                                                           Table 6

               Estimates of six versions of the model of the age‐adjusted mortality rate (eq. (6))

Model                          1                2                 3                4                5                6

ln(inc_rate)                0.3923           0.3925            0.4837           0.3987           0.3645
Chi-Square (p-value)     32.69 (<.0001)   27.54 (<.0001)    36.87 (<.0001)   24.01 (<.0001)   23.58 (<.0001)

drug_vintage                -0.3807                                                             -0.4124          -0.6347
Chi-Square (p-value)     11.41 (0.0007)                                                       16.37 (<.0001)   25.35 (<.0001)

imaging_vintage                             -0.2438                                             -0.2807          -0.4268
Chi-Square (p-value)                       3.98 (0.046)                                       5.03 (0.0249)    13.15 (0.0003)

radiation_vintage                                              -0.1565                           -0.154          -0.1102
Chi-Square (p-value)                                         2.04 (0.1532)                    2.53 (0.1116)    0.79 (0.3738)

surgery_vintage                                                                 0.0327           0.1676           0.1539
Chi-Square (p-value)                                                         0.05 (0.8297)    1.43 (0.2311)    1.64 (0.1998)

mean age at diagnosis       0.0184           0.0172            0.0143           0.0176           0.0167            0.023
Chi-Square (p-value)      2.84 (0.0921)   2.53 (0.1117)      2.1 (0.1476)    2.61 (0.1064)    3.62 (0.0571)    5.86 (0.0155)

% in situ                   0.0115          -0.1969            -0.0922         -0.0627           0.0893           0.2289
Chi-Square (p-value)       0 (0.9618)     0.48 (0.4902)      0.19 (0.6654)    0.06 (0.806)    0.16 (0.6869)    0.48 (0.4865)

% localized-regional        0.0568           0.0469            -0.0036          0.0406           0.0146           0.1607
Chi-Square (p-value)      1.02 (0.3135)   0.38 (0.5403)       0 (0.9529)     0.27 (0.6041)     0.07 (0.791)    3.91 (0.0479)

% distant                   0.2521           0.3284            0.2714           0.3104            0.187          -0.1542
Chi-Square (p-value)      2.25 (0.1338)   3.47 (0.0627)      1.37 (0.2421)   3.25 (0.0713)    1.04 (0.3075)     0.6 (0.4389)

% white                     -0.0249         -0.0033            0.2121          -0.1414           0.3692           0.3784
Chi-Square (p-value)       0 (0.9599)       0 (0.9952)       0.15 (0.7025)   0.05 (0.8209)    0.57 (0.4509)    0.47 (0.4945)

% male                      0.6559           0.3514            0.4858           0.4739           0.5715           0.5613
Chi-Square (p-value)      3.62 (0.0572)   1.08 (0.2992)      1.47 (0.2258)   1.72 (0.1903)    2.73 (0.0987)    1.66 (0.1977)



Statistically significant estimates (p-value < 0.05) are bold. All models were estimated via
weighted least-squares, weighting by the mean mortality rate of cancer site s during the period
1985-2009. Disturbances are clustered within cancer sites. All models include cancer-site fixed
effects and year fixed effects (not reported to conserve space), and all models were estimated
using annual data during the period 2000-2009. Also to conserve space, only estimates of the
sums of coefficients of current and lagged values of variables (e.g. k=0 k) are reported. Sums
                                                                          4

of coefficients are estimates of long-run effects.
                                                                       Table 7

                     Estimated contribution of different factors to the 2000‐2009 decline in the age‐adjusted cancer mortality rate



Column                        1          2          3         4          5          6              7
                         change in
                          variable,
                         1996‐2000
                          to 2005‐      estimated long‐run effect    contribution to 2000‐2009 mortality
Factor                      2009            (Table 3, model 5)                   rate decline            formula for calculating contribution
                                       Lower      Mean      Upper     Lower       Mean        Upper

                                                                                                           (k=0 k) ln(inc_rate2005‐2009 /inc_rate1996‐
ln(inc_rate)                 ‐3%      0.2174     0.3645    0.5116     ‐0.7%       -1.2%         ‐1.7%             4


                                                                                                           2000 )

                                                                                                           (k=0 k) (drug_vintage2005‐2009 ‐
drug innovation             19%       ‐0.2126   ‐0.4124    ‐0.6121    ‐4.1%       -8.0%         ‐11.9%          4

                                                                                                           drug_vintage1996‐2000 )
                                                                                                           (k=0 k) (imaging_vintage 2005‐2009 ‐
imaging innovation          14%       ‐0.0354   ‐0.2807    ‐0.5261    ‐0.5%       -4.0%         ‐7.4%           4

                                                                                                           imaging_vintage 1996‐2000 )
Total                                                                 ‐5.3%       ‐13.2%        ‐21.0%

During the period 2000‐2009, the age‐adjusted cancer mortality rate declined by 13.8%. If the distribution of cancer deaths by cancer site had not
changed, the mortality rate would have declined slightly more, by 14.3%.

inc_rate2005‐2009 is the mean value of the age‐adjusted incidence rate during 2005‐2009
                                                                                   Appendix Table 1
              Data on mortality, incidence, and treatment in 1996 and 2009, for 50 cancer sites not shown in Table 5 (ranked by average mortality rate during 1985‐2009)
Cancer site                                       year    average mort‐      incid‐   total drug    post‐1995       total     advanced        total           post‐1995         total      post‐1995
                                                         mort. rate, ality    ence      procs.        drug        imaging      imaging     radiation          radiation       surgical      surgical
                                                         1985‐2009 rate       rate                 procs./total    procs.    procs./total    procs.          procs./total      procs.     procs./total
                                                                                                   drug procs.              imaging procs.                 radiation procs.              surgical procs.

25010 Melanoma of the Skin                        1996          2.7    2.8     17.3     20,724              0%     20,724            31%         268                    0%      2,526                3%
25010 Melanoma of the Skin                        2009          2.7    2.8     22.6     20,548              6%     20,548            57%         308                   23%      3,118               10%
35021 Acute myeloid                               1996          2.5    2.4      3.5     12,772              1%     12,772            15%          29                    0%        618               13%
35021 Acute myeloid                               2009          2.5    2.9      3.6     51,695             24%     51,695            39%         213                    4%      1,836               56%
35012 Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia                1996          1.5    1.7      4.6      9,796              0%      9,796            31%           4                    0%        564                5%
35012 Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia                2009          1.5    1.4      4.5     18,841             24%     18,841            78%          15                    0%      1,222               17%
27010 Cervix Uteri                                1996          1.5    1.6      4.8     13,848              3%     13,848            43%       1,175                    0%        495                2%
27010 Cervix Uteri                                2009          1.5    1.2      3.4      9,204             18%      9,204            73%       1,362                   28%        951               30%
22020 Larynx                                      1996          1.4    1.5      4.3      6,499              0%      6,499            29%       1,489                    0%        689               11%
22020 Larynx                                      2009          1.4    1.1      3.1      5,404             16%      5,404            74%         795                   40%        752                5%
24000 Soft Tissue including Heart$                1996          1.4    1.5      2.8      8,680              1%      8,680            52%         604                    0%        658                5%
24000 Soft Tissue including Heart$                2009          1.4    1.3      3.3     15,896             19%     15,896            65%         960                   23%      1,278               21%
27030 Uterus, NOS                                 1996          1.1    1.0      0.2      2,055              1%      2,055            58%         349                    1%        112                4%
27030 Uterus, NOS                                 2009          1.1    1.2      0.3      2,882              3%      2,882            79%         150                   10%        265               34%
27020 Corpus Uteri                                1996          1.0    1.0     12.2     10,026              0%     10,026            47%       1,141                    0%        982                8%
27020 Corpus Uteri                                2009          1.0    0.9     13.3     22,193             14%     22,193            70%       1,102                   18%      2,966               34%
35043 Aleukemic, subleukemic and NOS              1996          1.0    1.0      0.4      5,478              0%      5,478            24%          87                    0%        266               19%
35043 Aleukemic, subleukemic and NOS              2009          1.0    1.0      0.4      5,044              2%      5,044            50%          49                   16%        307               48%
35041 Other Acute Leukemia                        1996          1.0    1.0      0.5      1,843              0%      1,843            26%          24                    0%        102                4%
35041 Other Acute Leukemia                        2009          1.0    0.6      0.2      3,285              8%      3,285            38%           2                    0%        150               64%
25020 Other Non‐Epithelial Skin                   1996          0.9    0.8      1.9     49,504              7%     49,504            20%         660                    0%     23,392                4%
25020 Other Non‐Epithelial Skin                   2009          0.9    0.9      2.0     37,340              6%     37,340            55%         672                   15%     18,324               25%
21072 Intrahepatic Bile Duct                      1996          0.9    0.9      0.9        281 .                      281            50%          27                    0%         42                5%
21072 Intrahepatic Bile Duct                      2009          0.9    1.3      0.8      2,474             29%      2,474            52%          52                   10%        279               12%
21080 Gallbladder                                 1996          0.8    0.8      1.1        821              0%        821            50%          37                    0%         35                6%
21080 Gallbladder                                 2009          0.8    0.6      1.2      1,300             42%      1,300            67% .             .                          103               22%
35022 Chronic Myeloid Leukemia                    1996          0.7    0.9      1.8      7,458              0%      7,458            14%          61                    0%        466               12%
35022 Chronic Myeloid Leukemia                    2009          0.7    0.3      1.7      7,140              7%      7,140            58%          24                   13%        518               33%
20020 Tongue                                      1996          0.7    0.7      2.6      3,509              0%      3,509            29%         589                    0%        372                5%
20020 Tongue                                      2009          0.7    0.6      3.3      8,341             17%      8,341            73%         885                   54%        958                9%
21090 Other Biliary                               1996          0.6    0.6      1.3      1,293             11%      1,293            18%         155                    1%         68                1%
21090 Other Biliary                               2009          0.6    0.4      1.7      3,130             43%      3,130            70%         149                   44%        320                8%
20100 Other Oral Cavity and Pharynx               1996          0.6    0.6      0.4      1,415              2%      1,415            33%         167                    0%        135                4%
                                                                                   Appendix Table 1
              Data on mortality, incidence, and treatment in 1996 and 2009, for 50 cancer sites not shown in Table 5 (ranked by average mortality rate during 1985‐2009)
Cancer site                                       year    average mort‐      incid‐   total drug    post‐1995       total     advanced        total           post‐1995         total      post‐1995
                                                         mort. rate, ality    ence      procs.        drug        imaging      imaging     radiation          radiation       surgical      surgical
                                                         1985‐2009 rate       rate                 procs./total    procs.    procs./total    procs.          procs./total      procs.     procs./total
                                                                                                   drug procs.              imaging procs.                 radiation procs.              surgical procs.

20100 Other Oral Cavity and Pharynx               2009          0.6    0.5      0.2        562              0%        562            26%           8                   38%         70               10%
33010 Hodgkin Lymphoma                            1996          0.5    0.5      2.8     17,161              0%     17,161            49%         776                    0%        843                7%
33010 Hodgkin Lymphoma                            2009          0.5    0.4      2.9     18,714             17%     18,714            79%         566                   13%        950               29%
35011 Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia                  1996          0.5    0.5      1.4     11,047              5%     11,047            17%          81                    0%        635               10%
35011 Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia                  2009          0.5    0.5      1.4     32,476              3%     32,476            36%         177                   14%      1,321               59%
20050 Gum and Other Mouth                         1996          0.5    0.5      1.8      1,766              0%      1,766            38%         217                    0%        254                4%
20050 Gum and Other Mouth                         2009          0.5    0.3      1.6      1,862             23%      1,862            71%         114                   31%        411               11%
32010 Thyroid                                     1996          0.5    0.5      6.5      7,647              1%      7,647            13%         201                    0%        738                8%
32010 Thyroid                                     2009          0.5    0.5     14.3     24,995             36%     24,995            27%         288                   32%      3,364                5%
23000 Bones and Joints                            1996          0.5    0.5      0.8      7,445              4%      7,445            41%         747                    0%        497                4%
23000 Bones and Joints                            2009          0.5    0.4      1.0     13,354             15%     13,354            49%         453                   27%      1,445               24%
21030 Small Intestine                             1996          0.4    0.4      1.7      2,186              0%      2,186            32%           5                    0%        208                4%
21030 Small Intestine                             2009          0.4    0.4      2.2      3,206             23%      3,206            78%          79                   35%        302               15%
32020 Other Endocrine including Thymus$           1996          0.3    0.3      0.7      4,322              0%      4,322            59%         393                    0%        203                5%
32020 Other Endocrine including Thymus$           2009          0.3    0.3      0.7      6,024             33%      6,024            64%         148                   31%        700               38%
20030 Salivary Gland                              1996          0.3    0.2      1.3      1,691              0%      1,691            70%         327                    0%        137                5%
20030 Salivary Gland                              2009          0.3    0.2      1.3      1,953             15%      1,953            83%         436                   50%        214               19%
20060 Nasopharynx                                 1996          0.2    0.3      0.8      1,730              0%      1,730            47%         289                    0%        104                2%
20060 Nasopharynx                                 2009          0.2    0.2      0.6      2,023              8%      2,023            71%         170                   42%        226               31%
21130 Other Digestive Organs                      1996          0.2    0.2      0.4        353 .                      353            33% .             .                           59                0%
21130 Other Digestive Organs                      2009          0.2    0.3      0.5        343              0%        343            78%           1                    0%         27               11%
27060 Vulva                                       1996          0.2    0.2      1.2        820              0%        820            10%          53                    0%        122                1%
27060 Vulva                                       2009          0.2    0.2      1.3      1,089             21%      1,089            67%          87                   11%        167               10%
20070 Tonsil                                      1996          0.2    0.2      1.2      1,721              0%      1,721            29%         412                    0%        107                3%
20070 Tonsil                                      2009          0.2    0.2      1.8      4,666             14%      4,666            84%         840                   62%        404                6%
20080 Oropharynx                                  1996          0.2    0.2      0.3        432             33%        432            31%         122                    0%         31                3%
20080 Oropharynx                                  2009          0.2    0.2      0.3      1,463             12%      1,463            92%         312                   60%        130                3%
22010 Nose, Nasal Cavity and Middle Ear           1996          0.2    0.2      0.7      1,184 .                    1,184            68%         267                    0%         89                0%
22010 Nose, Nasal Cavity and Middle Ear           2009          0.2    0.2      0.7      1,863             11%      1,863            77%         224                   47%        327                3%
35023 Other Myeloid/Monocytic Leukemia            1996          0.2    0.1      0.2      1,828              0%      1,828             4%          42                    0%        108               10%
35023 Other Myeloid/Monocytic Leukemia            2009          0.2    0.2      0.1      1,798              7%      1,798            51% .             .                           70               60%
21060 Anus, Anal Canal and Anorectum              1996          0.2    0.2      1.3      2,207              0%      2,207            39%         373                    0%        149               11%
21060 Anus, Anal Canal and Anorectum              2009          0.2    0.2      1.7      6,046             16%      6,046            79%         725                   32%        630               54%
                                                                                   Appendix Table 1
              Data on mortality, incidence, and treatment in 1996 and 2009, for 50 cancer sites not shown in Table 5 (ranked by average mortality rate during 1985‐2009)
Cancer site                                        year    average mort‐      incid‐    total drug        post‐1995       total     advanced        total           post‐1995         total      post‐1995
                                                          mort. rate, ality    ence       procs.            drug        imaging      imaging     radiation          radiation       surgical      surgical
                                                          1985‐2009 rate       rate                      procs./total    procs.    procs./total    procs.          procs./total      procs.     procs./total
                                                                                                         drug procs.              imaging procs.                 radiation procs.              surgical procs.

21120 Peritoneum, Omentum and Mesentery            1996          0.2    0.2       0.5      1,261                  0%      1,261            43%           4                    0%         92                4%
21120 Peritoneum, Omentum and Mesentery            2009          0.2    0.2       0.6      2,939                 23%      2,939            59% .             .                          476               31%
35013 Other Lymphocytic Leukemia                   1996          0.2    0.2       0.5      2,366                  7%      2,366            44% .             .                          177                3%
35013 Other Lymphocytic Leukemia                   2009          0.2    0.1       0.4      1,938                 13%      1,938            76%           1                 100%         139               17%
20090 Hypopharynx                                  1996          0.2    0.2       0.9        597 .                          597            38%         129                   0%          79                1%
20090 Hypopharynx                                  2009          0.2    0.1       0.6        522                  0%        522            55%          11                  36%         120               13%
28020 Testis                                       1996          0.1    0.1       2.6      8,682                  1%      8,682            51%         388                   0%         365                2%
28020 Testis                                       2009          0.1    0.1       2.9     11,454                 12%     11,454            71%         180                  16%         752                7%
22050 Pleura                                       1996          0.1    0.2       0.0        881                  0%        881            29%          44                   0%          66                0%
22050 Pleura                                       2009          0.1    0.1       0.0      1,278                 28%      1,278            47% .             .                           79               24%
27050 Vagina                                       1996          0.1    0.1       0.3        618 .                          618            37%          81                    1%         72                3%
27050 Vagina                                       2009          0.1    0.1       0.4      1,163                 14%      1,163            85%         139                   37%        111               18%
29030 Ureter                                       1996          0.1    0.1       0.6        328 .                          328            42%           3                    0%         30                3%
29030 Ureter                                       2009          0.1    0.1       0.6        359                  0%        359            16%          10                   20%         94               34%
22060 Trachea, Mediastinum and Other Respiratory   1996          0.1    0.1       0.2      4,975                  0%      4,975            32%         339                    0%        483                1%
Organs
22060 Trachea, Mediastinum and Other Respiratory   2009          0.1    0.1       0.2       1,086                 0%      1,086            36%          64                   33%        152               13%
Organs
27070 Other Female Genital Organs                  1996          0.1    0.1       0.4       2,716                 1%      2,716            54%         175                    0%        172               12%
27070 Other Female Genital Organs                  2009          0.1    0.1       0.6       2,049                29%      2,049            77%   .           .                          191               21%
21110 Retroperitoneum                              1996          0.1    0.1       0.4         833                 0%        833            73%           2                    0%        106                3%
21110 Retroperitoneum                              2009          0.1    0.1       0.4       1,425                 0%      1,425            55%          11                    0%        296               41%
28030 Penis                                        1996          0.1    0.1       0.3         636                 0%        636            50%   .           .                           62                2%
28030 Penis                                        2009          0.1    0.1       0.4         157    .                      157            68%   .           .                           35                6%
30000 Eye and Orbit                                1996          0.1    0.1       0.9       1,864                 6%      1,864            75%         173                    0%        151               11%
30000 Eye and Orbit                                2009          0.1    0.1       0.8       1,971                24%      1,971            81%         121                   26%        221               27%
29040 Other Urinary Organs                         1996          0.1    0.1       0.3       1,130                15%      1,130            56%          21                    0%         94                1%
29040 Other Urinary Organs                         2009          0.1    0.1       0.3         819                 4%        819            87%          80                    9%         60               20%
20040 Floor of Mouth                               1996          0.1    0.1       1.1         606    .                      606             0%          53                    0%        107                4%
20040 Floor of Mouth                               2009          0.1    0.0       0.7         851                11%        851            68%         102                   11%        212                6%
35031 Acute Monocytic Leukemia                     1996          0.1    0.1       0.2       1,088    .                    1,088            11%   .           .                           36               17%
35031 Acute Monocytic Leukemia                     2009          0.1    0.0       0.2       1,098                 0%      1,098            87%   .           .                           29               66%
20010 Lip                                          1996          0.0    0.0       1.4         440    .                      440            14%          13                    0%         91               22%
20010 Lip                                          2009          0.0    0.0       0.6         230                17%        230            31%          11                   36%         40                8%
                                                                                   Appendix Table 1
              Data on mortality, incidence, and treatment in 1996 and 2009, for 50 cancer sites not shown in Table 5 (ranked by average mortality rate during 1985‐2009)
Cancer site                                       year    average mort‐      incid‐    total drug     post‐1995       total     advanced        total           post‐1995         total      post‐1995
                                                         mort. rate, ality    ence       procs.         drug        imaging      imaging     radiation          radiation       surgical      surgical
                                                         1985‐2009 rate       rate                   procs./total    procs.    procs./total    procs.          procs./total      procs.     procs./total
                                                                                                     drug procs.              imaging procs.                 radiation procs.              surgical procs.

28040 Other Male Genital Organs                   1996          0.0    0.0       0.2         342 .                      342            69%         116                    0%          14                0%
28040 Other Male Genital Organs                   2009          0.0    0.0       0.2         243 .                      243            68% .             .                            20                0%
                                       Appendix Table 2

                        Estimates of all parameters of model 5 in Table 6

Parameter                                              Estimate      Empirical      Z      Pr > |Z|
                                                                  Standard Error
                                                                    Estimates
drug_vintageit                                         ‐0.1219        0.0376       ‐3.25   0.0012
drug_vintageit‐1                                       ‐0.1138         0.037       ‐3.08   0.0021
drug_vintageit‐2                                       ‐0.0768        0.0299       ‐2.57   0.0102
drug_vintageit‐3                                       ‐0.0759        0.0323       ‐2.35   0.0188
drug_vintageit‐4                                        ‐0.024        0.0419       ‐0.57   0.5671
imaging_vintageit                                      ‐0.0745        0.0495       ‐1.50   0.1324
imaging_vintageit‐1                                    ‐0.0337        0.0368       ‐0.92   0.3601
imaging_vintageit‐2                                    ‐0.0515        0.0376       ‐1.37   0.1706
imaging_vintageit‐3                                     ‐0.051        0.0377       ‐1.35   0.1763
imaging_vintageit‐4                                       ‐0.07       0.0502       ‐1.40    0.163
radiation_vintageit                                    ‐0.0198        0.0334       ‐0.59   0.5531
radiation_vintageit‐1                                  ‐0.0118        0.0322       ‐0.37   0.7126
radiation_vintageit‐2                                  ‐0.0317        0.0306       ‐1.04     0.3
radiation_vintageit‐3                                  ‐0.0494        0.0409       ‐1.21   0.2273
radiation_vintageit‐4                                  ‐0.0413        0.0471       ‐0.88   0.3805
surgery_vintageit                                      ‐0.1026        0.0572       ‐1.79   0.0729
surgery_vintageit‐1                                     0.0889        0.0475       1.87    0.0614
surgery_vintageit‐2                                     0.0588        0.0471       1.25     0.212
surgery_vintageit‐3                                     0.0516        0.0404       1.28    0.2018
surgery_vintageit‐4                                     0.0708        0.0687       1.03    0.3023
ln(inc_rateit)                                          0.1368        0.0598       2.29    0.0221
ln(inc_rateit‐1)                                        0.1761        0.0419       4.20    <.0001
ln(inc_rateit‐2)                                        0.0015        0.0406       0.04    0.9711
ln(inc_rateit‐3)                                       ‐0.0154        0.0343       ‐0.45   0.6543
ln(inc_rateit‐4)                                        0.0655        0.0524       1.25    0.2114
age_diagit                                              0.011         0.0028       3.96    <.0001
age_diagit‐1                                            0.0048        0.0029       1.65    0.0994
age_diagit‐2                                            0.001         0.0034       0.30    0.7654
age_diagit‐3                                               0           0.003       ‐0.01   0.9942
age_diagit‐4                                           ‐0.0002        0.0023       ‐0.09   0.9321
%in_situit                                              0.0199        0.1652       0.12    0.9043
                              Appendix Table 2

               Estimates of all parameters of model 5 in Table 6

Parameter                                     Estimate      Empirical      Z      Pr > |Z|
                                                         Standard Error
                                                           Estimates
%in_situit‐1                                   0.0742        0.1176       0.63    0.5279
%in_situit‐2                                  ‐0.0804        0.1199       ‐0.67   0.5023
%in_situit‐3                                   0.2073        0.1402       1.48    0.1394
%in_situit‐4                                  ‐0.1316        0.1203       ‐1.09   0.2741
%loc_regit                                     0.0372        0.0313       1.19    0.2343
%loc_regit‐1                                  ‐0.0003        0.0263       ‐0.01   0.9912
%loc_regit‐2                                  ‐0.0339        0.0323       ‐1.05   0.2936
%loc_regit‐3                                   0.0249         0.028       0.89    0.3737
%loc_regit‐4                                  ‐0.0133         0.031       ‐0.43   0.6673
%distantit                                     0.1278        0.1243       1.03    0.3038
%distantit‐1                                   0.0155        0.0846       0.18    0.8549
%distantit‐2                                   0.0085        0.0901       0.09    0.9245
%distantit‐3                                  ‐0.0415        0.0811       ‐0.51    0.609
%distantit‐4                                   0.0767        0.1493       0.51    0.6076
%maleit                                        0.3862        0.0921       4.19    <.0001
%maleit‐1                                      0.1145        0.1269       0.90    0.3668
%maleit‐2                                     ‐0.0738        0.1675       ‐0.44   0.6594
%maleit‐3                                      ‐0.004        0.1122       ‐0.04   0.9716
%maleit‐4                                      0.1485        0.1244       1.19    0.2324
%whiteit                                      ‐0.0394        0.1506       ‐0.26   0.7938
%whiteit‐1                                     0.1751        0.1568       1.12     0.264
%whiteit‐2                                     0.0917        0.1486       0.62    0.5372
%whiteit‐3                                     0.1204        0.1543       0.78    0.4353
%whiteit‐4                                     0.0214         0.138       0.15    0.8769
year 2000                                     ‐0.0078        0.0311       ‐0.25   0.8019
year 2001                                     ‐0.0049        0.0266       ‐0.19   0.8529
year 2002                                      0.007         0.0238       0.30    0.7679
year 2003                                     0.0146         0.0226       0.65    0.5179
year 2004                                     0.0229         0.0217       1.05    0.2914
year 2005                                     0.0268         0.0186       1.44    0.1512
year 2006                                     0.0153         0.0166       0.92     0.356
year 2007                                     0.0073          0.012       0.60    0.5452
year 2008                                     ‐0.0023         0.007       ‐0.33   0.7414
                                             Appendix Table 2

                             Estimates of all parameters of model 5 in Table 6

Parameter                                                      Estimate      Empirical       Z      Pr > |Z|
                                                                          Standard Error
                                                                            Estimates
year 2009                                                          0             0            .        .
site 20010 Lip                                                 ‐5.9498        0.2247       ‐26.48   <.0001
site 20020 Tongue                                              ‐2.7438        0.1287       ‐21.33   <.0001
site 20030 Salivary Gland                                      ‐3.2657        0.1647       ‐19.83   <.0001
site 20040 Floor of Mouth                                      ‐5.2176          0.23       ‐22.69   <.0001
site 20050 Gum and Other Mouth                                 ‐2.9853        0.1501       ‐19.89   <.0001
site 20060 Nasopharynx                                         ‐2.9887         0.303        ‐9.86   <.0001
site 20070 Tonsil                                              ‐3.5872        0.1854       ‐19.35   <.0001
site 20080 Oropharynx                                          ‐3.0913         0.273       ‐11.32   <.0001
site 20090 Hypopharynx                                          ‐4.179        0.2239       ‐18.66   <.0001
site 20100 Other Oral Cavity and Pharynx                       ‐2.0194        0.2858        ‐7.07   <.0001
site 21010 Esophagus                                           ‐1.1834        0.1189        ‐9.95   <.0001
site 21020 Stomach                                             ‐1.3349         0.121       ‐11.03   <.0001
site 21030 Small Intestine                                     ‐3.0813        0.1245       ‐24.75   <.0001
site 21060 Anus, Anal Canal and Anorectum                      ‐3.4776        0.1804       ‐19.27   <.0001
site 21071 Liver                                               ‐1.0747        0.1587        ‐6.77   <.0001
site 21072 Intrahepatic Bile Duct                              ‐1.5006        0.2068        ‐7.26   <.0001
site 21080 Gallbladder                                         ‐2.2607        0.1588       ‐14.24   <.0001
site 21090 Other Biliary                                        ‐2.817        0.1352       ‐20.84   <.0001
site 21100 Pancreas                                            ‐0.4293         0.101        ‐4.25   <.0001
site 21110 Retroperitoneum                                      ‐3.964        0.2557       ‐15.50   <.0001
site 22010 Nose, Nasal Cavity and Middle Ear                   ‐3.4404        0.2091       ‐16.46   <.0001
site 22020 Larynx                                              ‐2.2216        0.1272       ‐17.46   <.0001
site 22030 Lung and Bronchus                                   0.4585         0.1912        2.40    0.0165
site 22060 Trachea, Mediastinum and Other Respiratory Organs   ‐3.5571        0.3365       ‐10.57   <.0001
site 23000 Bones and Joints                                    ‐2.3116          0.3         ‐7.71   <.0001
site 24000 Soft Tissue including Heart$                        ‐1.8317        0.1611       ‐11.37   <.0001
site 25010 Melanoma of the Skin                                ‐1.9887        0.1486       ‐13.38   <.0001
site 25020 Other Non‐Epithelial Skin                           ‐2.2481        0.1609       ‐13.97   <.0001
site 26000 Breast                                              ‐0.4356        0.2505        ‐1.74   0.0821
site 27010 Cervix Uteri                                        ‐1.5047        0.2913        ‐5.17   <.0001
site 27020 Corpus Uteri                                        ‐2.4597        0.1971       ‐12.48   <.0001
site 27030 Uterus, NOS                                         ‐0.9538          0.32        ‐2.98   0.0029
site 27040 Ovary                                               ‐0.7829        0.2152        ‐3.64   0.0003
site 27050 Vagina                                              ‐3.2256        0.3498        ‐9.22   <.0001
site 27060 Vulva                                               ‐2.9244        0.3359        ‐8.71   <.0001
site 27070 Other Female Genital Organs                         ‐3.3376        0.3176       ‐10.51   <.0001
site 28010 Prostate                                            ‐1.2188         0.255        ‐4.78   <.0001
                                         Appendix Table 2

                          Estimates of all parameters of model 5 in Table 6

Parameter                                                Estimate      Empirical       Z      Pr > |Z|
                                                                    Standard Error
                                                                      Estimates
site 28020 Testis                                         ‐4.098        0.3064       ‐13.38   <.0001
site 29010 Urinary Bladder                               ‐1.7334        0.1193       ‐14.53   <.0001
site 29020 Kidney and Renal Pelvis                       ‐1.3938        0.0874       ‐15.95   <.0001
site 29040 Other Urinary Organs                           ‐3.837        0.2772       ‐13.84   <.0001
site 30000 Eye and Orbit                                 ‐4.2201        0.2183       ‐19.33   <.0001
site 31010 Brain and Other Nervous System                ‐0.7299        0.1629        ‐4.48   <.0001
site 32010 Thyroid                                        ‐2.899        0.2435       ‐11.91   <.0001
site 32020 Other Endocrine including Thymus              ‐2.5717        0.2759        ‐9.32   <.0001
site 34000 Myeloma                                       ‐1.4358        0.2013        ‐7.13   <.0001
site 35011 Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia                    ‐2.3424        0.4727        ‐4.96   <.0001
site 35012 Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia                  ‐2.3112         0.172       ‐13.43   <.0001
site 35013 Other Lymphocytic Leukemia                    ‐3.7868        0.2478       ‐15.28   <.0001
site 35021 Acute myeloid                                 ‐1.5428        0.2144        ‐7.20   <.0001
site 35022 Chronic Myeloid Leukemia                      ‐3.1786        0.2173       ‐14.63   <.0001
site 35041 Other Acute Leukemia                          ‐2.0083        0.2609        ‐7.70   <.0001
site 35043 Aleukemic, subleukemic and NOS                 ‐1.811         0.246        ‐7.36   <.0001
site 37000 Miscellaneous Malignant Cancer                    0             0            .        .
Intercept                                                0.3112         0.8416        0.37    0.7116
