NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY INFORMATION
AND INTEREST RATES

Carl E. Walsh

Working Paper No. 1589

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1985

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. SES-8408603. I would like to thank Jan Loeys and Gikas
Hardouvelis for helpful comments. The research reported here is
part of the WBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1589
March 1985

Monetary Info rma tion

and Interest Rates
ABSTRACT

A model of interest rate movements in response to new information on

the money stock is developed.

The model, which incorporates several

earlier approaches as special cases, makes explicit the manner in which
estimated interest rate responses to money surprises depend on the rela-

tive variances of nominal and

real

disturbances, as well as on the moxie-

tary authority's policy and the credibility of that policy.

Carl E. Walsh
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
(609) 452-4026

MONETARY INFORMATION AND INTEREST RATES

I.

Introduction

Recent empirical evidence leaves little doubt that anticipated real
rates of return on a wide variety of assets are affected by the Federal

Reserve's weekly release of its latest estimates of the money supply.
The positive co-movements of nominal interest rates and the value of the

dollar, together with the negative co-movements of nominal interest
rates and both commodity and stock prices are inconsistent with the hypothesis that the responses are solely due to variations in the expected

rate of inflation.2 Lagging behind the accumulation of empirical evidence has been the development of theoretical models which are capable

of explicitly modelling the determinants of the response coefficients

measured in the empirical work. The need for such explicit models is
particularly important given the apparent shifts in parameters which the

empirical work has found to coincide with changes in Federal Reserve
policy.3

While several heuristic explanations for the asset price responses to
money announcements have been offered (
),

all

Cornell

(1983) provides a survey

the existing models in this area have tended to treat only a sub-

set of the competing hypotheses.

For example, Urich (1983), Walsh

(1983), Nichols, Small, and Webster (1983), Roley and Walsh (1983), and

Campbell (1984) construct models of weekly interest rate determination

under the assumption that the aggregate price level is fixed. These
models have focused on the interest rate responses as real rate respon-

—1—

ses to changes in expected future money demand relative to expected future money supply.

Roley and Walsh (1983) also construct a flexible price model in which

all observed interest rate movements are due to revisions in expected
inflation. Loeys (1983) incorporates sluggish price adjustment by assuming prices are fixed for a constant number of periods and completely

flexible thereafter. Engle and Frankel (1984) and Hardouvelis (1985)
also model the sluggish adjustment of the aggregate price level in mod-

els of the joint response of interest rates and exchange rates to money

surprises. However, they assume the equilibrium price level is deter-

mined by purchasing power parity and that uncovered interest parity
holds. By further taking the foreign price level and nominal interest
rate to be constant, the relevance of their models to an understanding
of the short-run response of U.S. interest rates to weekly announcements

of the U.S. money stock may be questioned.

In addition, neither of

these two models explicitly characterizes the behavior of the Federal
Reserve, a

factor

emphasized in most of the literature in this area.

Engle and Frankel (1984) and Hardouvelis (1985) also assume the
long-run equilibrium real rate of interest is constant. Any movements
of distant future rates must therefore, by definition, be due to changes

in expected inflation, and they cannot analyze the real activity hypothesis as modelled by Siegel (1985). Under this hypothesis, a money
announcement provides information on real shocks to the economy which
produce changes in the long-run equilibrium real rate of interest.

-2-

The present paper develops a specific model of the interest rate re-

sponse to the new information contained in the weekly money announcement. The extent to which interest rates adjust to new information on
the money. stock is shown to depend on the monetary authorityts policy
behavior, as well as the credibility of its policy, the properties char-

acterizing the behavior of the aggregate price level, and the variance
of nominal disturbances relative to real disturbances.

II. The Model

Since an interest rate such as the federal funds rate with only a one

day maturity responds to money announcements,' it is useful to base a
model of the announcement effect on a model of the market for bank re-

serves. Suppose that the demand for reserves by banks

arises

from the

existence of a binding reserve requirement on deposits. Under lagged
reserve accounting, as was in effect over the sample period used in most
of the empirical studies cited earlier,

rr k + m2, where rr is the

log of required reserves during week t and m_2 is the log of the money
supply during week t-2.5

The supply of reserves consists of nonborrowed reserves
borrowed reserves (BRt).

(NBRt) plus

Equilibrium in the market for reserves re-

quires banks to be satisfied with the composition of total reserves be-

tween borrowed and nonborrowed reserves. This composition is determined

by the Federal Reserve. Given the manner in which discount window borrowing is administered,6 bank borrowing will depend on both the current
federal funds rate, i, and the expected future value of this short-term

-3-

interest rate.7 A rise in current borrowing by an individual bank in-

creases the implicit cost of future borrowing. Thus, if the interest
rate is expected to be high next period, so that the profitability of

borrowing at the discount window is expected to be high, individual
banks may reduce current borrowing in order to increase access to the

window next period. The desired reserve composition is assumed to be
given by equation (1):

nbr -

rr

+

-

+ Vt

(1)

where nbr = ln(NBR) and.it÷i is the expectation, conditional on time t
is assumed to be serially

information, of t+l The disturbance term
uncorrelated with mean zero.

Using

-

(1),

'[rr

=

-

nbr

+ o + 2t1t+1 + vt].

(2)

Equation (2) holds under either lagged or contemporaneous reserve accounting. Prior to a money announcement, market participants know i -

-1

.

Eo+2t1t+1]

-1

[rr.-nbr +v]. The weekly announcement may lead

to revisions in forecasts about rr, nbr, or v (under lagged reserve
accounting, -aggregate required reserves, rr =

exactly),

but, given -+1'

is

k + m_2 become known

unaffected by these revisions as it

depends, from (2), only on the linear combination rr_nbrt+vt which was
already known.9

Let tz denote the revision in a variable z that results from the an-

nouncement in week

of m_2. Under a federal funds operating proce-

-4-

dure, the monetary authority keeps i fixed during the settlement week,

and nbr adjusts so that Li = 0.

Under a nonborrowed reserves operat-

ing procedure, nbr is kept fixed and, from (2),

=

12tit÷1.

(3)

Thus, the current short rate responds if and only if the announcement
leads to a revision in expectations of the future short rate. To deter-

mine

the remainder of the model must be specified.

The demand for real money balances is taken to be a decreasing function of the nominal rate of interest and an increasing function of real
permanent income:

m_p=o ai+y+u

(4)

where Pt is the log of the price level and y is real permanent income.
The assumptions made concerning the disturbance term u are very important, particularly since evidence presented in Roley and Walsh (1984) of

a positive contemporaneous correlation between money and interest rates

using weekly data suggests that demand shifts, as opposed to supply
shifts, play a major role in observed short-run interest rate and money

stock movements.11 To capture the notion that money demand shocks have
both permanent and transitory components, it is assumed that

u. =

u1 +

-

where c is a white noise disturbance term with variance .
nent component of any shock

is equal to (l-)Et, while

the transitory component.'2

-5-

(5)
The permarepresents

Assuming permanent income is equal to the rational expectation of the

present discounted value of future income suggests that y should be
modelled as a random walk:

v=v
t t-l+Pt

(6)

.

where tP is a serially uncorrelated mean zero random variable.

=

From (4),

=

a'[ao_mt++pt++Y+j++j1.

a[ac-mt+± +

+

+

Taking expectations,

(7)

+±1

In response to a money announcement, (7) implies

=

(8)

-

Finally, if r+± is the anticipated real rate of interest from t+i to
t+i+l,

=

-l

-l

)-'+
-

-l

v
t+i
tut
-l

Equation -(9) is useful in illustrating the various factors different
authors have emphasized in explaining the effect of announcements on in-

terest rates. For example, Siegel (1985) can be viewed as focusing on
the real income shocks affecting the equilibrium real rate of interest
through the term

If

a money surprise is positively correlated

with future real income, interest rates will rise if an unexpectedly
large value of m_2 is announced. Other models have assumed this term
to be identically zero, in which case, the interest rate response de-

-6-

pends on how new information affects expectations of the future nominal
money supply, future prices, and future disturbances to money demand.
=

In fixed price models,'3 (9) simplifies to

These models have thus emphasized the persistence of money demand disturbances and the monetary authority's policy rule governing the
evolution of the nominal money stock.

To complete the specification of a general model of all the factors
appearing in (9), two additional components are required: a model of ag-

gregate demand and supply to determine the equilibriwn price level and a
model of the perceived behavior of the monetary authority.

Rather than explicitly model aggregate demand and supply in the goods

market, a shortcut will be taken.

A variety of rational expectations

models of an aggregate economy imply equilibria in which the price level

depends on past and current expected values of both the current and fu-

ture money stock.

Since equal changes in t+i and u÷., or m÷. and

have no effect on the equilibrium price level," it is assumed
that

Pt

Pot

+

N

p

co

Zs0 d5I0 b[_5mt÷ -11+

t5Y+]

+

(10)

For example, N might be the length of the longest nominal wage contract.

The current price level depends on expectations of Pt formed at times
t-l to t-N since such expectations are imbedded in the current structure

of nominal wages. If Pt is expected to depend on m and futUre values
of the money stock, an equation such as (10) would result. The time
varying term

will be discussed below, while

turbance.

-7-

is a white noise dis-

Rational expectations models which exhibit both static and dynamic

neutrality impose restrictions on the d5 and b coefficients. First,
the neutrality of money implies that proportional changes in the nominal

money supply at all dates raise the price level by the same proportion.
Equation (10) possess this property if and only if

X d b. =

1.

(11)

Condition (11) is not sufficient to ensure dynamic, or super, neutrality. If anticipated future real rates of interest are invariant to

the anticipated path of money, further restrictions are imposed. For
example, equation (10) implies that Pt S not perfectly flexible since
it is partially determined by past expectations. However, the past mat-

ters for only N periods so that, from the point of view of period t,
for i > N should be

for i..> N iscompletely flexible. Hence,

invarient to the anticipated (as of time t) behavior of the nominal mon-

ey stock. From equation (4), this requires that, for i > N, the solution for p given by (10) be consistent with

-

- u[r+.'

+

-

+±] +

t+i +

(12)

where r' is the equilibrium real rate of interest. For simplicity, it
will be assumed that rt is influenced by the same factors which affect
permanent income, as well as by a transitory disturbance:

=

rt+.1 +

6t+i +

-

The transitory shock, v, captures factors other than permanent income
which influence r'.15 Equation (12) requires that the b.'s in (10) satisfy

-8-

-

b. =

Since (13) implies 1b.

a/(l+a)i,

j =

0,...

(13)

1, (11) now requires that

d =

Finally3 (12) and (13) imply that

1.

-

(14)

E[a/(l+)]

r'÷.. The

presence of this term captures the effects of shifts in the equilibrium
real interest rate on the price level.

In order to represent, in the simpliest possible way, market partici-

pants' expectations about monetary policy, the following assumptions
will be made. First, it is assumed that the monetary authority follows

a monetary aggregates policy in which it tries to achieve a targeted

path for the money stock. Let m÷± denote the targeted value, as of
time t, for m÷.. Second, while the particular control techniques used

to achieve the target path depend on whether a federal funds or a reserve aggregate operating procedure is being used, it is assumed that
-

the monetary authority is expected to achieve its target. Under this
assumption,

=

Third, it is assumed that the monetary au-

thority is expected to revise its target path for future money in light

of past deviations from target. To maintain a simple structure, it will

be assumed that rn'+. is adjusted in response to the new information
obtained in week t

Two

hypotheses

by

the release of the data on

m2.

about the monetary authority's behavior have figured

prominantly in the analysis of interest rates and money announcements.
The first is that the monetary authority acts to offset any deviation of

-9-

money from the target path without changing the long-run growth target.
This hypothesis can be represented by assuming
T

where ""

will

=

i

(l-X) (m2 - m..2)

(15)

be used to denote an expectation just prior to the week t
=

announcement of the actual value of m2. The difference m2 m*t2

represents the new information contained in the announcement. According to (15), the monetary authority is expected to offset deviations
from target at the rate X per .week. As i -*

,

=

--> 0,

so that no revision of the long-run target path is anticipated.

The second hypothesis often made concerning the monetary authority's
behavior is that a deviation from the old target path as revealed by the

announcement of m2 is an indication that a change in the target growth
rate has occured. This case can be represented by assuming

(16)

where iT is a parameter measuring the fraction of the money surprise that
gets incorporated into the new target gr.owth rate.

During the sample period used in the empirical work on money surpris-

es, the stated goals of the Federal Reserve were expresse4 in terms of
ranges for the growth rates of various monetary aggregates.

Since these

ranges are changed only every six months, the stated policy of the Federal Reserve on a week to week basis is more closely represented by (15)

than by (16).. 6 However, a plausible approximation to the public's expectations of Fed behavior would place some positive probability on both

possible adjustment responses to perceived deviations from target. For

example, suppose it is expected with probability q that the monetary
target path will be adjusted according

- 10 -

(15) in which deviations are

gradually offset. With probability l-q, however, the growth path is be-

lieved to be adjusted according to (16). In this case,

[q(l-X)' + (lq)(i+2)1r]112.

(17)

The weight q is then a simple measure of what might be described as p01-

icy credibility. A high q implies market participants expect the mone-

tary authority to be unlikely to revise the underlying target growth
rate of the money stock.

Alternatively, q could be interpreted as a

means of reflecting uncertainty about the monetary authority's policy.

The monetary authority can attempt to achieve its target path for the
money stock by using either the funds rate or nonborrowed reserves as an

operating instrument. If the funds rate is used, equation (7) defines
the required path of

If a nonborrowed reserves operating proce-

dure is used, equation (2) defines the path for nbr which is consistent
with the path for the funds rate required by(7) and the target path for

the money stock.

It is the monetary authority's operating procedure

which provides an important link between the reserve market and the money market.

III. The Informatfona.l Content of Money Announcements

The weekly announcement by the Federal Reserve provides the market

with the value of m2." Since r2 was observed during week t-2, and
it will be assumed that individuals know the past level of prices,'8
equations (4) -

=

t-2

(6)

imply'9

"t-2 +

t-2

-

—

t-2
11

-

-

-

t-3

(18)

allows only a

The new information contained in the announcement of

particular linear combination of the underlying disturbances, !Pt2
and t3, to be observed. The revisions in the marketts estimates
of the basic shocks can be written as

t*t_2 =

Att_3 =

a1l1_2

(19)

afl2

(20)

a3112

(21)

where the a. are time varying Kalman filter coeff±c±ents2 with a1 >

0, a2 > 0, and a3 < 0. From (18), a1 +a2 -

a3 =

1.

While the announcement of m2 does reveal information on the week
t-2 money demand shock, it does not allow market participants to learn
exactly sincê.fl_2 is also affected by real shocks to permanent in-

come. Either unpredicted positive shocks to real income or to money dé-

mand cause m_2 to be larger than anticipated. Because the observation
of t-2 is not sufficient to identify the underlying disturbances, any
nonzero money surprise is attributed partially to each of its possible
-

causes.

IV.

Interest

Rate Responses

Equations (8) and (9) can be used to calculate the responses of both

anticipated future nominal and real interest rates to the money announcement. Details of the derivations are relegated to the appendix.

-

12 -

First, consider the change in the real rate of interest expected to
prevai.l at time t+i with

N:

ôalTi2, i
where 6 is the covariance between

N.

(22)

permanent income and real interest

rate innovations. Since all contracts in force at time t will have
ex-

pired by t+N, the expected real rate for t+i is independent of
any of
the monetary factors such.as X, ir, or the weight q determining
expectations of the future money stock. Real rates do respond to real
shocks,
and a positive money surprise would lead to an upward revision
in the

real rate of interest expected in the distant future if 6 >
0.

the case if real aggregate demand

Such is

shocks dominate so that real income

and real interest rates are positively correlated.

Fori<N,
=

äa1
-

+ a1(l-d(i))[a +

a'(ld(i))[q(lx)1 +

+ d.1[(i+3)(1_q) -

where d(i) Z d.,. From (18), d(i) =

1

(l-fla2 -a3}

(l-q)(i+2)]

q(l-X)'1/(l+x)]}

for all i

arid (23), three additional terms appear when
functions of the price adjustment

N. Comparing (22)
N,

and all three are

parameters. As long as prices are not

perfectly flexible, real interest rates will be
disturbances and the monetary

(23)

affected by monetary

authorityts response to those disturbanc-

es.

-

13

-

The second term multiplying i2

in

(23) is positive and captures the

effect of revisions .in expectations of future money demand.

This

term

is positive since higher money demand will, ceteris paribus, increase

real interest rates until prices have completely adjusted.

definition of the a.'s a1 +

(l-fla2

-

a3

= 1

-

From the
Thus, the

greater the revision in the public's estimate of cr2, the smaller will

be this term. Since t2 arises from permanent income and money demand
shocks, the greater the proportion of 't-2 attributed to

the less

permanent is the shift in money demand since -P shocks are completely
permanent while c shocks, are only partially so.

This term capturing ex-

pectations about future money demand has been the main focus of emphasis

under the policy anticipations hypothesis. This hypothesis also empha-

sizes the policy response of the money supply which is represented in
in (23).

the third and fourth terms multipying

The third term in (23) is negative and results from the change in expectations about the future money supply.

With X < 1, a positive money

surprise implies that the money stock will remain above the old target
growth path for several periods, while if (-l-q)r > 0, the nominal money

stock is expected to permanently remain above the old target path. This

upward revision in the expected future money stock lowers, for a given

money demand shock, expected real interest rates as long as prices are

not able to respond completely. Combining this and the previous term
shows how the real interest rate response depends on a comparison of the
revisions in expectations of future money demand and supply.

- 14

-

The last term in (23) enters because the real rate of interest depends.on the expected rate of inflation as long as d.÷l
term can have either sign and depends

on whether the money supply is ex-

pected to, grow at a different rate than

previously C

expected to return to its old growth path. In the
the

0. This final

(l-q)ir

0 )

or

is

latter case, in which

term dominates, the net effect is negative.

Earlier discussions of the money announcement effect have all emphasized some sort of active policy response as central to the response of

interest rates to money surprises. Either the policy authority was assuiried to revise its target growth

path so that expectations of inflation

rose, or the monetary authority was assumed to restrict

money growth

temporarily in order.to return to the target growth path. As (23) makes

clear, anticipated future real interest rates are affected by a money
surprise even if A =
what

is

it = 0.

if

Even

akin to base drift with

no

the monety authority allows for

revision in the targeted growth

real interest rates will be affected.

Because the higher money demand

revealed by a positive money surprise is expected to be at least par-

tially temporary, while with base drift the rise in the nominal money
-

supply is permanent, real rates will be lower
ed.21 Unless the

until prices have adjust-

öa1 term dominates, however, some sort of policy re-

sponse is necessary to explain what appears to be the positive response
of real rates to positive money surprises.

Differentiating the coefficient °

-2

in (23) with respect to A

shows that the response of expected real rates is increasing in A: a

olicy shift

designed to

return the money stock more quickly to the tar-

- 15

-

gj path will increase the sensitivity of real rates to money surprises

if interest rates initially responded positively to such surprises.
Since the shift in policy operating procedures by the Federal Reserve in

October, 1979 was generally perceived as a move to keep monetary aggregates closer to the long run growth target, it could be described as a

rise in ).

This

would then be one possible factor in explaining the

rise in the response of interest rates to money surprises that occurred
after October, 1979.22

The observed response of nominal forward rates is the sum of the
change in the relevant expected future real rate and expected future in-

flation. When i

=

N, Li1 is given by

[óa1

-

q(1-))'X/(l+X)

+ (l_q)1T]n_2

i

N,

(24)

Hence, that some weight

which converges to [6a1 + (l-q)ir]n...2 as

be given to the possibility of a revision in the target path (i.e.,

j is not a necessary ment for expectations of nominal interest
rates several years in the future to move in response to a money surprise.

If the surprise contains any information useful in predicting
will be nonzero

changes in the equilibrium real rate of interest,

even if no change in the target growth rate of the money stock is anticipated.

-Wheni<N,
+ a1(1 -

- a'q(l-X)'[l

d(i))[l
-

+ (1-q)id(i) -

16 —

-

Th2]

d(i)/(1+aX)]

u'(i+2)(1d(i))1)112.

(25)

Because X has opposing effects on expected inflation and expected
real rates, the net effect of a change in X on the sensitivity of nomi-

nal rates to money surprises is ambiguous. A higher X implies a faster
return to the target path, and this reduces the impact of

on future

inflation. However, it increases the impact on expected real rates.
For i such that d(i) is small, that is, for small i or if prices are
very sluggish to adjust, the effect on real interest rates dominates,

and a rise in X will increase the response of 1't+i to a money surprise.

Referring back to equation (24), a rise in A can lead to a greater
response of expected future interest rates to money surprises even for i

N as long as 2X + aX2 > 1.

Thus, the increase in long-term interest

rate responses to money surprises which occurred after the October 1979
shift in operating procedures is potentially consistent with market par-

ticipants believing the Federal Reserve would move more quickly to elim-

inate deviations from the targeted growth path. Even for the expected
interest rate at t+i for large i, it is not necessary to assume market

participants. believed the Fed was more likely to revise its target
growth path in order to explain the greater responses found in the empirical studies.

Equations (24) and (25) can be used to determine the effect of a rise
in q.. Since Fed policy, during the period studied in the empirical mon-

ey announcement literature, was aimed at achieving target growth paths

for the monetary aggregates, q can be interpreted as an index of the

policy's credibility. A high q implies the public expects, with high

- 17 —

probability, that deviations from target will be offset. Thus, a rise

=

in q is a rise in -credibility. Rewriting (24) and (25) as

b(i)T'it2,
3b(i)/q =
for i

-[(l-X)1X/(l+X)

+ ii] <0

(26)

N. Since a rise in q reduces the weight given to the possibili-

ty that a money surprise signals a change in the long run rate of inflation, distant expected future interest rates respond less to the new information contained in the announcement.23

For i < N, the sign of ab(i)/q is ambiguous. If prices are slow to

adjust so that d(l) approximately equals zero, b(l)/q = cz1[31T

(l-X)]

-

which is negative for small it. In this case, greater belief in

the monetary authority's commitment to offset money surprises decreases

the response of the current short-term rate24 to the unanticipated component of the

money announcement.

Equations (23) and (25) also illustrate the manner in which the real

and nominal interest rate responses depend on the a. parameters. Because the new information contained in the money announcement does not
allow the individual underlying disturbances to be identified, a posi-

tive money surprise is attributed partially to real, permanent income
disturbances and partially to money demand shocks. Most previous models

of the money announcements have considered only the special case in
which the money surprises are caused by money demand shocks t-2' and
the money arinouncement fully reveals st-V In the present framework,

this case is the special one in which a1 =

-

18 -

a3

=

0, and a2 = 1.

It

follows immediately from (22) that expected future real rates are unaffected: by money surprises. For large 1, equation (24) implies that
ex-

pected future nominal interest rates will
lieves there is some chance the

get growth path. For

move only if the public be-

monetary authority will revise its tar-

N, the last term in both (23) and (25) becomes
so that real and nominal interest rates depend

only on the permanent component of any disturbance to money demand.

If money announcements provide any information that is useful in
forecasting future real income, as
termari and Weiss (1985),

suggested by Siegel (1985) and Lit-

a1 will differ from zero. The Kalmari filter

coefficients will depend on the sample estimates of the variances and
èovariances of the underlying

disturbances (see Chow (1975)), and will

generally evolve over time. Unobserved shifts in the population vari-

ances of these disturbances (a and 2) will cause movements in the
a.'s. For example, suppose the, variance of real shocks rises relative
to that of nominal money demand shocks.

cause a1 to rise and

Such a structural shift will

a2 to fall. From (23) and (25), the respoise of

both real and nominal interest rates will rise in absolute value. An
increase in the relative importance of real shocks will cause interest
rates to become more sensitive to money surprises.

V. Conclusions

The simple model developed in this paper incorporates most of the
competing hypotheses which have been put forward to explain the positive
response of nominal interest rates to the

- 19

-

unanticipated component of the

Federal Reserve's weekly money announcements.25 By explicitly modelling
these hypotheses, an expression for the response of current and expected

future short-term real and nominal interest rates was obtained. The
factors emphasized in earlier models of the money announcement effect

become special cases in this more general framework. The model shows
how empirically estimated interest rate responses depend on the speed
with which money supply deviations from target

ity of such a policy, and
permanent income and

the

nominal

are offset, the credibil-

relative importance of shocks to real,

money demand.

in the stock of
Few economists would claim that weekly variations

money have important effects on

macroeconomic variables of interest.

However, the weekly announcements of the latest figures on Ml, together

with the availability of survey measures

of expectations about the an-

nouncements, provide an almost ideal •setting for testing hypotheses
about the responses of asset prices to new

information. Because the an-

nouncement provides information about a previous week's money stock, the
new information in the announcement is predetermined with respect to the

In addition, the survey seems to

subsequent interest rates movements.

provide a reasonable measure of the market's expectations about the an-

nouncements. These properties have made this a useful setting in which
to examine hypotheses concerning
icy play in influencing interest

the role expectations about future pol-

rates. While a great deal of empirical

evidence has been accumulated documenting the responses of asset prices
to the weekly money surprises over several sample periods, the theoretical modelling of these effects has lagged behind. The responses seem to

shift with changes in monetary policy, but in order to derive testable

-

20

-

hypotheses about the manner in which various characteristics of the en-

vironment influence the responses, a more general theoretical framework

than has guided the empirical research to date seems necessary. This
paper represents a preliminary attempt to provide such a framework.

-

21

-

APPENDIX

Equations (8) and (9) can be evaluated by substituting for

+

+

From (4)-(6) and (18)-(21), Ay2 +

+ Att.2 -

=

+

and

t-2

=

(1

-

so that

+ Au1 (1 -

+

for all i

(Al)

0.

Using (10) and (17),

Am+. -

p+ =

- Z .dZ

-

-

=

-

b.{

+j9t+j+i

{-a+q(l-X)'[1d(i)/(l+aX)]
-

(l-q)lTad(i)

-

tt+i

+ (l-q)ir(i+2)(l-d(i))
(A2)

t-2

Substituting (Al) and (A2) into (8) yields the expressiàn for

given in equation (25). Note that for i

N, d(i) = 1, so that (A2)

simplifies to

{_ao+q(1_X)1[X/(l+aX)]_(l_q)1Ta)1_2.

To evaluate anticipated real rates of interest, it is necessary to

determine the revision in the expected rate of inflation from t+i to
t+i+1:
-

22

-

=

d

Eb
Si

-

+di+1 Zb.m
t

j

t+i+1+j

= C-qX(1-X)'[d(i)/(l+czX)J +
(1-q)iid(i)
+ d
1+1 [q(1-X)1/(1+aX)

-

23

-

+ (l_q)1r(i+3))i2.

REFERENCES

1.

Berkinan, Neil G., "On the Significance of Weekly Changes in Ml",
New England Economic Review (May/June 1978), 5-22.

2.

Campbell, John Y., "The Demand for Bank Reserves and the Behavior
of the Federal Funds Rate Within the Statement Week", November,
1984.

3.

4.

Chow, Gregory C., Analysis and Control of Dynamic Economic Systems
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1975
Cornell, Bradford,. "Money Supply Announcements, Interest Rates,
and Foreign Exchange", Journal of International Money and Finance
1 (August 1982), 201-208.

5.

6.

Cornell, Bradford, "Money Supply Announcements and Interest Rates:
Another View", Journal of Business 56 (January 1983), 1-24.
"
The Money Supply Announcements Puzzle:
Cornell, Bradford,
Review and Interpretation", American Economic Review 73 (September
1983), 644-657
.

7.

Engel, Charles, and Jeffrey Frankel, "Why Interest Rates React to
Money Announcements: Art Explanation from the Foreign Exchange
Market", Journal of Monetary Economics 13 (January 1984), 31-39.

6.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Gikas A. Hardouvelis, "Commodity Prices,
Money Surprises, and Fed Credibility", Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking (forthcoming), 1985.

9.

10.

11.

12.

Gavin, William T. and Nicholas V. Karamouzis, "Monetary Policy and
Real Interest Rates: New Evidence from the Money Stock
Announcements", Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Working Paper
8406, December 1984.
Goodfriend, Marvin, ttDiscount Window Borrowing, Monetary Policy
and the Post-October 6, 1979 Federal Reserve Operating Procedure",
Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (September 1983), 343-356.

Grossman, Jacob, "The Rationality of Money Supply Expectations and
the Short Run Response of Interest Rates to Money Surprises",
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 13 (November 1981), 409-424.
Hardouvelis, Gikas A., "Market Perceptions of Federal Reserve
Policy and the Weekly Money Announcements", Journal of Monetary
Economics 14 (September, 1984a), 225-240.
-

24

-

13.

14.

Hardouvelis, Gikas A., "Reserve Announcements and Interest Rates:
Does Monetary Policy Matter?" (October l984b).
Hardouvelis, Gikas A., "Exchange Rates, Interest Rates and Money
Stock Announcements: A Theoretical
Exposition", Journal of
International Moy and Finance (forthcoming), 1985.

15.

Judd, John P., "Money Supply Announcements, Forward Interest Rates
and Budget Deficits", Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Review Fall 1984, 30-46.

16.

Litterman, Robert B. and Laurence Weiss, "Money, Real Interest
Rates, and Output: A Reinterpretation of Postwar U.S. Data",
Econometrica 53 (January 1985), 129-156.

17.

Loeys, Jan, "Market Perceptions of Monetary Policy and the Weekly
Ml Announcements", Federal Reserve bank of Philadelphia, Working
Paper No. 84-2, August, 1984.

18.

Loeys, Jan, "Changing Interest Rate Responses to Money

Announcements: 1977 - 1983", Journal of Monetary Economics
(forthcoming) 1985.
•l9.

Nichols, Donald A., David H. Small, and Charles E. Webster Jr.,
"Why Interest Rates Rise When an
Unexpectedly Large Money Stock is
Announced", American Economic Review 73 (June 1983), 383-388.

20.

Nichols,Donald A. and David H. Small, "The Effect of Money Stock
Announcements on the Federal Funds Market".

21.

Pearce, Douglas K. and V. Vance Roley, "The Reaction of Stock
Prices to Unanticipated Changes in Money: A Note", Journal of
Finance 38 (September 1983), 1323-1333.

22.

Roley, V. Vance, "Weekly Money Supply Announcements and the
Volatility of Short-term Interest Rates", Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Economic Review (April 1982), 3-15.

23.

Roley, V. Vance, "The Response of Short-term Interest Rates to
Weekly Money Announcements", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
15 (August 1983), 344-354.

24.

Roley, V. Vance and Rick Troll, "The Impact of New Information on
the Volatiltiy of Short-term Interest Rates," Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City Economic Review (February 1983), 3-15.

25.

Roley, V. Vance and Carl E. Walsh, "Unanticipated
Money and
Interest Rates", American Economic Review 74 (May 1984),

26.

Roley, V. Vance and Carl E. Walsh, "Monetary
Policy Regimes,
Expected Inflation, and the Response of Interest Rates to Money
Announcements", Quartey Journal of Economics (forthcoming)

- 25

27.

28.

29.

Shiller, Robert J., John Y. Campbell, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz,
"Forward Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure
of Interest Rates", Brookg Papers on Economic Activity (1:
1983), 173-223.
and Interest Rates:
Siegel, Jeremy J., "Money Supply Announcements
Does Monetary Policy Matter?", Journal of Monety Economics
(March 1985).

Smirlock, Michael, "Financial Market Reaction to Inflation
Announcements: Evidence from the Long Term Bond Market", December,
1984.

30.

Trevor, Robert G., "New Classical Models and Unobservable
Aggregates", (March 1984)

31.

Urich, Thomas J., "The Information Content of Weekly Money Supply
Announcements", Journal of Monetary Economics 10 (July 1982),
73-88.

32.

33.

34.

Urich, Thomas J. and Paul Wachtel, "Market Responses to the Weekly
Money Supply Announcements in the 1970's", Journal of Finance 36
(December 1981),. 1063-1072.
-

of Inflation and
Urich, Thomas J. and Paul Wachtel, "The Effects
"
Journal of Finance
Money Supply Announcements on Interest Rates,
39 (September 1984), 1177-1188.
Walsh, Carl E., "The Effects of Alternative Operating Procedures
on Economic and Financial Relationships", in Monetary Policy
Issues in the 1980's 1983.

-

26

-

Footnotes

1. Recent work documenting the response of various asset prices to the
weekly announcement of Ml include Berkinan (1978), Conrad
(1978),
Grossman (1981), Urich (1982), Urich and Wachtel (1982), Roley
(1982, 1983), Shiller, Campbell, and Schoenholtz (1983), Roley and
Walsh. (1983, 1984), Cornell (1983), Loeys (1984), and
Gavin and Karamouzis (1984) who examine interest rate responses, Cornell (1982,
1983), Engle and Frankel (1984), and Hardouvelis (l984a) who examine
exchange rates and interest rates, and Pearce and Roley (1984) who
examine stock prices, and Frankel and Hardouvelis
(1985) who examine

commodity prices.

2. Such evidence would only be consistent with real rates remaining
constant if the aggregate price level jumps in response to weekly
money announcements.

3. For example, see Roley and Walsh (1983) or Loeys (1984).

4. See, for example, Campbell (1984) for some empirical evidence.

5. This ignores the existence of unequal reserve ratios on the various
components of the money stock and assumes excess reserves are equal
to zero.

6. See Goodfrjend (1982) for a discussion.
7.

Borrowing also depends on the current and expected future value of
the

discount rate, but this is assumed to be constant and so will be

ignored.

8. To ensure stabiltiy of the forward rational

expectations solution to
(1), it is assumed that
a fuller analysis of discount
window borrowing and Fede.al Rerve policy, see Goodfriend (1982).

> . For

9. This point is analyzed by Nichols and Small
(1984).

(1984) and Campbell

10. This specification differs from that of Nichols, Small, and Webster
(1983) and Hardouvelis (1985) who do not include income explicitly
and who assume money demand also depends
+1 i. The money
demand equation assumed here is more standar. j.n Roey and Walsh
(1983), the interest rate in the money demand equation is identified with a rate of longer maturity than
11. Roley. and Walsh (1984) regress the change in the 3-month Treasury
Bill rate over a settlement week on the contemporaneous unanticipated money stock. The resulting estimated coefficient was positive and significant for the October 1979 to October 1982 period.
Similar results were found using the ten-year constant maturity
Treasury 'security yield.

12. Hardouvelis (1985) uses a similar specification. However, his
shocks incorporate transitory income shocks as well as money demand

-27-

shocks since no income variable is explicitly included in his money
demand equation.

13. The models of Urich (1983), Walsh (1983), Nichols, Small, and Webster (1983), and Roley and Walsh (1983, section II) fall into this
category.
14. This is because the elasticity of money demand with respect to permanent income is assumed to be equal to one.
15. Since ô depends on the correlation between permanent income and th
real rate of interest, it could be either positive or negative.

16. Roley (1983) presents evidence which shows that the interest rate
response to a money surprise depends on whether the announcement
places the money stock inside, below, pr above the policy range.

17. Actually, the announcement represents a preliminary estimate of
The evidence in Roley and Walsh (1984) suggests the subsein these preliminary estimates have no effects on
qLexLt revisions
interest rates.

18. This assumption is consistent with empirical evidence that the announcement of the latest figures on the Consumer Price Index have
little impact on interest rates. The release of the Producer price
Index, however, does seem to affect rates. See Roley and Troll
(1983) and Smirlock (1984)..

19. It is not necessary for the present analysis to derive explicitly
the expectations of. the underlying shocks just prior to the money
announceient.

Note that no revision in ei.ther permanent income or

the

money demand shock (u) from period t-3 appear in (18) since,
from (4), the sum of these two is known exactly prior to week t's
money announcement.

20. See Chow (1975). For an application to the case in which the money
supply is measured with error, see Trevor (1984).

21. The second and third terms in (23) become _'(l_d(i))Za2

0.

22. The empirical evidence of increased responses refers to nominal interest rates while (23) gives the real rate response. As discussed
earlier., however, the evidence suggests that the nominal rate movements are also real rate movements. The responses implied by the
model for nominal rates are considered below.
23. Judd (1984) reports results consistent with this result. After October 182, when the Fed de-ernphasized control of Ml, forward rates
five years out became more sensitive to money surprises. See also
Hardouvelis (1984b) and Loeys (1985).

24. Recall from equation (3) that

=

under a nonborrowed reserves operating procedure.

-28-

=

25. The one explanation discussed by Cornell (1983) which was not included was the uncertainty hypothesis.

-

29

-

